Keywords: Pharmacists,Physicians,Nurses,Healthcare providers,Burnout,COVID-19,Factors,Jordan,Hospital,Qualitative
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
ModDate: 2020/09/24 09:12:23+02'00'
CreationDate: 2020/09/24 03:54:29+08'00'
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
Subject: Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice, 2020, doi:10.1186/s40545-020-00262-y
Author: Abdullah Algunmeeyn
Title: Understanding the factors influencing healthcare providers’ burnout during the outbreak of COVID-19 in Jordanian hospitals
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Pharmacists,Physicians,Nurses,Healthcare providers,Burnout,COVID-19,Factors,Jordan,Hospital,Qualitative
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s40545-020-00262-y
xmp:dc:publisher: Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice
xmp:dc:description: Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice, 2020, doi:10.1186/s40545-020-00262-y
xmp:dc:subject: Pharmacists; Physicians; Nurses; Healthcare providers; Burnout; COVID-19; Factors; Jordan; Hospital; Qualitative
xmp:dc:title: Understanding the factors influencing healthcare providers’ burnout during the outbreak of COVID-19 in Jordanian hospitals
xmp:dc:creator: Abdullah Algunmeeyn; Faris El-Dahiyat; Mohammad Mitib Altakhineh; Mohammad Azab; Zaheer-Ud-Din Babar
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2020-09-24T09:12:23+02:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2020-09-24T09:12:23+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2020-09-24T03:54:29+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:f7195bd4-8161-46c1-95df-04fc37cfed21
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:50ce68c8-cf37-4c5f-a46b-0c32874ad599
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:f7195bd4-8161-46c1-95df-04fc37cfed21
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2020-09-24T06:17:04+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Faris El-Dahiyat
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5264-8699
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A reference to the original document from which this one is derived. It is a minimal reference; missing components can be assumed to be unchanged. For example, a new version might only need to specify the instance ID and version number of the previous version, or a rendition might only need to specify the instance ID and rendition class of the original.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DerivedFrom
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: ResourceRef
xmp:pdfaType:description: Identifies a portion of a document. This can be a position at which the document has been changed since the most recent event history (stEvt:changed). For a resource within an xmpMM:Ingredients list, the ResourceRef uses this type to identify both the portion of the containing document that refers to the resource, and the portion of the referenced resource that is referenced.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Part#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stPart
xmp:pdfaType:type: Part
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/t/pg/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpTPg
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Paged-Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Fonts
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag Font
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: XMP08 Spec: An ordered array of plate names that are needed to print the document (including any in contained documents).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: PlateNames
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaType:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Font#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stFnt
xmp:pdfaType:type: Font
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: DateBOOKMARKS:
Outline placeholder
  Abstract
  Background
  Aim
  Method
  Result
  Conclusion
Background
Methods
  Research design
  The study sample
  Data gathering
  Data analysis
Results
  Characteristics of the interviewees
  Themes related to the factors influencing healthcare providers’ burnout during an outbreak of coronavirus in Jordanian hospitals
    Job stress among healthcare providers
    Staff and resource adequacy
    Fear of COVID-19 infection
Discussion
Conclusions and recommendations
Acknowledgements
Authors’ contributions
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Competing interests
Author details
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Algunmeeyn et al. Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40545-020-00262-y 
(2020) 13:53
RESEARCH  Open Access
Understanding the factors influencing
healthcare providers’ burnout during the
outbreak of COVID-19 in Jordanian
hospitals
Abdullah Algunmeeyn1, Faris El-Dahiyat2* [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5264-8699"] , Mohammad Mitib Altakhineh3, Mohammad Azab4 and
Zaheer-Ud-Din Babar5
Abstract: Background: Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is an infectious disease caused by a newly discovered
coronavirus. The nature of healthcare providers’ occupation puts them at an increased risk of getting any
contagious disease, including COVID-19. They are on the front line of the COVID-19 outbreak response and as such
are at risk of contracting this virus. The infectious disease started from China in December 2019 and spread rapidly
throughout countries, including Jordan. Especially, recent studies indicated that Jordanian healthcare providers’
work conditions and demographic are significant factors for healthcare providers’ burnout. Additionally, burnout has
been increased among healthcare providers in Jordanian hospital.
Aim: The present investigation aims to better understand the factors affecting pharmacists’, physicians’, and nurses’
burnout during the outbreak of COVID-19 to provide basic information for lowering and preventing the level of
burnout in Jordanian hospitals.
Method: This study is qualitative in nature, adopting face-to-face interviews as the key instrument of data
collection in one hospital in Jordan. The sample interviewed consisted of 30 healthcare providers in total (10 nurses,
10 physicians. and 10 pharmacists).
Result: Three key factors to healthcare providers’ burnout were identified in the sampled hospitals: job stress, staff
and resource adequacy, fear of COVID-19 infection, and interprofessional relationships in healthcare practice. The
examination also offers recommendations for lowering and preventing healthcare providers' burnout in Jordanian
hospitals.
Conclusion: This study explored the main factors of healthcare providers’ burnout during the outbreak of COVID-19
in Jordanian hospitals, thereby making an original contribution to existing knowledge, as it is the first empirical
exploration of healthcare providers' burnout during the outbreak of COVID-19. As such, it has attempted to offer an
in-depth understanding of the factors impacting this issue.
Keywords: Pharmacists, Physicians, Nurses, Healthcare providers, Burnout, COVID-19, Factors, Jordan, Hospital,
Qualitative
Handling Editor: Rabia Hussain, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Malaysia.
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:Faris.dahiyat@aau.ac.ae"] Faris.dahiyat@aau.ac.ae
2College of Pharmacy, Al Ain University, Al Ain, UAE
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2020 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the
data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
Page 2
Algunmeeyn et al. Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice (2020) 13:53  Page 2 of 8
Background
The novel virus was first identified by Chinese author-
ities in Wuhan City at the end of December 2019. The
evidence presented shows that the virus is spread
through birds and mammals, with people particularly at
risk of infection and spread of the virus [1]. COVID-19
is similar to the previous outbreaks of corona viruses
such as SARS-CoV (severe acute respiratory syndrome-
coronavirus) and MERS-CoV (Middle East respiratory
syndrome-coronavirus) in 2003 and 2015 [2]. The infec-
tion started to spread rapidly throughout countries, in-
cluding Jordan. In December of 2019, the China Health
Authority alerted the World Health Organization
(WHO) to a serious case of pneumonia that was un-
known to doctors and that was occurring in Wuhan,
China [3, 4]. The infection started to spread rapidly to
other countries including Jordan. It seems that the rap-
idly spreading virus is more contagious than SARS-CoV
and MERS-CoV9 [4].
A suggested route of human-to-human transmission is
through airborne droplets, contact or touching an in-
fected person, or a contaminated surface [5]. The nature
of healthcare providers’  occupation puts them at an in-
creased risk of getting any contagious disease, including
COVID-19. They are on the front line of the COVID-19
outbreak response and as such are at risk of contracting
this virus. Hand washing with soap and water, wearing
face masks, and isolating confirmed and suspected cases
are considered the best ways to avoid being exposed to
COVID-19 [6, 7].  However, a nationwide outbreak of
COVID-19 is an unexperienced virus for healthcare pro-
viders (nurses, doctors, and pharmacists) in the world.
Similarly, when severe acute respiratory syndrome such
as SARS spread rapidly, most healthcare providers expe-
rienced severe stress, and some nurses refused to care
for patients [8, 9]. For example, the factors influencing
nurses’  desire to leave their jobs during an outbreak of
SARS were identified as the perceived risk of fatality
from SARS, tenure, work stress, and social relationships.
Burnout is a long-term consequence of prolonged ex-
posure to certain job demands and a reaction that ap-
pears when a person can no longer endure the stress
they have been undergoing [10]. Additionally, burnout is
a syndrome characterized by emotional exhaustion,
depersonalization, and a diminished sense of personal
achievement. Both quantity and quality of healthcare
providers’ care could be negatively affected by stress and
burnout. Evidence found that stressors in the workplace
may result in a burnout syndrome and burnout results
in low productivity [11]. Studies reported that healthcare
providers are faced with hectic, unpredictable, and ever-
changing situations [11, 12].  For the reason that they
deal with various diseases, traumatic events, and urgent
situations, they do not have enough time for recovery, 
putting them under persistent stress. The COVID-19
pandemic is causing global panic [13].  As a result,
healthcare providers who were caring for COVID-19 pa-
tients are reported to experience much higher stress,
anxiety, and burnout than healthcare providers who do
not in other hospital departments [11].  A nationwide
outbreak of COVID-19 is an unfamiliar traumatic event
for healthcare providers; therefore, there has been lim-
ited studies into COVID-19 related burnout. Likewise,
when severe acute respiratory syndrome such as SARS
and MERS-CoV spread rapidly, most physicians, nurses,
and pharmacists experienced severe anxiety, stress, and
some physicians, and nurse declined to provide care for
patients [8, 9].  Moreover, a study conducted by Tzeng
and Yin [14] reported that when H5N1 avian flu spread
rapidly, the healthcare providers' fear of infection from
the disease was a significant factor influencing their pre-
paredness to offer care for patients infected with the
avian flu. Since an infectious disease such as COVID-19
can occur anywhere in the world, policy-makers and
managers need to pay attention to healthcare providers’
burnout in association with their experiences of a na-
tionwide COVID-19 outbreak. Especially, recent studies
indicated that Jordanian healthcare providers’ work con-
ditions and demographic are significant factors for
healthcare providers’  burnout [15, 16].  Additionally, a
study conducted by Alfuqaha and Alsharah [16] found
that burnout has been increased among healthcare pro-
viders in Jordanian hospital. However, as yet, there is no
research regarding these matters in relation to COVID-
19-related burnout. Thus, this study attempted to
recognize the influencing factors on healthcare pro-
viders’ burnout during an outbreak of COVID-19 in Jor-
danian hospitals to provide basic information for
lowering and preventing the level of burnout.
Methods
Research design
The current project was qualitative in nature. It
employed face-to-face interview (semi-structured inter-
views) as a method to gather data within one govern-
mental hospital in Jordan.
The study sample
The population for this qualitative study consisted of
nurses, physicians, and pharmacists who were caring for
patients’ suffering from COVID-19 admitted in one hos-
pital located in a region Jordanian’s capital, Amman.
The study participants were 10 nurses, 10 physicians,
and 10 pharmacists who worked in the governmental
hospital with the following job titles: pharmacists, regis-
tered nurse, and physicians who worked in the emer-
gency department and intensive care unit. The selection
of participants for the interviews was based on
Page 3
Algunmeeyn et al. Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice (2020) 13:53  Page 3 of 8
convenience and purposive sampling technique, result-
ing in a total of 30 participants (see Table 1). The prime
consideration with the sampling process in this case was
to recruit and select informants who could provide a
deep understanding of the issues under investigation and
to recruit and select them in such a way as to give cred-
ibility to the findings so that they can be potentially gen-
eralized to another context or a larger population.
Seven of the participants were females, and all the
other participants were males, also working in different
positions. Out of all those approached to be interviewed,
no one declined to take part. Privacy and confidentiality
were assured by the researcher to all the participants.
For privacy and confidentiality reasons, the names of the
interviewees cannot be mentioned. Participants were re-
ferred to using a code, consisting of H and numbered 1–
30 in abbreviated format; for example, “Interviewee H1”
or “Interviewee H10.” The selection of hospital health-
care providers for the interviews was based on conveni-
ence and purposive sampling technique as mentioned
previously, resulting in a total of 30 respondents. The
prime consideration with the sampling process was to
recruit and select informants who could offer a deep un-
derstanding of the matters under examination and to re-
cruit and select them in such a way as to give credibility
to the results so that they can be potentially generalized
to another context or a larger population.
Data gathering
Face-to-face interviews were conducted to gather data from
the two hospitals in this investigation, which started after
gaining the essential ethical approval. Any participants who
were willing to be interviewed were then sent an email
form, indicating that they had agreed to take part and giv-
ing an opportunity for the investigator to arrange an ap-
pointment for the interview. Consent forms and
information sheets were then distributed to the prospective
participants based on their interest in participating in this
study. The participant information sheet contained details
of the investigation study, and the approaches that would
be utilized to gather and analyze the relevant data, as well
as the purposes for which these data would be used. Like-
wise, the participants were informed that they had the right
to withdraw from the study at any time. In addition, the re-
searcher asked the participants to sign a consent form on
the day of the interview, emphasizing that their needs took
priority over the study. Their permission was likewise
Table 1 Numbers of interviewees in the case study
Staff category  Number of interviewees in case study
Pharmacists 10
Nurses  10
Physicians  10 
obtained for the interview to be audio-recorded and for fu-
ture use of the transcripts. Each interview was then digitally
recorded, while notes were also taken during the interviews.
The face-to-face interview process began with greetings
and an introduction, after which the participant read
through the information sheet and signed the informed
consent form. The interviewee’s background data and
demographic information were subsequently collected,
followed by the scheduled interview questions and
prompts.
Data analysis
The data from the 30 interviews were analyzed with the
aid of the NVivo qualitative data analysis software pack-
age. The audio-recorded interviews were transcribed ver-
batim, and these transcripts were reviewed by the
researchers before the data within them was analyzed.
Later, the data were imported into the NVivo qualitative
data analysis software package to assist with linking con-
cepts contained in the data. In this study, thematic ana-
lysis was selected as the data analysis method, since it was
considered as the most appropriate method for the
current study. This technique adopted in the present
study was to place the mass of qualitative data collected
into meaningful and related categories. This allowed the
investigators to rearrange and analyze the data systematic-
ally and rigorously. In addition, thematic analysis enables
rich and deep insights to be gained of intricate phenom-
ena. The data analysis procedures for this study were as
follows: (1) the researcher familiarized himself with the
content and information in the transcriptions; (2) the re-
searcher continued to read each transcription line by line
to find keywords, meanings, or concepts relating to the
aims of the study; (3) the coding was refined by assem-
bling similar codes and attempting to group codes to-
gether; (4) in the practical retrieval process, the researcher
collected in one place all the text that was coded with the
same code, copying and pasting the text into separate la-
beled files for each code, and using the Word program; (5)
the researcher organized and gathered all coded data into
themes; and (6) common themes were identified and in-
ferences were made from them, with sample quotes being
selected to illustrate the themes that emerged.
Results
Characteristics of the interviewees
Only 7 of the participants were female. The majority of
the interviewees were over 27 years of age, and most
were graduates. They worked in different roles, but all
had over 4-year work experience, while half had 12–18-
year experience. A brief profile of each interviewee is
presented in Table 1, 2, 3 and 4. Only 7 of the partici-
pants were females, and these consisted of 10 nurses, 10
doctors, and 10 pharmacists. All the other interviewees
Page 4
Algunmeeyn et al. Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice (2020) 13:53  Page 4 of 8
Table 2 Participant profiles: nurses
No.  Designation  Gender Age  Qualifications Years of experience
1  ICU nurse  Male  30  Bachelor  8
2  ICU nurse  Male  33  Bachelor  11
3  ICU nurse  Male  29  Bachelor  8
4  ICU nurse  Female  29  Diploma  8
5  Emergency department nurse  Male  40  Bachelor  18
6  Emergency department nurse  Female  38  Bachelor  16
7  Emergency department nurse  Female  28  Bachelor  6
8  Emergency department nurse  Female  42  Bachelor  20
9  Emergency department nurse  Male  38  Diploma  18
10  Emergency department nurse  Male  40  Diploma  18
were males also working in different positions. The age
of the participants ranged from 27 to 56, with the major-
ity falling into the 33–42 age group (see Table 1, 2, 3
and 4).  Their qualifications differ: 3 with diploma de-
grees, 22 with bachelor’s degrees, 4 with Pharm D de-
gree, and 1 with Master degree.
Out of all those approached to be interviewed, no one
declined, citing a lack of time or other commitments as
a reason. The examiner decided to interview the staff
who provided care for patients suffering from COVID-
19 in the respective categories by concentrating on the
nurses, doctors, and pharmacists in each category, as
they would have had knowledge of the factors influen-
cing healthcare providers’  burnout during the outbreak
of COVID-19. The interview questions were designed to
collect in-depth information on the following key areas
that are factors influencing healthcare providers’ burnout
during the outbreak COVID-19.
Themes related to the factors influencing healthcare
providers’ burnout during an outbreak of coronavirus in
Jordanian hospitals
The data analysis revealed the following key themes re-
lating to the factors influencing healthcare providers’ 
burnout during an outbreak of COVID-19 in hospitals
in Jordan, as described by the participants during the
interviews.
Job stress among healthcare providers
The data analysis revealed that most of the interviewees
cited job stress as the key influencing factor of COVID-
19. All of the participants (nursing, physicians, and phar-
macists) mentioned fear and anxiety. Interviewees felt
they did not have enough information when they were
caring for patients, and they were afraid of infection
spreading to their families. Thus, they became stressed
and afraid. The following statements reflect the inter-
viewees’ views in relation to this finding (theme):
... I am expected to be there and stay there and pro-
vide care for those patients suffering from COVID-
19, but know that I am at risk and know that I have
a family to go home to,. (Interviewee H15)
but . I have a husband and two children. The youn-
ger one is four years old and the little one is two
years old. It is the time for them immunity wasn’t
Table 3 Participant profiles: physicians
No.  Designation  Gender Age  Qualifications Years of experience
1  Ear, nose, and throat physician  Male  40  Bachelor  16
2  Pathologist and laboratory physician Female 58  Bachelor  34
3  Radiologist  Male  56  Bachelor  32
4  Critical care practitioner physician Male  44  Bachelor  20
5  Critical care practitioner physician Male  41  Bachelor  21
6  Radiologist  Male  35  Bachelor  11
7  Surgeon  Male  39  Bachelor  15
8  Pathologist and laboratory physician Male  42  Bachelor  18
9  Critical care practitioner physician Male  33  Master  9
10  Surgeon  Male  55  Bachelor  31
Page 5
Algunmeeyn et al. Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice (2020) 13:53  Page 5 of 8
Table 4 Participant profiles: pharmacist
No.  Designation Gender  Age  Qualifications Years of experience
1  Clinical pharmacist Male  40  Bachelor  17
2  Clinical pharmacist Female  45  Bachelor  22
3  Clinical pharmacist Male  33  Bachelor  10
4  Clinical pharmacist Male  29  Pharm D  6
5  Clinical pharmacist Male  27  Pharm D  4
6  Clinical pharmacist Male  31  Bachelor  8
7  Clinical pharmacist Female  39  Bachelor  16
8  Clinical pharmacist Male  35  Bachelor  12
9  Clinical pharmacist Male  27  Pharm D  4
10  Clinical pharmacist Male  30  Pharm D  7
too strong, so I have to consider it very seriously.
But what do you think I could I do? I have to be in-
volved as a nurse unless I loss my job. (Interviewee
H1) 
hospital, because nursing is the area of healthcare
provision where there is highest engagement and
commitment to Accreditations implementation in
this hospital. (Interviewee H1)
Some COVID -19 patients are in this hospital. Since
of the responsibility of my job, the pressure is in-
escapable for me (Interviewee H2)
As a nurse, I have a task to care for patients but at
the same time I also have a responsibility to myself,
my kids', wife and my parents, everybody who has a
stake in my wellbeing. (Interviewee H3) 
The staff sufficiency in this hospital leads to de-
crease workload for current staff and surely affects
our performance and the quality of care provided to
patients with COVID-19......  Management of our
hospital is equipped with facilities sufficient for de-
crease or preventing the staff from infected from
COVID-19the spread of COVID-19, (Interviewee
H16,H22)
as you know we heard that the deaths of several
pharmacists, nurses and doctors in around the
world. Because we are work at the frontline to fight
this virus so this cause fear and anxiety to get this
virus or transit it to our families. (Interviewee H27)
Staff and resource adequacy
The data analysis found that most of the respondents
emphasized staff and resource adequacy and turnover as
a factor impacting nursing, physicians’, and pharmacists’
practice during an outbreak of COVID-19 at Jordanian
hospitals. These opinions were derived from the follow-
ing quotes extracted from the interviews with staff:
... I our hospital provide the all staff work with pa-
tient have COVID-19 adequate PPE such N95s and
full Hazmat. (Interviewee H18)
...  Our hospital employs the best infection control
guideline for preventing the spread of COVID-19…
(Interviewee H26) 
Our hospital employs the best infection control
guideline for preventing the spread of COVID-19
between the staff , (Interviewee 14)
Fear of COVID-19 infection
The study found that the respondents recognized fear of
COVID-19 infection as a factor influencing nursing,
physicians, and pharmacists’ practice during an outbreak
of COVID-19 in Jordanian hospitals. For example, the
interviewees stated
In spite of we used good equipment to prevent our
self during working with patient COVID-19 but
honestly I am afraid of being infected with COVID-
19. (Interviewee H3)
……….always pharmacists and doctors are bringing
home bacteria and viruses. (Interviewee H5)
….I feel that my job puts me, wife and my son at
great risk get the infection (interviewee H8)
...and I also see the shortage of nurses as a major
barrier to Accreditations implementation in this 
I tried to protect myself as much as I can by the
wearing Hazmat suit and follow the best infection
control guideline for preventing myself to infected
Page 6
Algunmeeyn et al. Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice (2020) 13:53  Page 6 of 8
by COVID-19. I have a husband and two children.
The younger one is four years old and the little one
is two years old. It is the time for them immunity
wasn’t too strong, so I have to consider it very ser-
iously. But what do you think I could I do? I have to
be involved as a physician unless I lose my job.
(Interviewee H30)
Discussion
This study aimed to explore the factors impacting
healthcare providers’  burnout during an outbreak of
COVID-19 in Jordanian hospitals in order to gain a bet-
ter understanding of such influencing factors in hospitals
in Jordan, specifically from the perspective and experi-
ence of nursing, physicians, and pharmacist staff. The re-
spondents, including nurses, cited job stress, staff and
resource adequacy and fear of COVID-19 infection as
factors impacting the burnout in healthcare providers
who experienced COVID-19 in Jordanian hospitals.
The findings show that job stress among healthcare
providers was the main factor for burnout during the
outbreak of COVID-19 in Jordanian hospitals. Most of
the participants believe that during the outbreak of a
new emerging contagious disease COVID-19 led to an
increase of the number of affected patients with
COVID-19 in their hospitals. This could increase the
workload and expose them at work to COVID-19, the
highly contagious nature of which could mean taking
the infection home to their relatives. This result is simi-
lar to that of other studies, conducted by Shanafelt et al.
and Potter [5, 17],  where it was confirmed that the
highly infectious nature of the disease increased health-
care providers’  stress and anxiety, which in turn, in-
creased their burnout.
Additionally, according to the participants’  responses,
the staff and resource adequacy was recognized as a factor
in the current context. Most of the participants made the
point that staff and resource adequacy in the hospitals was
largely connected to the healthcare providers’ burnout, in-
cluding reference to available and sufficient personal pro-
tective equipment, quick access to occupational health
with efficient assessment and testing if symptoms
warranted it, and information and resources to prevent
carrying the infection home to family members. A study
mentioned that hospitals usually provide personal
protection equipment for doctors, nurses, little attention
is being paid towards the protection for pharmacists even
though they are the front line of fighting COVID-19 crisis
[18, 19]. The current study also found that where there
was an adequate increase in pharmacist, nurse, and phys-
ician staff in hospitals, this was associated with a decrease
in healthcare providers’ burnout. Hospitals that invest in
more staff may also invest in other activities that improve
quality and avoid workload. These findings are consistent 
with those of other studies by Kim et al. and Kane et al.
[20, 21], who highlighted such factors as being associated
with the healthcare providers’  burnout during the out-
break of COVID-19. For example, they pointed out that
MERS-CoV-related healthcare providers’ burnout are as-
sociated with poor hospital resources for the prevention of
their staff contracting the virus and treatment of MERS-
CoV. Additionally, Kane et al. [22] and Klopper et al. [23]
found that nurse-to-patient ratio is an effective nurse re-
tention strategy leading to nurses’ satisfaction with the job
and providing care and decreasing nurses’  burnout. Fur-
thermore, a study indicated that management should en-
sure presence of adequate human resource particularly
pharmacists to decrease the workload. This can be
attained through recruiting new staff and increasing effi-
ciency [24].
Finally, the findings of this project revealed that fear of
COVID-19 infection is a factor related to healthcare pro-
viders’ burnout in Jordanian hospitals. The interviewees
believe that nursing, physician, and pharmacist jobs put
the healthcare providers and their families at great risk
of exposure to COVID-19 due to acquiring the infection
at work and taking the infection home to their family.
This finding is supported by those of other studies con-
ducted worldwide [5, 9, 14, 25–27].
The principles of COVID-19 infection prevention and
control strategies associated with healthcare suggest the
need for administrative controls and hospital resources
[27]. In addition, if the government, with strong leader-
ship, develops stronger and more resilient health systems
in preparation against emerging contagious diseases such
as COVID-19, healthcare provides’  burnout will
decrease.
Conclusions and recommendations
The present study has explored the main factors affect-
ing healthcare providers’  burnout, as faced by hospitals
in Jordan during the outbreak of COVID-19, based on
responses from a sample of hospital pharmacists, physi-
cians and nurses’ staff members. In Jordanian hospitals,
three main factors were identified from the reported ex-
periences of these nurses: job stress among healthcare
providers, staff and resource adequacy, and fear of
COVID-19 infection. These factors should be addressed,
because they could impact on healthcare providers’
burnout in hospitals, negatively influencing the quality
of healthcare services and thereby incurring serious
problems.
Nevertheless, a limitation of the current project is that
it examined just one hospital. Moreover, the sample only
included pharmacists, physicians, and nurses caring for
patients of coronavirus in the emergency department
and intensive care unit, which is likely to affect the
generalizability of the findings. Further enquiry is
Page 7
Algunmeeyn et al. Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice (2020) 13:53  Page 7 of 8
therefore necessary to explore the ways in which the fac-
tors affect the healthcare providers’  burnout during an
outbreak of COVID-19 in Jordan’s and government hos-
pitals, thereby looking at how to decrease and prevent
staff burnout to identify and overcome these factors,
with the inclusion of views from managers and policy-
makers.
In order to lower the level of burnout, managers need
to make efforts to reduce job stress, to reinforce hospital
resources for the treatment of COVID-19, and to pro-
mote support from top management. And also, sufficient
funds are available to meet all of quality of care needs of
the patient in the hospital. And being able to meet re-
quirement or at least minimum requirement (adequate
physicians, pharmacists, and nurse-patient ratio, enough
equipment, and other requirement) and hopefully be-
yond. It is essential that we develop effective and system-
atic burnout management programs for monitoring and
preventing burnout in preparation against possible fu-
ture outbreaks of infectious diseases.
The present researcher used a qualitative case study
technique whereas a quantitative approach could con-
firm and support these results and build on the current
study through further work on health workers’ burnout
during COVID-19 in Jordanian hospitals. One limitation
of this study is that the scope of research was confined
to the outbreak of COVID-19 in one country. As such, it
is necessary to increase the number of study contribu-
tors for comparison with cases in other countries. Be-
sides, as most of the interviewees were male, future
investigations need to include more female nurses, phy-
sicians, and pharmacist so as to examine gender charac-
teristics. In addition, factors such as personality, coping
strategies, and job attitude could be surveyed as add-
itional influencing factors of burnout. Finally, the re-
searchers also recommend that a mixed-method study
design combining cross-sectional surveys and in-depth
interviews be used for an in-depth inquiry into COVID-
19-related burnout
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the healthcare providers who
participated in this study.
Authors’ contributions
AG conceptualized the project with FD and ZB. AG, MT, and MA contributed
with data collection. AG and FD contributed to data analysis and
interpretation. AG, FD, and ZB contributed with manuscript development.
The final version was read and approved by all authors.
Funding
The authors received no specific funding for this work.
Availability of data and materials
The datasets for this manuscript are not publicly available. The datasets
obtained as a part of this will be available on request. Requests to access the
datasets should be directed to [URL: "mailto:faris.dahiyat@aau.ac.ae"] faris.dahiyat@aau.ac.ae. 
Competing interests
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential
conflict of interest.
Author details
1School of Nursing, University of Isra, Amman, Jordan. 2College of Pharmacy,
Al Ain University, Al Ain, UAE. 3Karak Comprehensive Medical Center,
Jordanian Ministry of Health, Amman, Jordan. 4Faculty of Medicine, The
Hashemite University, Zarqa, Jordan. 5Department of Pharmacy, University of
Huddersfield, Huddersfield, UK.
Received: 1 June 2020 Accepted: 18 August 2020
References
1.  Schoeman D, Fielding BC. Coronavirus envelope protein: current
knowledge. Virology journal. 2019 Dec;16(1):69.
2.  Mizumoto K, Kagaya K, Zarebski A, Chowell G. Estimating the asymptomatic
proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the
Diamond Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020. Eurosurveillance.
2020 Mar 12;25(10):2000180.
3.  Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok KH, To KK, Chu H, Yang J, Xing F, Liu J, Yip CC, Poon
RW, Tsoi HW. A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019
novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a
family cluster. The Lancet. 2020 Feb 15;395(10223):514–23.
4.  Paules CI, Marston HD, Fauci AS. Coronavirus infections—more than just the
common cold. Jama. 2020 Feb 25;323(8):707–8.
5.  Shanafelt T, Ripp J, Trockel M. Understanding and addressing sources of
anxiety among health care professionals during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Jama. 2020 Apr;7.
6.  Curtis N, Sparrow A, Ghebreyesus TA, Netea MG. Considering BCG
vaccination to reduce the impact of COVID-19. The Lancet. 2020 Apr;30.
7.  Ong SW, Tan YK, Chia PY, Lee TH, Ng OT, Wong MS, Marimuthu K. Air,
surface environmental, and personal protective equipment contamination
by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) from a
symptomatic patient. Jama. 2020 Apr 28;323(16):1610–2.
8.  Brug J, Aro AR, Oenema A, De Zwart O, Richardus JH, Bishop GD. SARS risk
perception, knowledge, precautions, and information sources, the
Netherlands. Emerging infectious diseases. 2004 Aug;10(8):1486.
9.  Shiao JS, Koh D, Lo LH, Lim MK, Guo YL. Factors predicting nurses'
consideration of leaving their job during the SARS outbreak. Nursing Ethics.
2007 Jan;14(1):5–17.
10. Demerouti E, Bakker AB, De Jonge J, Janssen PP, Schaufeli WB. Burnout and
engagement at work as a function of demands and control. Scandinavian
journal of work, environment & health. 2001 Aug;1:279–86.
11. Chemali Z, Ezzeddine FL, Gelaye B, Dossett ML, Salameh J, Bizri M, Dubale B,
Fricchione G. Burnout among healthcare providers in the complex
environment of the Middle East: a systematic review. BMC public health.
2019 Dec 1;19(1):1337.
12. Gates DM, Gillespie GL, Succop P. Violence against nurses and its impact on
stress and productivity. Nurs Econ. 2011 Mar 1;29(2):59–66.
13. Bonyan R, Al-Karasneh AF, El-Dahiyat F, et al. Identification of the awareness
level by the public of Arab countries toward COVID-19: cross-sectional study
following an outbreak. J of Pharm Policy and Pract. 2020;13:43. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1186/s40545-020-00247-x"] https://doi.
 org/10.1186/s40545-020-00247-x.
14. Tzeng HM, Yin CY. Nurses' fears and professional obligations concerning
possible human-to-human avian flu. Nursing Ethics. 2006 Sep;13(5):455–70.
15. Mudallal RH, Othman WA, Al Hassan NF. Nurses’ burnout: the influence of
leader empowering behaviors, work conditions, and demographic traits.
INQUIRY: The Journal of Health Care Organization, Provision, and Financing.
2017 Aug 23;54:0046958017724944.
16. Alfuqaha O, Alsharah H. Burnout among Nurses and Teachers in Jordan: a
comparative study. Archives of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy. 2018 Jun 1;
20(2):55–65.
17. Potter C. To what extent do nurses and physicians working within the
emergency department experience burnout: A review of the literature.
Australasian Emergency Nursing Journal. 2006 Jun 1;9(2):57–64.
18. Bukhari N, Rasheed H, Nayyer B, et al. Pharmacists at the frontline beating
the COVID-19 pandemic. J of Pharm Policy and Pract. 2020;13:8. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1186/s40545-020-00210-w"] https://doi.
[URL: "https://doi.org/10.1186/s40545-020-00210-w"] org/10.1186/s40545-020-00210-w.
Page 8
Algunmeeyn et al. Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice (2020) 13:53
19. Chan AH, Rutter V, Ashiru-Oredope D, Tuck C, Babar ZU. Together we unite:
the role of the Commonwealth in achieving universal health coverage
through pharmaceutical care amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of
Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice. 2020 Dec;13:1–7.
20. Kim JS, Choi JS. Factors influencing emergency nurses' burnout during an
outbreak of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus in Korea. Asian
nursing research. 2016 Dec 1;10(4):295–9.
21. Kane RL, Shamliyan TA, Mueller C, Duval S, Wilt TJ. The association of
registered nurse staffing levels and patient outcomes: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Medical care. 2007 Dec;1:1195–204.
22. Klopper HC, Coetzee SK, Pretorius R, Bester P. Practice environment, job
satisfaction and burnout of critical care nurses in South Africa. Journal of
Nursing Management. 2012 Jul;20(5):685–95.
23. Ayele Y, Hawulte B, Feto T, Basker GV, Bacha YD. Job satisfaction among
pharmacy professionals working in public hospitals and its associated
factors, eastern Ethiopia. Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice. 2020
Dec;13:1–9.
24. Hall LM, Angus J, Peter E, O'Brien-Pallas L, Wynn F, Donner G. Media
portrayal of nurses' perspectives and concerns in the SARS crisis in Toronto.
Journal of Nursing Scholarship. 2003 Sep;35(3):211–6.
25. Chen KY, Yang CM, Lien CH, Chiou HY, Lin MR, Chang HR, Chiu WT.
Burnout, job satisfaction, and medical malpractice among physicians.
International journal of medical sciences. 2013;10(11):1471.
26. Al Knawy BA, Al-Kadri HM, Elbarbary M, Arabi Y, Balkhy HH, Clark A.
Perceptions of post outbreak management by management and healthcare
workers of a Middle East respiratory syndrome outbreak in a tertiary care
hospital: a qualitative study. BMJ open. 2019 May 1;9(5):e017476.
27. Hafner T, Banda M, Kohler J, Lumpkin M, Adeyeye MC, Nfor E, Aboagye-
Nyame F, Guzman J. Integrating pharmaceutical systems strengthening in
the current global health scenario: three ‘uncomfortable truths’. Journal of
Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice. 2020 Dec;13(1):1–4.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations. 
Page 8 of 8
