Page 1
MYCONAMES Synopsis of proposals on fungal nomenclature: a review of the proposals
concerning Chapter F of the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, 
fungi, and plants submitted to the XI International Mycological Congress, 
2018
Tom W. May1 and Scott A. Redhead2
1Royal Botanic Gardens Victoria, 100 Birdwood Ave, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia. Corresponding author email: tom.may@rbg.vic.
gov.au
2Ottawa Research and Development Centre, Science and Technology Branch, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 960 Carling Avenue, K.W. 
Neatby Building, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0C6, Canada
Abstract: A commentary is provided on the seven formally published proposals to modify the provisions of the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and
plants (ICN) that will be dealt with by the Fungal Nomenclature Session (FNS) of the 11th International Mycological Congress (IMC11) in July 2018. The proposals
deal with four issues: (1) clarification of the meaning of “original material” in relation to the typification of sanctioned names; (2) indication of the nomenclatural status
of sanctioned names in author citations; (3) use of DNA sequences as nomenclatural types; and (4) use of repository identifiers as an alternative to author citations. 
Information is also provided on the composition and role of the Fungal Nomenclature Bureau and the operation of the FNS and the pre-Congress Guiding vote.
Key words: Author citations, DNA types, ICN, Governance, Guiding vote, Identifiers, Nomenclature, Sanctioned names, Typification.
Article info: Accepted: 18 May 2018; Published: 23 May 2018.
INTRODUCTION
Following new procedures adopted at the Nomenclature Section
of the XIX International Botanical Congress in Shenzhen
(Hawksworth et al. 2017), formal proposals to amend the
International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants 
(ICN) in regard to provisions solely related to fungi were published
in IMA Fungus 9: (i)-(vii) on 1 April 2018 (Hawksworth 2018).
The new procedures are set out in the Shenzhen ICN (Turland
et al. 2018) and state that such proposals are to be dealt with
by the Fungal Nomenclature Session (FNS) of an International
Mycological Congress. This Synopsis presents the proposals along
with a commentary, following the established practice for proposals
presented to International Botanical Congresses (Turland &
Wiersema 2017).
An innovation in the Shenzhen Code is that all articles and
recommendations that relate solely to organisms treated as fungi
have been separated in a new “Chapter F”. It is the material in
Chapter F that can be modified or augmented by the FNS of an
IMC. The Shenzhen Code is currently in press, but it is anticipated
that printed copies will be available prior to the FNS.
This synopsis has been prepared in our capacities as the
appointed Secretary (TWM) and Deputy Secretary (SAR) for the
upcoming Fungal Nomenclature Session in Puerto Rico (see below).
Fungal Nomenclature Session
The proposals discussed below will be formally considered at
the Fungal Nomenclature Session (FNS) of the XI International
Mycological Congress to be held on Thursday 19 July 2018 in
the plenary hall of the Puerto Rico Convention Center, San Juan, 
Puerto Rico. All persons registered for at least that day of the
Congress are eligible to attend and vote in the FNS. Each person
eligible to attend has one vote, and there are no institutional votes.
Procedures for the FNS are set out in Provision 8 of Division
III of the Shenzhen Code. These procedures include: a qualified 
majority (60 %) is required for accepting proposals and for referring
items to the Editorial Committee; while a 50 % majority is required
for accepting an amendment to a proposal, for choosing between
two alternative proposals, and for establishing and referring items
to a Special-purpose Committee. Note that changes to wording of
particular proposals may be moved as amendments during the FNS, 
either as a friendly amendment [when accepted by the original
proposer(s)] or otherwise when introduced by an eligible attendee
of the FNS and seconded by five other eligible attendees.
The FNS may authorize one or more Special-purpose
Committees, with a specific mandate, to be appointed by the
Nomenclature Committee for Fungi in consultation with the
General Committee, that report back to the FNS of the next IMC. 
An example of a previous Special-purpose Committee is the Special
Subcommittee on Governance of the Code with Respect to Fungi, 
appointed following the Melbourne IBC, that produced proposals
to amend the Code that were ultimately adopted at the Shenzhen
IBC (May 2016; Hawksworth et al. 2017).
For the main body of the Code, an Editorial Committee
is elected by the Nomenclature Section of an IBC, and that
Committee finalizes the Code arising from that Congress. For
changes to Chapter F, there will be an “Editorial Committee -
Chapter F” that will incorporate any required changes into the
on-line version of the Code (in consultation with the Editorial
Committee for the Shenzhen Code). Proposals concerning examples
are automatically referred to the Editorial Committee.
Fungal Nomenclature Bureau
The Fungal Nomenclature Bureau (FNB) of an International
Mycological Congress is responsible for running the FNS and the
pre-Congress Guiding vote. The FNB consists of the Chair, up to
five Deputy Chairs, Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and Recorder. 
These roles in the FNB are the equivalent of the President, Vice-
president, Rapporteur-général, Vice-rapporteur and Recorder in
the Bureau of Nomenclature of an International Botanical Congress
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 1 
(ix)
Page 2
MYCONAMES
(IBC). Subject to confirmation by the General Committee (in
train at present for the Chair and Deputy Secretary positions), the
officers of the FNB will be: Amy Rossman (Corvallis, USA; Chair),
David Hawksworth (Richmond and London, UK; Emeritus
Deputy Chair), Tom May (Melbourne, Australia; Secretary),
Scott Redhead (Ottawa, Canada; Deputy Secretary) and Lorenzo
Lombard (Utrecht, The Netherlands; Recorder). Further details
on the election and duties of members of the FNB can be found in
Hawksworth et al. (2017). In his role as Rapporteur-général for the
Rio IBC, Nicholas Turland (Berlin, Germany) has kindly agreed
to an invitation from the International Mycological Association to
attend the Fungal Nomenclature Session in San Juan as an observer.
In the lead up to each IBC, it is traditional for the Rapporteur-
général and the Vice-rapporteur to present a synopsis of the
proposals, as background for the pre-Congress vote and for the
Nomenclature Section of the IBC. As Secretary and Deputy-
Secretary of the FNB, we follow that tradition here for proposals
that are to be dealt with by the FNS of IMC11. The Synopsis is not
intended as a vehicle for the personal opinions of the secretaries, 
but rather is an opportunity to draw together all the proposals and
examine technical aspects such as clarity of wording, ramifications
for other articles, and unexpected consequences, as well as indicate
opinions of relevant international committees.
Given the short time frame between the introduction at
the Shenzhen Congress of new procedures for governance of
the nomenclature of names of fungi and the inaugural Fungal
Nomenclature Session at IMC, all seven formal proposals to amend
Chapter F were published together in April 2018 in IMA Fungus 9
in the section MycoNames (Hawksworth 2018).
Guiding vote
A pre-Congress Guiding vote will take place subsequent to the
publication of this Synopsis, until 17 June 2018, as a non-binding
but nevertheless indicative assessment for the FNS on the published
proposals. Any proposal that has a “No” vote that is equal to or
greater than 75 % in the Guiding vote is automatically rejected by
the FNS, unless a proposal to discuss it is moved by a registered
attendee of the FNS and seconded by five other registered
attendees.
Participation in the Guiding vote is open to authors of
proposals, members of the Nomenclature Committee for Fungi, 
and members of a range of organizations as set out in Division III
of the Code, specifically the International Mycological Association
and its Member Mycological Organizations. We acknowledge that
the geographic and sector balance of the eligible organizations
could be improved, but no organizations contacted us by the
deadline specified by Hawksworth et al. (2017). Nevertheless, the
FNB has proactively approved the following additional eligible
organizations, all with an international or continental scope: 
African Mycological Society, La Asociación Latinoamericana
de Micología, International Association for Lichenology, and
International Commission on the Taxonomy of Fungi.
Organisations whose members are eligible to participate in the
Guiding vote are listed on the IMA website: 
<http://www.ima-mycology.org/nomenclature/guiding-vote>.
Results of the Guiding vote will be available on the IMA website
prior to the IMC at the same link.
Because the proposals relating to fungi follow the numerical
sequence of articles in the ICN, they have not been re-numbered, 
and the Guiding vote will also use the numbering of the proposals
as published (F-001 etc.).
It is recommended to read this Synopsis in parallel with
the original proposals (Hawksworth 2018) before completing
the Guiding vote — see IMA Fungus 9: (i)-(vii) <http://www.
imafungus.org/Issue/91/MYCONAMES.pdf>.
Options on the Guiding vote, for each proposal will be: 
No, Yes, Special-purpose Committee, Editorial Committee,
and Abstain. A “Yes” vote only implies approval in principle of
the proposal, not necessarily of its exact wording. An “Editorial
Committee” vote (unless otherwise indicated) instructs the
Editorial Committee - Chapter F to consider inclusion in the Code 
of material in the proposal, but does not require it to do so. 
Opinions of committees
Proposals to amend Chapter F of the Code were submitted to the
Nomenclature Committee for Fungi (NCF) for their opinion and
Prop. F-005 was also submitted to the International Commission
on the Taxonomy of Fungi (ICTF). Voting within these
committees is reported as the number of votes for the options: 
Yes – No – Special-purpose Committee – Editorial Committee. 
In the ICTF, 18 of the 23 members voted, and in the NCF all 20
members voted. Percentages are of the members voting. A given
committee is stated to support a proposal when the “Yes” vote is 50
% or more. 
Proposals to conserve, protect or reject and
requests for binding decisions
It is important to note that proposals to conserve, protect or reject
names or to suppress works and requests for binding decisions
(such as on confusability of names) should continue to be
submitted to the General Committee (GC) for examination by
the relevant Specialist Nomenclature Committee, which for fungi
is the Nomenclature Committee for Fungi (NCF). The means of
submitting proposals and requests to the GC is via publication
in the journal Taxon, except for lists for protection or rejection, 
prepared by working groups established under Art. F.2 or F.7, which
are published in IMA Fungus. Recent reports of the NCF have
been published simultaneously in Taxon and IMA Fungus (e.g. May
2017) and reports of the GC appear in Taxon; both series of reports
will now be published annually. The proposals and requests dealt
with by the NCF (and ultimately the GC) are not part of the
business of the FNS.
PROPOSALS TO AMEND CHAPTER F OF
THE CODE 
This Synopsis repeats the exact wording of the proposed changes
to Chapter F, along with reference to the published justification. 
Numbering of articles and recommendations and the quoted text
follows the Shenzhen ICN (Turland et al. 2018), with new material
inserted in sequence in the appropriate position. When
existing articles are quoted, new text is in bold, deleted text
is in strikethrough. Proposals below relate to Articles (Art.),
Recommendations (Rec.) and Examples (Ex.) of the Code.
(x)  I M A F U N G U S
Page 3
Article F.3 - concerning elements from the
context of sanctioning works
Prop. F-001 [Parra & Zamora in IMA Fungus 9(1):(i)-(iii)] Reword
Art. F.3 Note 2
“Note 2. For names falling under Art. F.3.9, both elements
from the context of the protologue are original material and
those from the context of the sanctioning work are considered as
equivalent to original material.”
Prop. F-002 [Parra & Zamora in IMA Fungus 9(1):(i)-(iii)] Reword
Art. F.3 Note 2
“Note 2. For names falling under Art. F.3.9, an elements from
the context of the protologue are original material and those from
the context of the sanctioning work are considered as equivalent to
original material a sanctioning work may be chosen as lectotype
when no original material is available, except when a neotype has
been previously designated for the same name.” [Revised from the
original proposal to show deleted text.]
The proposers note that If F-002 is accepted, it will be necessary
to amend Art. 9.13: “If no original material is extant or as long as
it is missing, a neotype may be selected. A lectotype always takes
precedence over a neotype, except as provided by Art. 9.16, 9.19(c) 
and F.3 Note 2.” [Revised from the original proposal, where a
reference to the need to change Art. 9.12 was also included by
mistake.]
Secretaries’ comments When typifying names that are sanctioned, 
the current wording of the Code is that the type of a sanctioned
name “may be selected from among the elements associated with
the name in the protologue and/or the sanctioning treatment” 
(Art. F.3.9). Note 2 to Art. F.3.9. explains that “elements from the
context of the protologue are original material and those from the
context of the sanctioning work are considered as equivalent to
original material”. The proposers provide historical background
to the evolution of this article from the wording in the Vienna
Code. They note that due to variant interpretations of previous
editions of the Code, in some cases where material associated
with the protologue was no longer extant, but there was extant
material associated with the relevant sanctioning work, a neotype
was chosen. Under the current wording of the Code (or at least the
intent of the wording), such neotypes should be superseded.
The proposers present Prop. F-001 and F-002 as alternatives. 
Although arguments for both proposals are put forward, the
proposers in fact strongly prefer Prop. F-002 (Juan Carlos
Zamora pers. comm.). Their intent with Prop. F-002 is to allow
past neotypifications of sanctioned names to stand when such
neotypifications were carried out even when material from the
context of the sanctioning work was available; and they also wish to
allow such a practice to continue.
The Nomenclature Committee for Fungi supports Prop. F-002 
(13 - 6 - 1 - 0) over Prop. F-001 (4 - 16 - 0 - 0). However, Nicholas
Turland (Rapporteur-général for the IBC) has pointed out that
to enforce the intent of either, the proposals need to refer to
Articles rather than Notes. Also, with the current wording of F-001 
adjustments would be required to a number of other Articles, and
for Prop. F-002 the possibility that a neotype is lost or destroyed
needs to be taken into account. A potential re-wording of Art. 
F.3.9 that matches the intent of Prop. F-002 is: “The lectotype
of a name of a species or infraspecific taxon adopted in one of 
the works specified in Art. F.3.1, and thereby sanctioned, may be
selected from among the elements associated with the name in
the protologue and/or the sanctioning treatment. If no elements
associated with such a name in the protologue exist (or as long
as they are missing) and no lectotype exists, a neotype may be
selected. As long as a neotype exists, selection of a lectotype is
precluded”.
For Prop. F-002, mycologists participating in the Guiding
vote should vote “Yes” if they support the intent of the wording
put forward by the proposers (the wording of the proposal can be
amended during the FNS).
Recommendation F.3A - concerning indication
of sanctioned status
Prop. F-003 [Hawksworth in IMA Fungus 9(1):(v)] Amend Rec. 
F.3A
“F.3A.1. After a sanctioned name (Art. F.3.1), either “: Fr.” or
“: Pers.” (to indicate the sanctioning author Fries or Persoon) or
the abbreviation “nom. sanct.” (nomen sanctionatum) should may 
be added in a formal citation, together with the citation of the
place of sanctioning if when it is considered desirable useful to
indicate the nomenclatural status of the name. In a formal citation
of a new combination based either on a sanctioned name or on the
basionym of a sanctioned name, “: Fr.” or “: Pers.” should be added
within the parentheses after the author(s) of the basionym (Art. 
49.1).1 [footnote]1 In this Code and its Appendices, sanctioning is
indicated by “: Fr.” or “: Pers.””
Prop. F-004 [Hawksworth in IMA Fungus 9(1):(v)] Revise
Examples 1 and 2 in Rec. F.3A
Ex. 1. Boletus piperatus Bull. (Herb. France: t. 451, fig. 2. 
1790) was adopted in Fries (Syst. Mycol. 1: 388. 1821) and was
thereby sanctioned. It can be cited as either B. piperatus Bull. : Fr. 
or B. piperatus Bull., nom. sanct. when it is useful to indicate the
nomenclatural status of the name.
Ex. 2. Agaricus compactus [unranked] sarcocephalus (Fr.) Fr. 
was sanctioned when adopted by Fries (Syst. Mycol. 1: 290. 1821).
That status can be indicated by citing it as either A. compactus 
[unranked] sarcocephalus (Fr. : Fr.) Fr. : Fr. or A. compactus 
[unranked] sarcocephalus (Fr.) Fr., nom. sanct. The designation “:
Fr.nom. sanct.” is not to be added when citing its basionym A. 
sarcocephalus Fr. (Observ. Mycol. 1: 51. 1815) and nor to , but
it can be added when citing subsequent combinations such as
Psathyrella sarcocephala (Fr. : Fr.) Singer (in Lilloa 22: 468. 1949).
Secretaries’ comments Prop. F-003 follows from a proposal made
at the Shenzhen Congress to replace the colon as an indication
of sanctioned status by the term “nom. sanct.”. At that Congress, 
rather than replace the colon, an amended proposal was accepted
that allowed either the colon or the use of “nom. sanct.”. The current
proposal seeks to remove the option of using the colon. Because
Prop. F-003 relates to a recommendation, should it be accepted, 
use of the colon would not be forbidden. However, if accepted, in
the Code and its Appendices, the indication of sanctioning would
be changed from the colon (as used at present) to “nom. sanct”.
An advantage of the proposal is that sanctioned status would be
indicated only for the name as sanctioned, which mirrors existing
recommendations of the Code in relation to other indications of
nomenclatural status, such as “nom. cons.” (Rec. 50E.1) or “nom. 
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 1 
MYCONAMES 
(xi)
Page 4
MYCONAMES 
(xii) 
rej.” (Rec. 50E.2). In addition, confusion is possible with the colon
when the rank of the name as sanctioned is not the same as either
the basionym (where the sanctioned name is a combination), or
otherwise a later combination that is also a change in rank. On
the other hand, the colon has been widely used as a method to
indicate sanctioned status since its introduction in the Sydney
Code. Should Prop. F-003 be accepted, the suggested revisions to
the examples in Prop. F-004 would be logical. Because Prop. F-004 
concerns examples, it will automatically be referred to the Editorial
Committee - Chapter F. Within the NCF, there is support for the
two proposals (14 - 5 - 1 - 0).
Article F.4.2 (new) - concerning DNA sequence
data to serve as type of name
Prop. F-005 [Hawksworth et al. in IMA Fungus 9(1):(v)–(vi)]
Insert a new Article after Art. F.4.1
“F.4.2. In fungi, when DNA sequence data corresponding to a
new taxon have been detected, but no physical specimen has been
found to serve as the type of the name of the new taxon (Art. 8.1–
8.4), the type may be composed of DNA sequence data deposited
in a public repository.”
Prop. F-006 [Hawksworth et al. in IMA Fungus 9(1):(v)–(vi)] Add
a new Recommendation F.4A
“F.4A.1. When the type is composed only of DNA sequence
data (Art. F.4.2), the new taxon should be described with reference
to a published phylogenetic analysis; both the phylogenetic tree
and the DNA sequence alignment that was used to create the
phylogenetic tree should be deposited in a publicly accessible
repository.”
“F.4A.2. A new taxon typified only by DNA sequence
data should be represented by multiple sequences obtained in
independent studies, of which one is designated as the holotype.”
“F4A.3. DNA sequence data used for typification should
be drawn from the molecular regions that are appropriate for
delimiting species, based on prevailing best practices as determined
by the relevant taxonomic communities.”
Secretaries’ comments Prop. F-005 allows for typification of the
name of a fungus by a DNA sequence, when there is no physical
specimen. The recommendations in Prop. F-006 add some non-
mandatory requirements. In addition to publications mentioned in
the proposal, two of the proposers (Lücking & Hawksworth 2018) 
have prepared a detailed analysis of the “promises and pitfalls” 
related to “formal description of sequence-based, voucherless
Fungi”.
Proposals with the same wording as Prop. F-005 and F-006 
were submitted to the Nomenclature Section of the 2017 Shenzhen
International Botanical Congress (Hawksworth et al. 2016).
During that Nomenclature Section, an amendment was suggested
to extend the core proposal (Prop. 308, corresponding to F-005) to
all organisms covered by the Code. The proposal as amended was
not accepted, but the option of a Special-purpose Committee on
DNA Sequences as Types was accepted (Turland et al. 2017). This
Special-purpose Committee will report to the 2023 International
Botanical Congress. The existence of this Special-purpose
Committee does not preclude decisions on Prop. F-005 and F-006
being made at the San Juan IMC, as these proposals are limited to
names of fungi. 
We note that the recommendations in Prop. F-006 relate to
taxonomic practice (such as requiring a phylogenetic analysis) more
so than in any other existing Articles of the Code. Such taxonomic
practices are seen as essential by some mycologists in order for
them to support Prop. F-005, but such practices (if desirable) 
would be better enforced through other mechanisms that are both
mandatory (rather than recommendations) and linked to external
bodies that could effectively regulate the taxonomic aspects. There
are examples of existing provisions of the Code that reference
external bodies, such as the recognized repositories that issue
identifiers for nomenclatural novelties of fungi (Art. F.5) and the
“appropriate international bodies” that are involved in the setup of
working groups that prepare lists for protection (Art. F.2.1).
Within the NCF there was strong opposition to Prop. F-005 
and F-006 (2 – 15 – 3 – 0), with a 75 % No vote (and only 10 %
Yes). Opinions on Prop. F-005 were also sought from the ICTF, 
within which there was also strong opposition to the proposal as
published (2 – 12 – 4 – 0), with a 67 % No vote (and only 11 %
Yes). In addition, there is a recent publication with around 300
authors (Zamora et al. 2018), opposing the proposals.
In discussion of the formal proposal in the ICTF two
procedural options for handling DNA-based names were raised: 
that names typified on DNA sequences alone must be: (1) 
published in specified journals (that adhere to a taxonomic code of
practice); or (2) approved post-publication by a Subcommittee on
DNA-based names. Further refinements discussed included: DNA-
based names are allowed but (3) do not compete for priority with
names based on specimens; (4) must be based on at least a certain
number of sequences; (5) cannot be introduced in known genera
unless all known species are sequenced; and/or (6) have epithets or
authorship indicating the nature of their type, such as by including
“DNA-” at the start of the epithet. All these options or refinements
received less than 50 % support within the ICTF, except for the
last, for which there was a 50 % Yes vote. A few ICTF members
indicated that combinations of the options and refinements might
be acceptable. It must be stressed that the options and refinements
discussed in the ICTF were not formal proposals, and any support
for them must be interpreted in relation to the strong negative vote
within the Commission on proposal Prop. F-005 as published.
Some designations for fungi have already been introduced
that are based on DNA sequences as “type specimens” (De Beer et
al. 2016; Lücking & Moncada 2017). For “Lawreymyces” and its
constituent intended species, Lücking & Moncada (2017) argued
that depictions of the sequence of bases of DNA were “illustrations” 
and consequently could serve as types under Art. 40.5. However, 
a new example to Art. 40.5 in the Shenzhen Code specifically
indicates that such representations of DNA sequences “are not
illustrations under Art. 6.1 footnote because they are not depictions
of features of the organisms, and consequently the intended names
were not validly published” (Turland et al. 2018). Therefore, all
attempts so far to formally name fungi based on DNA sequences
as types are invalid. However, the designations introduced in the
format of generic and specific names remain available for informal
use or later validation by those who would like to refer to the
organisms from which the sequences were obtained.
Use of an informal category that is not regulated by the Code 
is another option that could be considered. For Prokaryotes, the
category “Candidatus” was introduced by Murray & Schleifer
(1994). The International Code of Nomenclature of Prokaryotes 
(Parker et al. 2015) includes an appendix outlining use of the
IMA FUNGUS
Page 5
“Provisional Status Candidatus”, but names introduced with this
status have no nomenclatural standing. Nevertheless, attaching an
indication such as “Candidatus” to designations of fungi based on
DNA sequences rather than type specimens would be one way that
names could be referred to and included in name databases (with
the names being explicitly invalid).
Given the contentious nature of the proposals coupled with
the fact that issues around naming fungi for which specimens are
not readily available will persist, a Special-purpose Committee
may be an appropriate option, reporting to the next International
Mycological Congress in 2022. Such a Committee would be a
forum in which mycologists interested in the issues could continue
discussion, especially as sequencing technologies and means of
isolating fungi from environmental samples evolve.
Recommendation F.10 (new) - concerning use
of identiﬁer for citation of author of name
Prop. F-007 [Rambold et al. in IMA Fungus 9(1):(vi)–(vii)] Add
a new Recommendation and examples under a new section in
Chapter F under the heading “Citation of Authors of Fungal
names”
“Rec. F.10A. For names of organisms treated as fungi, the
identifier for the name of a taxon issued by an ICN-recognized
registration repository (see also Art. 22.1 and 26.1) may be used
in place of the author citation of the name (but not to replace the
name itself ). The identifier should be preceded by a hash (#) and
enclosed in square brackets. In electronic publications this identifier
should be directly linked out to its stable representation (Universal
Resource Indicator) in one of the registration repositories.”
“Ex. 1. Astrothelium meristosporoides [#816706]; the link out
for the latter identifier would be www.mycobank.org/ MB/816706
or, alternatively, http://www.indexfungorum.org/Names/
NamesRecord.asp?RecordID=816706.”
“Ex. 2. Lecanora varia [#389546]; the link out for the latter
identifier would be http://www.indexfungorum.org/Names/
NamesRecord.asp?RecordID=389546 or, alternatively, www.
mycobank.org/MB/389546.”
Secretaries’ comments Prop. F-007 suggests utilizing the stable
identifiers for names as issued by registration repositories as a
replacement for citation of authors. The proposers note that
with multiple authors becoming more common for taxonomic
novelties, the author citation can contain many authors, especially
in new combinations where there are multiple authors of both the
basionym and the combination. Being only a recommendation, use
of the proposed method of indicating authorship would be advisory
but not binding. We note that it is already recommended to
shorten strings of more than two authors to the first and followed
by “et al.” (Rec. 46C.2). Author citations are optional anyway
under existing provisions (Art. 46.1), to be used as an option only
in publications “dealing with taxonomy and nomenclature”. In the
proposal the identifier for the name is provided after the name, and
includes a link out to a registration repository, but we note that an
alternative method of providing a link to repository data (which
contains not only the authorship but also the publication details) 
would be to embed the link in the name itself. The NCF does not
support this proposal (7 – 11 – 2 – 0). Nevertheless, the use of links
from names and authors to external data is certainly a concept that
should be actively explored and discussed, especially looking ahead
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 1 
to the possibility of simultaneous publication and registration of
nomenclatural novelties in fungi.
Further proposals
We are aware of several sets of further proposals that are in
preparation. The short time frame between the establishment of
the new procedures for governance of fungi nomenclature at the
Shenzhen IBC in 2017 and the FNS at the 2018 IMC meant that
some proposals were not ready for submission by the deadline of 1
March 2018. 
In particular, there is a need to provide certainty about the
validity or otherwise of nomenclatural novelties (new names and
combinations) of fungi where identifiers have been obtained, but
are mis-cited in the publication where the novelties are introduced. 
The opinion of the NCF was sought on the concept of treating
mis-cited identifiers (when they had been obtained) as correctable, 
meaning that names introduced with miscited errors would be valid
(but names where the identifier was omitted or not obtained would
be invalid). The NCF strongly supports correctability of miscited
identifiers (16 – 2 – 2 – 0) and a proposal to amend the Code to
clarify this issue will be circulated prior to the FNS.
Proposals not covered in this Synopsis may be introduced “from
the floor” during the FNS, once proposed by a registered attendee
of the FNS and seconded by five other registered attendees. It is
important to note that during the five-day Nomenclature Section of
an IBC, proposals “from the floor” have not been treated as merely
“any other business” at the end of the Section, but traditionally have
been introduced when important issues have not been addressed
by the deadline for publishing proposals prior to the Congress, or
when proposals accepted earlier in the week are realized to have
unintended consequences that need rectifying. At the Shenzhen
Congress, motions from the floor were ruled as having to be
submitted by the penultimate day of the Nomenclature Section.
Procedures during the FNS are laid out in the Shenzhen Code.
At the commencement of the San Juan FNS, there will be a motion
to accept the Shenzhen Code as the basis for discussion. We provide
advance notice here that at the commencement of the FNS we
will also table a motion that proposals from the floor must be in
the hands of the Secretaries by the commencement of the Session
(in a digital format). It is desirable that any proposals intended to
be moved from the floor are distributed well in advance. Any new
proposals submitted to the Secretaries prior to the IMC will be
made available on the IMA website.
Index of proposals
F-001. Treat material associated with the context of the relevant
sanctioning work as original material. Reword Art. F.3 Note 2.
F-002. Allow neotypification for sanctioned names even when
there is extant material associated with the context of the relevant
sanctioning work. Reword Art. F.3 Note 2.
F-003. Simplify the indication of the status of sanctioned
names by only using “nom. sanct.”. Revise Rec. F.3A.
F-004. Examples associated with simplification of the
indication of the status of sanctioned names by only using “nom. 
sanct.”. Revise Examples 1 and 2 in Rec. F.3A.
F-005. Permit DNA sequence data to be used as types of names
of fungi. New Art. F.4.2.
F-006. Recommendations associated with permitting DNA 
MYCONAMES 
(xiii)
Page 6
MYCONAMES
sequence data to be used as types of names of fungi. New Rec. 
F.4A.
F-007. Recommend use of an identifier as an alternative to the
citation of authors of fungal names. New Rec. F.10A.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to David Hawksworth for helpful feedback on the Synopsis; 
Nicholas Turland for providing instructive comments on the proposals in
his role as Rapporteur-général for the XX International Botanical Congress; 
Andrew Miller (ICTF) for facilitating discussion within the ICTF; and Luís
Parra and Juan Carlos Zamora for constructive dialogue concerning their
proposals. 
REFERENCES
De Beer ZW, Marincowitz S, Duong TA, Kim JJ, Rodrigues A, Wingfield
MJ (2016) Hawksworthiomyces gen. nov. (Ophiostomatales), illustrates
the urgency for a decision on how to name novel taxa known only from
environmental nucleic acid sequences (ENAS). Fungal Biology 120:
1323–1340.
Hawksworth DL (ed.) (2018) Proposals for consideration at IMC11 to modify
provisions solely related to fungi in the International Code of Nomenclature
for algae, fungi, and plants. IMA Fungus 9: (i)-(vii). <http://www.
imafungus.org/Issue/91/MYCONAMES.pdf>
Hawksworth DL, Hibbett DS, Kirk PM, Lucking R (2016) (308–310)  ࡇ
Proposals to permit DNA sequence data to serve as types of names of fungi. 
Taxon 65: 899–900.
Hawksworth DL, May TW, Redhead SA (2017) Fungal nomenclature evolving: 
changes by the 19th International Botanical Congress in Shenzhen
2017, and procedures for the Fungal Nomenclature Session at the 11th
International Mycological Congress in Puerto Rico 2018. IMA Fungus 8:
211–218. 
Lücking R, Hawksworth DL (2018) Formal description of sequence-based
voucherless Fungi: promises and pitfalls, and how to resolve them. IMA
Fungus 9: 143–166.
Lücking R, Moncada B (2017) Dismantling Marchandiomphalina into
Agonimia (Verrucariaceae) and Lawreymyces gen. nov. (Corticiaceae):
setting a precedent to the formal recognition of thousands of voucherless
Fungi based on type sequences. Fungal Diversity 84: 119–138.
May TW (2016) Report of the Special Subcommittee on Governance of the
Code with Respect to Fungi. Taxon 65: 249–253.
May TW (2017) Report of the Nomenclature Committee for Fungi – 20. IMA
Fungus 8: 189–203; Taxon 66: 483–495.
Murray RGE, Schleifer KH (1994) Taxonomic notes: a proposal for recording
the properties of putative taxa of procaryotes. International Journal of
Systematic Bacteriology 44: 174–176.
Parker CT, Tindall BJ, Garrity GM (2015) International Code of Nomenclature
of Prokaryotes. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary
Microbiology. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.000778
Turland NJ, Wiersema JH (2017) Synopsis of proposals on nomenclature –
Shenzhen 2017: a review of the proposals concerning the International
Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants submitted to the XIX
International Botanical Congress. Taxon 66: 217–274.
Turland NJ, Wiersema JH, Monro AM, Deng Y-F, Zhang L (2017) XIX
International Botanical Congress: report of Congress action on
nomenclatural proposals. Taxon 66: 1234–1245.
Turland NJ, Wiersema JH, Barrie FR, Greuter W, Hawksworth DL, et al. 
(2018) International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants
(Shenzhen Code) adopted by the Nineteenth International Botanical Congress
Shenzhen, China, July 2017. [Regnum Vegetabile no. 159.] Glashütten: 
Koeltz Botanical Books.
Zamora JC, Svensson M, Kirschner R, Olariaga I, Ryman S, et al. (2018) 
Considerations and consequences of allowing DNA sequence data as types
of fungal taxa. IMA Fungus 9: (in press).
(xiv)  IMA FUNGUS
