Page 1
EDITORIAL WHEN SHOULD WE DESCRIBE SPECIES?
Two intense debates are underway
in fungal taxonomy, one more
public than the other, with little
consideration that one debate may inform
the other. The more public debate, which
continues in this issue of IMA Fungus (see
p. 213), concerns possible mechanisms for
typification of, and the attendant wisdom of
accepting, DNA-only species. The quieter
debate, occurring more among editors, often
to the frustration of authors of rejected
papers, concerns the acceptability of papers
describing single new species, especially
when based on single specimens or single
cultures. Proponents of DNA-typified
species presently focus on often semantic
concerns to define minimum requirements, 
sometimes nodding towards best practices, 
while practitioners of traditional taxonomy
propose species that meet the requirements
of the International Code of Nomenclature
for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN), but fail to
meet the editorial policies of an increasing
number of journals. To my eyes, these are
actually the same debate. Both concern our
concepts of discovery, and the inconsistent
logic separating the two reveals a fault line
between what the para-legal ICN and the
editor/reviewer-enforced policies that deter-
mine what actually is published.
What is discovery?
In the provocative book Reinventing Dis-
covery (Nielsen 2011), a quantum physicist
argues that Big Data has fundamentally
changed the nature of discovery in science. 
The image of a tortured genius experienc-
ing eureka moments alone in a laboratory
among books and arcane instruments is
being replaced by teams of analysts organiz-
ing masses of data to generate empirical, 
statistically-supported new knowledge – the
human role is as a fact-checker for soft-
ware and computers, perhaps supported
by citizen scientists. In the old world, the
solitary taxonomist focused for a life-time
on one group, and in the brave new world
is replaced by a far more efficient Illumina
sequencer that feeds millions of sequences
into a bioinformatic pipeline and identifies
thousands of OTUs that don’t match any
known species in the databases. As stated by
Hibbett et al. (2011), “…molecular ecology
is clearly the major arena of contemporary
species discovery…” rather than conventional 
taxonomy. My question is whether this
process actually discovers new species, or
simply indicates that there are new species
to be found? In modern ecology, when you
have a substrate in your hand that contains
DNA sequences of a thousand species, half
of them unknown, have you discovered 500
new species or have you picked up a handful
of dirt?
In conventional taxonomy, a specimen
in hand allows measurement and descrip-
tions of characters and character states, 
elucidation of ecology and observation of
behaviour. Reproduced observations and a
progressive chain of experiments are core
elements of science. A DNA sequence is an
observation that can be reproduced as long
as there is a physical specimen that can be
re-sampled and extended with existing or
future technologies. A printed DNA se-
quence clearly does not meet this condition. 
The Law of Conservation of Information
is controversial, but suggests that no new
information is derived by rearrangement of
existing data (Medawar 1988). Does the act
of naming a sequence provide new infor-
mation that is not already inherent in the
sequence itself? I would say not. 
Whether it is one specimen or a hun-
dred, with a specimen in hand it seems clear
that you have made a discovery. Does the
knowledge that someone else has detected
the same DNA in a different handful of
dirt really change the picture? There are no
characters other than nucleotides, there is no
differential ecology or behaviour attribut-
able to the specific unknowns, unless they
can be inferred in some way by information
inherent in the genetic sequences. 
Is there any conceptual similarity be-
tween a species based on one specimen and
a species based on a few DNA sequences? 
Does a double standard exist, where our
historical practise allows (but is now actively
discouraging) what some perceive as low
quality species descriptions with an old tech-
nology, while preventing what some would
consider a higher quality of species descrip-
tion using a new technology?
Single specimen
species: Four examples
It is easier to offer my own work up for criti-
cism than to question the decisions of oth- 
ers. Here are four species known originally
from single specimens, two published, one
published long ago by someone else, and one
unpublished, with some rationalization and
post-facto analysis of their present status.
(1) The bamboo spathes that yielded Cha-
romyces amphimelas (Seifert 1987) were
collected by a fellow MSc student during
his holiday in Hawai’i. My MSc supervisor, 
R.J. Bandoni, had stacks of damp chambers
all over his office. After six months, a black, 
a wiry growth filled one dish, but it did not
belong to Bandoni’s beloved heterobasidio-
mycetes, so the voluminous specimen cycled
around the students in the lab until it ended
up with me. The fungus was stunning (Fig. 
1A), but didn’t grow when I tried to culture
it, the specimen having been stealth-colo-
nized by Trichoderma. In 1987, the process
was to show the fungus to everyone who
might have seen it before, so I sent hunks of
the fungus to the experts. None knew it; all
were intrigued. The morphology was so dis-
tinctive that I had no hesitation describing
it as a new genus, an approach that was not
questioned by the reviewers of the paper. 
But I wonder if I would describe it today. 
Outside of compilations, and this edito-
rial, this paper has never been cited (and
self-citations don’t count!), not even when
a second species was added to the genus (al-
though the accidental overlap of the generic
name Charomyces with Saccharomyces fools
some search engines!). As far as I am aware, 
the fungus has never been re-collected (no
records in data.GBIF.org or mycoportal.
org). I can speculate about its phylogenetic
relationships based on conidium ontogeny, 
but it remains identifiable only for those
skilled in the art of micromorphology, not
to those skilled in the art of DNA sequenc-
ing. 
VOLUME 8 ·  NO. 2 
(37)
Page 2
EDITORIAL 
(38) 
(2) Hirsutella uncinata grew in a damp
chamber from the nut-like follicles of a
Hakea sp. that I picked off the ground in the
Mount Tomah Botanical Garden outside
Sydney, Australia, in 1999 (Seifert & Boulay
2004), while waiting for Pedro Crous and
Brett Summerell to tire of looking at leaf
spots. I will never forget my perplexity back
in Ottawa when I removed the conidio-
phores of the Hirsutella with the mounting
needle and found them to be stiff as wire in-
stead of floppy and flaccid like the Verticill-
ium I was expecting to see; then the delight
as I looked at the preparation through the
compound microscope, captured forever
in the micrograph taken at that second
(Fig. 1B). It was a true eureka moment, a
powerful feeling of discovering something
new. The generic assignment was clear, and
once again I consulted with the experts. This
time, there was a culture and some DNA
sequences. Unlike Charomyces, this fungus
is identifiable by morphologists and DNA
sequencers alike. No sexual morph is known
and the insect host, buried in the rock-like
substrate, is uncharacterized. The paper has
very modest citations, but has had some
sequence traction as the closest relative of
Ophiocordyceps sinensis of oriental medicine
fame. To my knowledge this fungus also has
not been seen again.
(3) Harpagomyces lomnikii. A few years ago, 
photographs of chains of pitted, doliiform
cells with ornamenting hooks were circulat-
ed on the internet (Fig. 1C) by palaeontolo-
gists who found them in an archaeological
dig in Argentina (Fernández et al. 2010).
I was probably the only person alive who
recognized them as something described in
Poland a hundred years earlier as Harpago-
myces. This genus was compiled among the
hyphomycetes by Carmichael et al. (1980),
but excluded from our 2011 compilation
(Seifert et al. 2011). These odd cells had
blown through a window in Warsaw, were
given a name, and were then forgotten. 
Honestly, I felt I had given the Argentin-
ians a name with no information attached; 
we did not even know what kingdom it
belonged to. This fungus is named but of
unknown classification, not really identifi-
able by morphology except by accident, and
unidentifiable with DNA sequencing. How
useful is this name?
(4) The Brain Fungus. My last example is
undescribed and unnamed as far as I know; 
for convenience, we will call it the Brain
Fungus. I found it once in my backyard, 
growing in a pile of old pine logs. It looked
like an Acremonium or Mortierella through
the dissecting microscope, but I practically
fell off my chair when I looked through
the compound. What was this? Spores
always in pairs, produced inside some kind
of sporangium (Fig. 1D) . . . but the spores
never seemed to separate. I immediately
made some single spore isolations (or single
brain isolations) and wondered whether
this might be a bacterium and if the anti-
bacterial antibiotics in the medium would
be a problem. Of course, nothing grew. We
tried direct sequencing — no sequences. 
Is this an ascomycete, a zygomycete, a “hy-
phomycete” or something else? The hyphae
suggest that it is probably a fungus, but
I’ve shown pictures to colleagues and in
conference presentations, hoping someone
will recognize it and at least tell me what
phylum it belongs to. Here we have an
organism of ambiguous affinities, easily
identifiable by morphology but unnamed, 
with no correlating DNA sequences, and
the log pile is now gone. How best to cata-
logue this organism for future generations
when there are only a few photographs and
one dried specimen to provide evidence? 
My present strategy is to keep showing the
pictures to people, like you, right now . . .
looking for illumination, something that
feels like knowledge rather than a chance
observation.
What makes a species
worth naming?
As one of the founders of Fungal Planet 
(Crous et al. undated), I am distressed at
the response by many journals who con-
sider that this is now the only viable avenue
for description of single species, whether
based on one gathering or many. In fact, my
descriptions of Charomyces and Hirsutella
uncinata would have fitted fairly well into
Fungal Planet, and then might have actually
received some sideways citations! If I were
to describe the Brain Fungus now, I could
do so validly but I would be creating an
analogue of Harpagomyces. There would be
no retrieval mechanism for future scientists
to locate the description of this organism, 
and the use of the name would only occur if
some future devotee of the historical litera-
ture of the selected taxonomic group hap-
pened to stumble on the publication. 
Names are supposed to mean some-
thing; their purpose is to convey informa-
tion. At a more basic level, naming some- 
thing ensures that it is catalogued and forces
future taxonomists to consider it. In my
opinion, the alphanumeric serial codes in-
troduced for species hypotheses by UNITE
(Kõljalg et al. 2013) seem to be the solution
for unnamed taxon retrieval for DNA data. 
I wish we had something like that for mor-
phology!
Arbitrary rules, mindlessly applied, 
devalue the importance of competent, state-
of-the-art work in systematics, too often in
pursuit of citations. Are the limitations of
what we can determine about a species from
a DNA sequence more severe than what we
can determine about a species when we have
only one specimen? If not, why are so many
journals reluctant to allow single species de-
scriptions based on morphology, but lining
up to publish controversial papers on DNA
defines taxa that test the limits of the ICN? 
Taxonomists worry about maintaining
quality, so let us talk about quality. Our de-
bates over whether to allow formal naming
of sequence-only species or single species
descriptions need to synchronized. Quality
may not need to be legislated in the ICN, 
but it still needs to be enforced; there is a
strong tendency among mycologists to use
the ICN as a quality assurance mechanism. 
The framers of the ICN have to accept this. 
We should not confuse data, whatever
its technical components, with understand-
ing and knowledge. What does it take to
raise species description above banality, 
above trivia that could be extracted by any
child or by a machine? Do we want ma-
chine taxonomy in fungal biology? From
one perspective this seems like a paranoid
question and, from another, prescient. If
DNA sequences comprise both the descrip-
tion and the type, it is a short step to a
pipeline that automatically describes and
names the OTUs as species. The question
of machine-automated species description
is staring us in the face. Surely we should be
discussing it? 
Acknowledgement: I am grateful to M. 
Virginia Bianchinotti for the photograph
used as Fig. 1C.
Carmichael JW, Kendrick WB, Conners IL, Sigler
L (1980) Genera of Hyphomycetes. Edmonton: 
University of Alberta Press.
Crous PW, Seifert KA, Samson RA, Hawksworth
DL (eds) [Undated] Fungal Planet: a peer-
reviewed global initiative to promote the study of
fungal biodiversity. http:/www.fungalplanet.org
Fernández AL, Grill S, Seifert KA, Bianchinotti
V, Martínez G (2010) First record of
IMA FUNGUS
Page 3
EDITORIAL 
Fig. 1. A few of my favorite things. A. Charomyces amphimelas (from Seifert et al. 2011). B. Hirsutella uncinata (Seifert & Boulay 2004). C. Harpagomyces sp. 
(Fernández et al. 2010). D. The brain fungus.
Harpagomyces (Eumycota, incertae sedis) in
Cenozoic sediments, lower Colorado Basin, 
Argentina. In: X Congreso Argentino de
Paleontología y Bioestratigrafía. VII Congreso
Latinoamericano de Paleontología. La Plata: 
Lugar.
Hibbett DS, Ohman A, Glotzer D, Nuhn M, Kirk
P, Nilsson RH (2011) Progress in molecular
and morphological taxon discovery in Fungi
and options for formal classification of
environmental sequences. Fungal Biology
Reviews 25: 38–47. 
Kõljalg U, Nilsson RH, Abarenkov K, Tedersoo L, 
Taylor AFS, et al. (2013) Towards a unified
paradigm for sequence-based identification of
fungi. Molecular Ecology 22: 5271–5277.
Medawar PB (1988) The Limits of Science. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Nielsen M (2011) Reinventing Discovery: the new
era of networked science. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Seifert KA (1987) Charomyces, a new genus of
hyphomycetes with thallic-arthric conidia. 
Canadian Journal of Botany 65: 230–232. 
Seifert KA, Boulay H (2004) Hirsutella uncinata,
a new hyphomycete from Australia. Mycologia 
96: 929–934.
Seifert K, Morgan-Jones G, Gams W, Kendrick
B. (2011) The Genera of Hyphomycetes. [CBS
Biodiversity Series vol. 9.] Utrecht: CBS/
KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre.
Keith A. Seifert
President, IMA
(keith.seifert@agr.gc.ca)
VOLUME 8 ·  NO. 2 
(39)
