Page 1
MYCONAMES
XI International Mycological Congress: report of Congress action on
nomenclature proposals relating to fungi
Tom W. May1, Scott A. Redhead2, Lorenzo Lombard3, and Amy Y. Rossman4
1Royal Botanic Gardens Victoria, Birdwood Avenue, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia; corresponding author e-mail: tom.may@rbg.vic.gov.au
2Ottawa Research and Development Centre, Science and Technology Branch, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 960 Carling Avenue, K.W. Neatby Building, Ottawa, 
Ontario K1A 0C6, Canada
3Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands
4Department of Botany & Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97333, USA
Abstract: Procedures, appointments and outcomes of the Fungal Nomenclature Session (FNS) of the 11th International Mycological Congress (IMC11) are
summarized, including the composition of the Fungal Nomenclature Bureau and the Nominating Committee of the IMC. Nearly 150 mycologists attended the FNS, 
at which formal proposals to amend Chapter F of the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN) were debated. The 18 proposals considered
included 10 “from the floor”. Four proposals were withdrawn, two were sent to the Editorial Committee, five were sent to two Special-purpose Committees, four were
rejected, and three were accepted (concerning: using the identifier in place of the author citation; mis-citation of identifiers; and indication of sanctioning). Proposals to
amend Division III of the ICN were deemed out of scope of the FNS because they did not relate to Chapter F. The two Special-purpose Committees authorized were: 
“DNA Sequences as Types for Fungi” and “Names of Fungi with the Same Epithet”. Appointments made by the FNS included the Secretary of the Fungal Nomenclature
Bureau for IMC12, and officers and members of the Permanent Nomenclature Committee for Fungi. Decisions and appointments of the FNS were ratified in a
resolution accepted by the plenary session of the Congress.
Key words: Code, governance, Fungal Nomenclature Bureau, Fungal Nomenclature Session, ICN, Nomenclature Committee for Fungi. Special-purpose Committee.
Article info: Received 25 October 2018; Accepted 28 October 2018; Published 9 November 2018.
INTRODUCTION
Following changes to the International Code of Nomenclature for
algae, fungi, and plants (ICN; Turland et al. 2018) at the XIX
International Botanical Congress (IBC) in Shenzhen, July 2017, 
provisions of the ICN that dealt solely with names of organisms
treated as fungi were separated into a new section of the ICN,
“Chapter F” (Hawksworth et al. 2017). In addition, it was agreed
that future changes proposed to Chapter F would be dealt with by
the Fungal Nomenclature Session of an International Mycological
Congress (IMC) rather than the Nomenclature Section of an IBC. 
Procedures for introducing proposals to Chapter F were outlined by
Hawksworth et al. (2017); proposals were published (Hawksworth
2018); a Synopsis of these proposals was presented (May & Redhead
2018); and a pre-Congress Guiding vote on the proposals was held
(May & Miller 2018).
The Fungal Nomenclature Session (FNS) of the 11th 
International Mycological Congress took place on 19 July 2018, in
Room 201, Puerto Rico Convention Center, San Juan, Puerto Rico. 
Any person registered for that day of the Congress was entitled
to attend the FNS and vote. Due to the compressed timelines for
implementation of the new procedures for governance of fungal
nomenclature, registration for the Fungal Nomenclature Session
was not included on the Congress registration form. Members
of the Fungal Nomenclature Bureau (FNB) were present at
the registration desk on the first day of the Congress to answer
questions about the FNS, and names of those intending to attend
were added to a sign-up sheet. An online questionnaire was also
used to register those intending to attend, and otherwise, on the
day, attendees added their name to the sign-up sheet. A total of
149 people attended the FNS (Fig. 1). Although country was not
recorded, those attending came from at least 20 countries. 
FUNGAL NOMENCLATURE SESSION
PROCEDURES AND APPOINTMENTS
Division III of the ICN (Provisions 4 and 8) sets out officers
of the Fungal Nomenclature Bureau and the procedures for
their appointment. The Fungal Nomenclature Bureau (Fig. 2) 
comprised Amy Rossman (Corvallis, USA, Chair), Tom W. May
(Melbourne, Australia, Secretary), Scott A. Redhead (Ottawa, 
Canada, Deputy Secretary), Lorenzo Lombard (Utrecht, The
Netherlands, Recorder), and five Deputy Chairs. The Deputy
Chairs, as appointed by the FNS, were David Hawksworth
(London, UK, Deputy Chair Emeritus), Meredith Blackwell
(Columbia, USA), Pedro Crous (Utrecht, The Netherlands),
Karen Hughes (Knoxville, USA), and Yu Li (Jilin, China; 
in absentia). In addition, Nicholas (Nick) J. Turland (Berlin, 
Germany), Rapporteur-général for the 2023 International
Botanical Congress, attended as a non-voting advisor to the FNS, 
on the invitation of the International Mycological Association.
The Nominating Committee of the International Mycological
Congress was proposed by the Chair of the FNS, in consultation
with the other members of the FNB, and was accepted by the
FNS. Composition of the Nominating Committee was as follows: 
Greg Mueller (Chicago, USA, Chair), Takayuki Aoki (Tsukuba, 
Japan), David Hawksworth (London, UK), Tatiana Gibertoni
(Pernambuco, Brazil), and Marieka Gryzenhout (Bloemfontein, 
South Africa). The function of the Nominating Committee
was to prepare a list of candidates to serve on the permanent
Nomenclature Committee for Fungi (NCF), in consultation with
the current Secretary of that Committee, and propose the Secretary
of the Fungal Nomenclature Bureau for the next International
Mycological Congress.
Procedures for the FNS are set out in Division III of the ICN.
These procedures closely follow those of the Nomenclature Section
(xxii)  IMA FUNGUS
Page 2
MYCONAMES 
Fig. 1. Pedro Crous, Secretary-General, IMA, opening the Fungal Nomenclature
Session, IMC11, Puerto Rico. Nicholas Turland (Rapporteur-général for
2023 International Botanical Congress) on far right, with raised hand. Photo: 
Wilhelm de Beer. 
Fig. 2. Members of the Fungal Nomenclature Bureau, IMC11 (left to right): Scott
Redhead (Deputy Secretary),  David Hawksworth (Deputy Chair Emeritus),
Amy Rossman (Chair), Tom May (Secretary, holding Chapter F of the Shenzhen
ICN), and Lorenzo Lombard (Recorder). Photo: Wilhelm de Beer.
of an IBC, except that there are no institutional votes.
The FNS accepted the Shenzhen ICN as the basis for its
deliberations. In the lead up to the FNS, proposed amendments to
the ICN were based on a draft version of the Shenzhen ICN, but
discussions in the FNS used the final version, which was published
in hard copy on 26 June 2018 and made available as an electronic
version (http://www.iapt-taxon.org/nomen/main.php) on 27 June
2018.
It has been traditional at Nomenclature Sections of IBCs to
deal with proposals in the sequence in which articles and other
material to be amended (or added) appear in the ICN, and to
aggregate proposals relating to one issue or concept (that may
concern material present in different places in the ICN). Due to
the relatively small number of proposals, and in order to introduce
the procedures, which would have been unfamiliar to many
participants, proposals were dealt with in the following order, 
commencing with a relatively straightforward proposal: Prop. 
F-007 (on using the identifier in citation of names), Prop. F-005, 
F-006, F-012, F-013 and F-018 (all relating to ‘DNA as type’),
F-001 and F-002 (concerning Art. F.3 Note 2), F-003 and F-004
(on the citation of sanctioned names), F-014 (correctability of
mis-cited identifiers), F-008, F-009 and F-015 (on the Guiding
vote), F-016 and F-017 (introducing institutional votes), F-010
(establishing an Editorial Committee for Fungi), and F-011
(establishing a Special-purpose Committee on fungi named using
the same epithet).
It is intended that proceedings of the FNS will be published
in due course, based on transcripts of audio recordings of the
Session, following the tradition of publishing the proceedings of
Nomenclature Sections of IBCs, the most recent being that of the
Melbourne IBC (Flann et al. 2014).
Each person present at the FNS (except for the Rapporteur-
général) had one vote. Members of the FNB were eligible to vote, 
but, in order not to overly influence the voting, did not necessarily
choose to vote on all matters. Voting in the FNS was initially by
show of hands, but when the required majority for voting was not
clear, there was a “division” whereby those casting a “no” vote passed
by the counters separately from those casting a “yes” vote.
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 2 
The FNS accepted the candidates put forward by the
Nominating Committee for the position of Secretary of the
Fungal Nomenclature Bureau and the members of Nomenclature
Committee for Fungi for the period 2018-2022 as follows:
Secretary of the Fungal Nomenclature Bureau for the XII
International Mycological Congress, Amsterdam, 2022. — Tom
W. May (Australia).
Nomenclature Committee for Fungi. — Scott A. Redhead
(Canada, Chair), Tom W. May (Australia, Secretary), André
Aptroot (The Netherlands), Z. Wilhelm de Beer (South Africa),
Konstanze Bensch (The Netherlands/Germany), José Carmine
Dianese (Brazil), Teresa Iturriaga (Venezuela/USA), Paul M. Kirk
(UK), Roland Kirschner (Taiwan), James C. Lendemer (USA),
Lorenzo Lombard (The Netherlands), Andrew M. Minnis (USA),
Lorelei L. Norvell (USA), Luis A. Parra Sánchez (Spain), Shaun
R. Pennycook (New Zealand), Andrea I. Romero (Argentina),
Svengunnar Ryman (Sweden), Marco Thines (Germany), Dagmar
Triebel (Germany), Zhuliang Yang (China), and Yi-Jian Yao
(China).
PROPOSALS FROM THE FLOOR
New proposals (“Proposals from the floor”), which had not
been included in the Synopsis of proposals, were accepted by the
Secretaries up to the commencement of the FNS (8:00 h on
Thursday 19 July 2018). This cut-off time was proposed to the FNS
and accepted. Proposals from the floor (Table 1) were numbered
continuing the sequence used in the Synopsis of proposals. Some
proposals from the floor had appeared in publications prior to the
FNS, while others were provided directly to the Secretaries.
ACTIONS ON PROPOSALS
There were 18 proposals on nine matters. Actions of the FNS are
summarized in Table 2. Four proposals were withdrawn, two were
sent to the Editorial Committee (one automatically, as it concerned 
(xxiii)
Page 3
MYCONAMES
Table 1. Proposals “from the floor” dealt with at the IMC11 Fungal Nomenclature Session.
Proposal Summary  Proposed by
F-008
F-009
F-010
F-011
F-012
F-013
F-014
F-015
F-016
F-017
F-018 
Amend Div. III, Prov. 8.3 by adding: “(f ) Mycologists who have published at least one
nomenclatural novelty among organisms treated as fungi.”
Amend Div. III, Prov. 8.3 by removing “(b) Individual members of organizations affiliated with
the IMA” and rewording (a) accordingly.
Create an Editorial Committee for Fungi (mirroring the Editorial Committee, as set out in
Div. III, Prov. 7.11).
Create a Special-purpose Committee on Fungi named using the same Epithet for Asexual
and Sexual States, to report to the Fungal Nomenclature Session of the next International
Mycological Congress.
In the event of proposals F-005 and F-006 being accepted, add Note to Chapter F of the Code 
under Art. F.4.2 specifying: (1) registration of sequence-based names as “nom. seq.” (nomena
sequentia) and (2) that such names do not have priority over names based on physical types
(including cultures) or illustrations.
In the event of proposals F-005 and F-006 not being accepted, add a new Note and an Example
to Chapter F of the Code under Art. F. 5.5, specifying that designations [i.e. names that are not
validly published] based on molecular sequence data are to be registered, but when released
after effective publication such designations are to have “nom. seq.” (nomen sequentium)
appended. 
Art F.5. Allow correctability of mis-cited identifiers, via additions to Art. F.5.1, new Art. 
F.5.6, F.5.7 and F.5.8; and including addition of Art. F.5.9 that correctability extends to type
designations; and addition to Rec. F.5A.1 that authors “(c) upon publication of a name, supply
an electronic version of the publication containing the name to the recognized repository that
issued the identifier associated with the name.”
Amend Div. III, Prov. 8.3 by removing clauses (a), (b) and (c) and adding “(f) Mycologists who
have published at least one nomenclatural novelty among organisms treated as fungi, in a peer-
reviewed and indexed journal (only the authors of the nomenclatural novelty, who may differ
from those of the publication).”
Amend Div., III, Prov. 8.9 to specify (a) Personal votes, and add: (b) Institutional votes, and (c) 
“Personal votes from nomenclature committees” including the Fungal Nomenclature Bureau
(FNB), the Nomenclature Committee for Fungi (NCF), the International Commission on
the Taxonomy of Fungi (ICTF), and mycologists on the General Committee (GC) and the
Editorial Committee (EC).
In the event of proposal F-016 being accepted, amendments to Div. III, Prov. 3 to set out
procedures for allocating Institutional votes for the Fungal Nomenclature Session.
Add a new Article in Chapter F concerning DNA sequences as types, incorporating proposals
F-005, F-006 and F-012, with addition that “A name of a new taxon based on DNA sequence
data as type”: (1) “does not carry an author citation; instead, the unique registration identifier
may be cited as reference. When a name based on DNA sequence data is epitypified with
a physical type or illustration as defined in Art. 8.1–8.4, the authors of the epitypification
become the authors of the name.” and (2) “is not validly established unless the underlying raw
data … are deposited in a public repository and the unique identifier is cited in the protologue.” 
T.W. May & A.N. Miller (2018, IMA
Fungus 9: (xv)–(xxi)) 
T.W. May & A.N. Miller (2018, IMA
Fungus 9: (xv)–(xxi)) 
T.W. May
T.W. May
R. Lücking, P.M. Kirk & D.L. Hawksworth
(2018, IMA Fungus 9: 185–198) 
Lücking, Kirk & Hawksworth (2018, IMA
Fungus 9: 185–198)
T.W. May, L.L. Norvell, K. Bensch, L. 
Lombard, D. Triebel & Z.W. de Beer
J.C. Zamora
J.C. Zamora
J.C. Zamora
R. Lücking
only an Example), five were sent to the two Special-purpose
Committees that were established, four were rejected, and three
were accepted (two after amendment). Proposals related to the
following three matters were successful: using the identifier in place
of the author citation; mis-citation of identifiers; and indication
of sanctioning (Table 2). Proposals on DNA sequences as type
that were included in the Guiding vote (in which they received
more than 75 % “No” votes) were reintroduced, but sent to a
Special-purpose Committee, along with some other proposals on
the same topic. For the two proposals concerning Art. F.3 Note 2, 
the first was sent to the Editorial Committee for clarification, and
the second (to allow neotypification in place of lectotypification
for sanctioned names) was rejected. Proposals on the Guiding
vote, institutional votes, and an Editorial Committee for Fungi
were deemed to concern governance (see below) and were either
withdrawn or rejected. A proposal to establish a Special-purpose
Committee on fungi named using the same epithet was accepted
(see below).
(xxiv) 
PROPOSALS ON GOVERNANCE
Some proposals concerned matter in Division III of the ICN,
which is the section covering governance, rather than Chapter F
itself. Even though governance of the ICN in respect of matter
solely concerning names of fungi has been passed to the IMC, the
wording of the new Provision in Division III is: “For proposals
relating to the content of Chapter F, which brings together the
provisions of this Code that deal solely with names of organisms
treated as fungi (but excluding any other content), exactly the
same procedures are to be followed …”. The underlined phrase
indicates that only Chapter F can be modified by action of the
FNS at an IMC. This phrase was overlooked when the proposals
to modify Division III were put forward. Division III, Provision
8.2 indicates that if there is doubt about “which proposals deal
solely with names of ... fungi”, a decision can be sought from the
General Committee in consultation with the NCF, but there was
not sufficient time to seek an opinion from these committees, 
IMA FUNGUS
Page 4
MYCONAMES Box 1: Key outcomes of the IMC11 Fungal Nomenclature Session
ICN amended so that:
%  Errors in citation of identifiers (issued prior to publication of a nomenclatural novelty) are correctible
%  Existing “validations” for nomenclatural novelties that were associated with mis-cited identifiers are to be treated as isonyms (as
long as an identifier was issued prior to publication for the name as published, and the name is otherwise validly published)
%  A new identifier must be obtained when validating a designation (an “invalid name”), even when that designation is associated
with an existing identifier
%  Authors are encouraged to deposit electronic versions (such as PDFs) of publications containing nomenclatural novelties and
typifications with the repository that issued the relevant identifiers
%  Sanctioning indicated only by “nom. sanct.” (the “:” option was deleted)
%  Author citation may be replaced by the name identifier — but authors are still to be cited for basionyms of new combinations
Special-purpose Committees to report to IMC12 on:
%  DNA sequences as Types for Fungi
%  Names of Fungi with the Same Epithet
Editorial Committee
%  To clarify wording of Art. F.3 Note 2, on original material
Chapter F of the ICN
%  New version to appear online and in IMA Fungus in early 2019
as some of the proposals from the floor were in the hands of
the Secretaries only several days prior to the FNS. An opinion
on whether or not the FNS may approve proposals to amend
Division III will be sought from the General Committee prior to
the next IMC, so that it is clear at that time if proposals to modify
Division III can be dealt with at an IMC FNS, or otherwise must
wait until the next IBC Nomenclature Section (which is the most
likely interpretation).
There were five proposals concerning Division III: F-009
and F-015 on the Guiding vote; F-016 and F-017 introducing
institutional votes; and F-010 establishing an Editorial Committee
for Fungi, all introduced “from the floor”. Of the five proposals, 
the proposers were present for two (F-008 and F-009), and these
were withdrawn. The remaining three (F-015, F-016 and F-017) 
were voted on, and not approved. Nevertheless, it was considered
useful to establish an “Editorial Committee for Fungi” (EdCF),
which was proposed as an ad hoc committee, as allowed under
Division III, Prov. 5.2.(e) and 8.1, and approved. The role of the
EdCF will be to prepare a draft of changes to Chapter F arising
from the San Juan FNS, as a recommendation for the Editorial
Committee. The revised Chapter F will be published in IMA
Fungus, and any revisions will also appear in the on-line Shenzhen
ICN, with indication that they arose from IMC11. Composition
of the Editorial Committee for Fungi (EdCF) was agreed as: Tom
W. May (Melbourne, Australia, Secretary Fungal Nomenclature
Bureau), Scott A. Redhead (Ottawa, Canada, Deputy Secretary
Fungal Nomenclature Bureau), Konstanze Bensch (The
Netherlands/Germany), David Hawksworth (London, UK, 
Deputy Chair Emeritus Fungal Nomenclature Bureau), James
C. Lendemer (New York, USA), Lorenzo Lombard (Utrecht, 
The Netherlands, and Nicholas J. Turland (Berlin, Germany, 
Rapporteur-général, Chair Editorial Committee). Membership is
as approved by the FNS with addition of Lombard and Lendemer, 
who were co-opted after the Congress.
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 2 
SPECIAL-PURPOSE COMMITTEES
Prior to the publication of the Shenzhen ICN, such as during the
Shenzhen IBC Nomenclature Section itself, proposals to establish
Special-purpose Committees (previously “Special Committees”)
were treated as proposals from the floor. However, Division III
of the Shenzhen ICN (Prov. 8.5.(d)) contains expanded detail on
procedures, and stipulates that one of the acceptable actions during
the Fungal Nomenclature Section is to establish a Special-purpose
Committee. Two Special-purpose Committees were proposed, and
these were both authorized by the FNS; these will report to the
IMC in 2022. Membership of the Special-purpose Committees
will be appointed by the NCF in consultation with the General
Committee (Div. III, Prov. 8.5.(d)), taking into account people
present at the FNS who expressed interest in serving and any others
who may be appropriate. The two Special-purpose Committees are:
%  Special-purpose Committee on DNA Sequences as Types for
Fungi
%  Special-purpose Committee on Names of Fungi with the Same
Epithet
There is already a Special-purpose Committee on DNA as
Types, established at the Shenzhen IBC, to report to the 2023
IBC, dealing with all organisms covered by the ICN (algae, 
fungi, and plants). Close liaison between these two Committees
with overlapping mandates will be necessary. In addition, the
Shenzhen IBC established a “Special-purpose Committee on
Pleomorphic Fungi (Art. 59)” (Turland et al. 2017). The scope
of this Committee is identical to the Special-purpose Committee
established at IMC11 to deal with “Names of Fungi with the
Same Epithet”; specifically, cases where these names apply to
different morphs (asexual/anamorph and sexual/teleomorph) 
of the same fungus (holomorph). It is more appropriate, now 
(xxv)
Page 5
MYCONAMES
Table 2.  Actions on nomenclature proposals considered by the Fungal
Nomenclature Session of IMC11.
Abbreviations: ed.c. = referred to the Editorial Committee; rej.g.v. = rejected
on Guiding vote; sp-p.c. = referred to a Special-purpose Committee
Proposal % "No"  Congress action
(Guiding vote)
Proposals submitted by 1 March 2018, included in Synopsis of proposals (May
& Redhead 2018)
F-001 37.2  ed.c
F-002 44.8  rejected
F-003 33.0  accepted
F-004 32.5  ed.c
F-005 88.8  rej.g.v., reintroduced, sp-p.c
F-006 86.1  rej.g.v., reintroduced, sp-p.c
F-007 66.8  accepted after amendment1
Proposals “from the floor” (see Table 1)
F-008 n/a  withdrawn
F-009 n/a  withdrawn
F-010 n/a  withdrawn
F-011 n/a  sp-p.c (as suggested)
F-012 n/a  sp-p.c
F-013 n/a  sp-p.c
F-014 n/a  accepted after amendment and withdrawal of
certain portions2
F-015 n/a  rejected
F-016 n/a  rejected
F-017 n/a  rejected
F-018 n/a  withdrawn
1Proposal F-007 was amended so that the first sentence became an Article, 
and the second sentence a Recommendation, with addition of words “already
published” before name of organisms, and “subsequent to the protologue” after
“may be used”.
2In proposal F-014, proposed additions of Art. F.5.9 and to Rec. F.5A in the
original proposal were accepted, but the proposal was otherwise amended by: 
(a) deleting proposed additional wording under Art. F.5.1., and proposed new
Art. F.5.6 and F5.7; (b) withdrawing proposed new Art. F.5.8; and (c) adding
the following wording: F-014(1) “Art. F.5.1 bis. When the identifier issued
for a name by a recognized repository is cited incorrectly in the protologue, 
that name may nevertheless be validly published, provide that the identifier
for the name was issued prior to valid publication. The identifier cited in the
protologue is treated as a correctable error” and F-014(2) “Art. F.5.1 ter. An
identifier remains associated with the name or designation for which it was
issued. In order for a designation to become validly published, a separate
identifier must be obtained.”
that Chapter F contains material relating only to fungi, that
a Special-purpose Committee dealing with the same epithet
issue reports to the FNS of the next IMC, rather than the next
IBC Nomenclature Section. Karen Wilson (Secretary, General
Committee) has advised that replacing the Special-purpose
Committee set up at the XIX IBC by the Special-purpose
Committee on Names of Fungi with the Same Epithet (reporting
to the next IMC) is a sensible action, which can be formally
ratified when the composition of the two Special-purpose
Committees is discussed with the General Committee. 
RESOLUTION AND THE NEW WORDING OF
ICN CHAPTER F
As its final item of business, the FNS accepted a motion from
the Secretary that the President and the Secretaries be instructed
to present to the President of the International Mycological
Association (IMA) a resolution on behalf of the Session to the
effect that the decisions and appointments of the FNS be approved. 
At the closing ceremony (plenary session) to the Congress, 
which began at 17:00 h local time on 21 July 2018, the following
resolution was accepted:
“The XI International Mycological Congress resolved that the decisions
of its Fungal Nomenclature Session with respect to the International
Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants, as well as the
appointment of the Secretary of the Fungal Nomenclature Bureau, 
and officers and members of the Permanent Nomenclature Committee
for Fungi, made by that Session during its meeting, 19 July 2018, be
accepted.”
The wording of Chapter F of the Shenzhen ICN will be
amended in accordance with this resolution, by the EdCF, as a
recommendation to the full Editorial Committee of the ICN. It is
expected that the new version of Chapter F will be ready in early
2019, for publication in IMA Fungus. The on-line version of the
ICN will also be amended accordingly, with an indication that the
changes arose from IMC11.
Amendments to the ICN became effective immediately 
upon acceptance of this resolution; they are not dependent upon
publication of the present report nor upon publication of the
revised version of Chapter F of the Shenzhen ICN. New and
amended rules are retroactive to the starting-point for fungi, 1
May 1753 (Art. F.1 and 13.1(f)), unless expressly limited. The only
decision made in San Juan that involved a date limitation was in
relation to correctability of identifiers for typifications, because
mandatory citation of identifiers for typifications comes into force
on 1 January 2019.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUTURE
FUNGAL NOMENCLATURE SESSIONS
On the whole, given the short lead time from the Shenzhen IBC
(which approved the concept of a FNS) and the San Juan IMC, 
the inaugural FNS operated relatively smoothly. There is scope
prior to the next IMC to provide a timetable and explanatory
material (e.g. in relation to the publication of proposals and
the Guiding vote) well-ahead of the Congress. For the next
FNS, it is recommended that: (1) the FNS is a separate session
within the Congress programme, not overlapping with symposia
or field excursions of the Congress; (2) there is an option to
register for the FNS in the Congress registration form, so that
it is clear ahead of time how many people will be attending; 
and (3) proposals from the floor are only allowed up to the
commencement of the FNS, except where they relate to ones
that have already been accepted during the Session, and deal
with technical aspects of such proposals (rather than intent), so
as to avoid any unintended consequences of a particular wording
that had been accepted.
(xxvi)  IMA FUNGUS
Page 6
MYCONAMES ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the IMC11 Organizing Committee, particularly the Chair, Sharon
Cantrell (Gurabo, Puerto Rico), along with Astrid Concepción (San Juan, 
Puerto Rico), for making available facilities for the FNS; Werner Greuter
(Berlin) for suggesting the concept of Chapter F, which facilitated dealing with
fungi-specific aspects of the ICN; Nicholas Turland (Berlin), Rapporteur-
général for the XX International Botanical Congress, for his generous support
in the lead up to and during the FNS, and his helpful feedback on this
report; Dominik Begerow (Bochum) for timely updates to the International
Mycological Association website; Greg Mueller (Chicago) and the other
members of the Nominating Committee for taking time out during the
Congress to prepare their recommendations; Wilhelm de Beer (Pretoria) for
co-ordinating the compilation of lists of attendees, and providing photographs; 
and Teresa Iturriaga (Ithaca), Ihan du Plessis (Stellenbosch), Ludovic Le
Renard (Vancouver) and Wilma Nel (Pretoria) for assisting with the roving
microphones during the Session.
REFERENCES
Flann C, Turland NJ, Monro AM (2014) Report on botanical nomenclature
— Melbourne 2011. XVIII International Botanical Congress, Melbourne: 
Nomenclature Section, 18–22 July 2011. PhytoKeys 41: 1–289. 
Hawksworth DL (ed.) (2018) Proposals for consideration at IMC11 to modify
provisions solely related to fungi in the International Code of Nomenclature
for algae, fungi, and plants. IMA Fungus 9: (i)–(vii).
Hawksworth DL, May TW, Redhead SA (2017) Fungal nomenclature evolving: 
changes by the 19th International Botanical Congress in Shenzhen
2017, and procedures for the Fungal Nomenclature Session at the 11th 
International Mycological Congress in Puerto Rico 2018. IMA Fungus 8:
211–218.
May TW, Miller AN (2018) XI International Mycological Congress: Guiding
Vote on nomenclature proposals to amend Chapter F of the International
Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants. IMA Fungus 9: (xv)–(xxi).
May TW, Redhead SA (2018) Synopsis of proposals on fungal Nomenclature: a
review of the proposals concerning Chapter F of the International Code of
Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants submitted to the XI International
Mycological Congress, 2018. IMA Fungus 9: (ix)–(xiv). 
Turland NJ, Wiersema JH, Monro AM, Deng Y-F, Zhang L (2017) XIX
International Botanical Congress: report of Congress action on
nomenclatural proposals. Taxon 66: 1234–1245.
Turland NJ, Wiersema JH, Barrie FR, Greuter W, Hawksworth DL, et al. 
(2018) International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants
(Shenzhen Code) adopted by the Nineteenth International Botanical Congress
Shenzhen, China, July 2017. [Regnum Vegetabile no. 159.] Glashütten: 
Koeltz Botanical Books.
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 2 
(xxvii)
