Steven D. Bixler
32 N Chelton 	    (719) 659-1597
Colorado Springs,CO	    steven.bixler@gmail.com
 ANALYTICAL MANAGEMENT PROFESSIONAL
Results Oriented – Priority Driven –– Problem Resolution Oriented
Security Clearance
Top Secret Security Clearance with SCI/ SAP/ Access.
Summary of Qualifications
Active military Non Commissioned Officer with over 7 years experience in sensitive, responsible positions.  Extremely motivated and results-driven professional with exceptional communication skills and a background in the following broad-based competencies:
Strategic Operations
Operational Security 
  Tactical Operations
Relationship & Team Bldg
   Space Operations
   Data Mining
Three years experience in space force enhancement and space control operations
Extensive knowledge of national collection capabilities
Efficient user of Microsoft Office products including word, power point and outlook 
Experienced user of INTELLINK, SIPRNET, JWICS and other intelligence tools
Executive and  public briefing experience
Knowledgeable in  collection management
Extensive work in Tactical Intelligence including some Human Intelligence (CI/HUMINT) while deployed to Afghanistan and Bosnia
Successfully trained, supervised, and instructed assigned personnel in intelligence operations.
Professional Experience
United States Army – Intelligence Analyst  	 September 2000 - Present
Intelligence Analyst, Space and Missile Defense Command, Peterson, AFB, CO               March 2005 - Present
Strategic-level planer and military analyst responsible for monitoring primary threat countries and providing situational and threat awareness to the Brigade Commander. Responsible for providing pre deployment intelligence updates to army space forces.  Ensured the anti terrorism and force protection training were in compliance with the Army standard.   Developed and maintained space based intelligence training plan to more efficiently integrate new analysts.  
Coordinates with Strategic and National organizations to develop training requirements and problem solve intelligence issues.
Intelligence Analyst, 10th Mountain Divison, Fort Drum,NY                	               May  2001 - March 2005
Intelligence Analyst for Infantry Battalion deployed to Bosnia in support of Stabilization Force  10.
Primary responsible for providing daily intelligence updates to platoon leadership prior to convoy movement. Additional duties included producing daily situational awareness brief for battalion staff and maintaining intelligence database. 
Intelligence Analyst for Infantry Brigade deployed to Afghanistan in support of Operation enduring Freedom IV. 
As the Current Operations intelligence analyst I was responsible for receipt, analysis, dissemination and storage of tactical Intelligence information.  Selected by command to forward deploy as the Senior Analyst to a forward operating base on the Afghanistan, Pakistan boarder. 
Education 
Pikes Peak Community College	Currently enrolled in Associates in General Studies: Current GPA 3.4
References 	Personal and professional references gladly furnished upon request.
