Muhammad Ikram
901 6th street SW Apt 615
Washington DC 20024
Phone: (Work) 202-382-5359
(Resid): 703-344-3237
Objective: 
To diversify my skills in the field of journalism particularly in electronic media, to give accurate, objective and unbiased information to people and to create awareness among the targeted people and help reduce gap between the West and targeted people in Pakistan and Afghanistan who are prone to extremism and militancy. 
Personal Information
First Name:            Muhammad 
Last Name:              Ikram
Marital Status:       Single
Present Occupation:    International Broadcaster and Producer
Citizenship:                 Pakistan
E-mail:      mikram@voanews.com
Languages:
Speak, read and write fluently: Pashto, Urdu and English
Education:
1: Master
Journalism and Mass Communication (2004)
University of Peshawar, NWFP, Pakistan
2:  Bachelor of Arts:  
Law and Political Science (2002)
University of Peshawar, NWFP, Pakistan
3:    Higher Secondary School Certificate (2000)
       Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education,
       Peshawar, NWFP, Pakistan
4:   Secondary School Certificate (1997)
Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education,
Peshawar, NWFP, Pakistan
Experience:
International Broadcasting Bureau,                December 2006 till present
Voice of America
Washington DC, United States
Job Title: 
International Broadcaster and Producer
Responsibilities:
I do prepare reports for Voice of America, Deewa Radio on targeted region, i.e. Pakistan, Afghanistan particularly the border region of Pakistan and Afghanistan which is the main focus of concern not only for the US, Pakistan and Afghanistan but for the international community as well. I have intensively worked on the issue of terrorism and militancy in Pakistan and Afghanistan and the border region of the two countries and prepared analytical reports for Deewa broadcast.
I work as an international broadcaster and producer. I host live talk shows on issues and current events in the world, particularly the war against terrorism, the US, its allies and front line states in the war against terror, i.e. Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
I conducted interviews with US-based think tanks including Rand Corporation, The Heritage Foundation, Center for International Peace, STRATFOR Global Intelligence as well as members of US Congress, to name a few, on US policies towards Pakistan and Afghanistan and other strategic countries of the world. I did interviews with leading Pakistani and Afghan politicians and experts on the politics of the two countries, their relationship and relations with the United States. 
I hosted two-hour live show on the recent speech of the US President Barack Obama about his new strategy for Afghanistan. I did live commentary on the speech of President Obama and then talked with experts from Afghanistan and Pakistan in a live program following his speech. I was the host of live program when President Obama announced his first strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan on March 27, 2009. Again I gave live commentary of President Obama’s speech “A new beginning” to the Muslim World on June 4, 2009 in Cairo, Egypt.   
While working in Deewa Radio, I frequently hosted live talk shows on the judicial crisis in Pakistan when the then President of Pakistan General Pervez Musharraf sacked the whole judiciary except a few who did not challenge his emergency in 2007. It gave me an edge in the team as a host since I worked in Pakistan as a special reporter for the Supreme Court of Pakistan and the Ministry of Law, Justice and Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, covering landmark legal cases of the country. 
News Network International (NNI)                         August 2004 to November 2006
Islamabad, Pakistan
Job Title:   Reporter
Responsibilities:
I worked as a reporter for a Pakistani-based wire news agency, News Network International (NNI) in Islamabad, Pakistan. I served as a special reporter of the Supreme Court of Pakistan and the Ministry of Law, Justice and Human Rights Commission of Pakistan. I covered landmark legal cases of the country including constitutional petitions challenging the 17th amendment in the Constitution of Pakistan, the Hisba Bill (Sharia Bill) and the cases of honor killings including the case of human rights advocate, Mukhtara Mai, who herself fell victim of a local system in Punjab province, called Panchayiat. I wrote on human rights and social issues of the country. 
I wrote news stories on Pakistan’s parliamentary proceedings, role of political parties in promoting democratic norms and values in a country where the military ruled most the time in its 60 years history and where the military decides the strategic decisions of the country. I also covered the Foreign Office of Pakistan including press conferences and briefings by foreign dignitaries and collaborated with foreign media in the northern parts of Pakistan when a devastated earthquake, on October 8, 2005, killed more than 86,000 people and left millions homeless.
Deutsche Sudsieting (A German newspaper)
Job Title: Stringer/Fixer                                              October 2005 to April 2006
Responsibilities:
As a stringer for this German-based newspaper, I organized meetings and interviews for the visiting newspaper’s regional editor with Pakistan officials and politicians. I covered the devastating quake in North West Frontier Province, Pakistan in 2005 for this paper and led the editor to the quake-affected areas of NWFP, Pakistan and Pakistan administered Kashmir.
Pakistan Broadcasting Corporation (PBC):
Job Title: Monitor                                               September 2005 to February 2006
Responsibilities:
I worked as a monitor in Pakistan Broadcasting Corporation, Islamabad, Pakistan and monitored international radio and TV channels of the world that broadcast news and current affairs programs for Pakistan, Afghanistan, India and other neighboring countries in English, Urdu and Pashto languages.
The News International:
Peshawar, NWFP, Pakistan
Job Title: Reporter/Internee                                  January 2002 to February 2004
Responsibilities: 
I started my career in the field of journalism with Pakistan’s leading English newspaper, “The News International” in Peshawar bureau. I wrote on provincial politics, main issues of Pashtoons including terrorism, law and order situation of the province, the issue of Afghan refugees in NWFP and their repatriation to Afghanistan.  I wrote on the educational system prevailing in NWFP, students’ problems and highlighted the shortcomings in the education sector and other professional institutions. I also wrote on the social issues among the people and centuries-long traditions of honor killing and Swara. 
Campus Radio (FM 107):                                        January 2004 to June 2004
University of Peshawar  
Job Title: Broadcaster
Responsibilities:
I worked as a broadcaster in Campus Radio, University of Peshawar and was one of the pioneers in the Campus Radio. The Radio started its live transmission in 2004 when I was a student of Masters in the Department of Journalism and Mass Communication. I produced and presented news in English as well as Urdu. I also produced and broadcasted special reports about the curriculum and non-curriculum activities and problems of students inside and outside the university.   
Job related trainings:
1:  Voice Coaching/On-air presentation training for radio and television broadcasting organized           by Voice of America.
2:  Three-day on Radio Journalism Training Workshop organized by INTERNEWS at Peshawar University.
3: Three-day training workshop on “Capacity Building of Journalists” organized by the Department of Journalism and Mass Communication, University of Peshawar in collaboration with Friedrich Ebert Stiftung (FES), Islamabad.
4: Three-day workshop on “Involvement of men in the quest for gender equality organized by “ROZAN”, Islamabad, in collaboration with UNESCO at University of Peshawar, NWFP, Pakistan. 
Computer skills:
 Proficient in MS Word, MS Excel, MS Power Point, MS Access and Internet.
  
