Robert Andries Hurtekant
785 Weyburn Terrace Apt #81, Los Angeles, CA 90024
Cell: 214-458-7707
rob.hurtekant@gmail.com 
  
  
Education
  
Bachelor of Science in Foreign Service
Georgetown University, 2004-2008
Grade point average 3.7 on 4.0 scale, Magna cum Laude 
Major: International Politics with Security Studies Concentration 
African Studies Certificate (equivalent to a minor)
  
Relevant course work: Micro & Macroeconomics, International Relations, International Trade, International Finance, International Political Risk Analysis, International Business, African Militaries, Political Violence in Africa, Nationalism in Africa, AIDS in Africa
 
Masters in African Studies
University of California-Los Angeles, 2008-2010
Concentration in Political Economy
Grade point average 3.88 on 4.0 scale
Relevant Coursework: Political Economy of Africa, Survey of Political Economy, Language in South Africa, Postcolonial Theory, Theories of Economic Growth and Development, Afrikaans Literature in English Translation
  
Relevant Work History
  
Intern, the American Institutes for Research (AIR), Washington, DC
June – August 2008
Worked full-time on a project evaluating the effectiveness of UNICEF-sponsored schools in six different countries: Nigeria, Guyana, Thailand, Philippines, South Africa, Nicaragua. 
Collaborated with a partner to coordinate the international logistics of each site visit, including in-country travel, lodging and the hiring of local data collectors. 
Corresponded with high level personnel from UNICEF, giving progress reports on project, and with representatives from various countries’ Ministries of Education in order to facilitate data collection 
Successfully challenged AIR’s assumptions related to the South Africa site visit, allowing more visits at a wider variety of schools & better data collection.
Coded data in preparation for analysis.
  
Intern, Woodrow Wilson Center for International Scholars, Washington, DC
August-December 2007
Worked under former Ambassador & Congressman Harold Wolpe.  
Translated field reports (French to English) from the Wilson Center’s operations in Burundi and the DR-Congo.
Handled logistics for high profile speaker events. 
Created and disseminated weekly news updates to keep Wilson Center staff apprised of African news developments.
  
Intern, Carmen Lobbying Group, Washington, DC
August-December 2006
Worked under former Ambassador Gerry Carmen and Mike Lempres, director of Carmen’s International Practice, conducting in-depth research for major clients. 
Produced a detailed briefing for the executive managing director on the major issues surrounding a contractual dispute which involved an international client.
  
Research Assistant, Hunt Oil Company, Dallas, TX
Summers 2005 and 2006
Worked directly under Executive Vice President researching long term opportunities involving port real estate, alternative energy opportunities, and geological data. 
Engaged in research, e-mail and phone correspondence with business colleagues. Presented my findings to a team of executives.
  
Intern, Flanders Foreign Investment Office (FFIO), Dallas, TX
Summers 2001 and 2002
Maintained a database and performed market research for FFIO, an institution whose aim is to increase trade between Belgium and the US.
Skills & Awards
  
Seven years of French language study, three semesters of Afrikaans at the University of Cape Town and UCLA, two semesters of isiZulu at UCLA and intensive summer isiZulu study at University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa
Recipient of the UCLA Graduate Opportunity Fellowship for the 2008-2009 school year and University Fellowship for 2009-2010
Achieved a rating of Very Good on Georgetown’s French Language Proficiency Exam
Named 2007 Student of the Year by the Council on International Education Exchange based on volunteer work and efforts to encourage inclusion of disabled students in study abroad 
Discussant on disability and study abroad at the 2007 Council on International Education and the 2009 National Association for Study Abroad conferences
Named 2007 Student of the Year by the Council on International Education Exchange based on volunteer work and efforts to encourage inclusion of disabled students in study abroad 
Extensive experience with the Microsoft Office software suite 
