    GENE R. FOCA
    29 Broadview Terrace
     Chatham, NJ 07928
  Home Tel:  973-701-0104
     Cell: 973-886-0009
     Email:  [URL: "mailto:GeneRFoca@gmail.com"]GeneRFoca@gmail.com
TIME WARNER/Time Inc.	1991 – Present
Vice President Consumer Marketing, Time Worldwide/Publisher Time for Kids (2007 – Present)
              Responsible for all aspects of consumer marketing for Time Worldwide. Led the consumer research effort to transform the Time brand, leading to redesigns of the magazine and the website.  Redefined business model by cutting the size of the customer (subscriber) base to focus on a more profitable, desirable audience. Oversee staff of 35 professionals.
Led a team that generated over $40MM in profit, exceeding budgeted targets by over $8MM in each of 2007 and 2008.
Created and executed new cover testing research that led to more consistent newsstand sale each week (averaging over 90,000 each week) and increased profit.
Increased customer retention and profitably, stabilizing ratebase using asymmetric pricing techniques proposed by Dan Ariely, Duke University professor and M.I.T Media Lab.
Managed audience development and reporting for Time.com, identifying opportunities for growth in 2009 in China and South America.
Used research and consumer testing to make significant product changes to Time for Kids for 2009. 
            Vice President, Consumer & Brand Marketing: The Fortune/Money Group (Fortune, Money, Fortune Small Business, Business 2.0, CNNMoney.com) & Time Inc. Corporate Sales and Marketing (2003 – 2007)
             Chief marketing professional in charge of all aspects of consumer marketing for five brands, and brand marketing for the Time Inc. Business & Finance Network.  Responsibilities include generating over $40MM in revenue with full P&L oversight for the consumer business, all CRM, positioning, general presentations, advertising, online media kit, sales materials, event marketing and consumer and advertising research.  Oversee staff of 65 professionals, including 3 Consumer Marketing Directors and 3 Brand Directors, in a matrix environment. 
In 2006, exceeded budgeted profit levels by approximately 8%. Exceeded budgeted consumer marketing profit by $9.5 million for 2005 and by $6.9MM in 2004.
Re-launched Fortune, Money, Business 2.0, Fortune Small Business and CNNMoney.com to the advertising community as the Time Inc. Business and Finance Network (TIBFN).  Developed the pitch and presentation for the Network of brands as one affluent audience, leading to an additional 12% profit generation for the Network in 2006.
Reinvented the Money brand by selling management on the need for significant product and business model changes, and then creating and executing a research initiative to define the target audience and create a new mission for the brand.  New marketing approaches and editorial redesign of print and website resulted in: retail sale up 26% YOY, traffic on CNNMoney.com topping 18 million page views on day of re-launch, a 46% increase in subscription orders and being  named by the Media Industry Newsletter as one of two “Reinventions of the Year” in 2006.  
Moved the Business 2.0 consumer business from one that was unprofitable to profitability, by working with edit and research to improve retail sale by over 33% YOY (1H04 – 1H05) and by changing the consumer marketing to focus on partner programs with our other business titles.
Aided Corporate Sales and Marketing in developing marketing ideas for FORD Motor Company that resulted in over $7MM in annual profits.
- And Simultaneously -
President and General Manager – Hallmark Magazine
Responsible for all aspects of Hallmark Magazine test launch and management, including edit and ad sales oversight.
Successfully negotiated deal with Hallmark Cards, Inc. to blend the content and marketing expertise of Time Inc. with the assets of a consumer products company, in an effort to develop a new business model for product launches.  
Developed the business plan, including publication of three successful magazine issues, full direct marketing testing and creative development, complete retail test plan and execution, consumer and advertising research, and tagline testing.  
Vice President, Digital Marketing -Time Warner Digital Media (1999-2003)
Responsible for managing a 25 person team of marketing, creative, technical and operations professionals in an effort to sell Time Inc. magazines via the internet, with P&L responsibility for this group.  Served as marketing point person between AOL and Time Inc., member of the AOL Time Warner Marketing Council, and consumer marketing representative on the Time Inc. Corporate Sales and Marketing team. 
Led Time Inc. team responsible for selling over 1,000,000 magazine subscriptions through the AOL properties, and over 800,000 new AOL registrants annually. 
Negotiated/developed partnerships with Amazon, eBay, CDNow and others to sell Time Inc. magazine subscriptions.  Increased gross sub sales from under 100,000 in 1999 to over 450,000 in 2001.
Successfully tested marketing techniques on internal and external websites, developing the internet as a significant subscription source for the company.
Assisted in the analysis and negotiation of the majority purchase of Synapse, the industry’s largest magazine agent.
Evaluated corporate plans for “vertical online hubs” and database, as member of Time Warner Digital Media team, in the news, sports, finance and women’s categories. 
Associate Publisher, Consumer Marketing – Life Magazine (1997 – 1999)
Chief marketing professional with full P&L and management responsibility for Life Magazine’s consumer marketing business, with revenue of over $15MM.  Oversee staff of 10 professionals.  Enlisted to create a new business development/partnership marketing department for Time Inc., supervising 3 professionals.
Maintained 1.5 million ratebase for a mature brand that was experiencing declining consumer demand, allowing the organization to benefit from record advertising sales.
Improved efficiency of direct marketing efforts, resulting in over 100,000 new subscriptions per year.
Conducted branding and consumer research study for LIFE to help set long term direction.  
Assistant Consumer Marketing Director/Golf Plus Marketing Director – Sports Illustrated (1995 – 1997)
Responsible for the management of all of Sports Illustrated’s consumer marketing business sources and CRM: new business direct mail, direct response television, renewals and billing, agency marketing, premium and product development, online subscription marketing, ad sales retail promotions, list planning and league relationships (NFL, NBA).  Assisted the VP of Consumer Marketing in the development of all aspects of marketing strategy.  
Managed re-engineering of all retention marketing efforts.  Successfully reversed declining renewal rates.
Generated over 100,000 paid subscriptions for Sports Illustrated through direct response television:  Developed several successful television spots, including: “Feel the Power” favorite team spot with NFL Films, “Boomer Esiason and Peter King Live” edit endorsement spots, “Bulls Five-time Champions” donor spot and the “Gift Problem” animated donor spot.  Increased profitability of source through better CPO management.  
Negotiated all contracts with Polygram Video (NFL contract) and NBA Films.
Business Manager - People.com Launch (1994)
Retention Marketing Manager - People Magazine (1992-1994)
Associate Retention Marketing Manager – Fortune (1991 – 1992)
ADDITIONAL EXPERIENCE:
ELI LILLY AND COMPANY - Sales Associate, Corporate Marketing	      1990 – 1991
PRICE WATERHOUSE - Staff Accountant 	      1987 - 1988
AWARDS:	2003 President’s Award nomination - Time Inc. Consumer Marketing Reorganization
2001 President’s Award for leading the team responsible for the AOL/Time Inc. marketing program
1993 Marketing Achievement Award for creativity in retention marketing
EDUCATION:	The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill – Master of Business Administration, May 1990
The University of Notre Dame - Bachelor of Business Administration, Accounting, May 1987
PERSONAL:  Married with three children. Past Magazine Workshop Instructor, Radcliffe Publishing Course, Radcliffe College. Advisory Board, Chatham Athletic Foundation. VP, Membership for Chatham United Travel Soccer, 2005-2006. Chatham High Boys’ Varsity Soccer Coach. Third/fourth grade lacrosse coach.
