ANN GUIDRY
Writer/Editor
2009 Matthews Lane • Austin, Texas 78745 • (512) 291-6712
 [URL: "mailto:manifest@annguidry.com"]manifest@annguidry.com
Ann Guidry is an Austin-based freelance writer, editor, and columnist who began her writing career as a book reviewer for The Austin Chronicle. She has edited book-length fiction manuscripts, legal briefs, and Ph.D. dissertations. She has written marketing materials for a chain of Wisconsin grocery stores, assessment test passages for Educational Learning Systems, encyclopedia entries for Macmillan Reference USA, and pitched, researched, and produced feature articles for CareerBuilder.com, LDB Interior Textiles, The Austin American-Statesman, and The Good Life. Her most recent projects include writing web content and print ad copy for Seasonal Living Trading Company, writing educational storyboards as instructional designer for Fusion Learning Systems, and producing student guides (for classic and contemporary literature) to be published by Thomson Gale. 
One of Ann’s many strengths is her versatility. Her talent for grasping the fundamental concept of a new project and turning it into fresh, engaging copy has a proven track record. Ann is self-motivated and dedicated to producing work that is professional, beautifully written, and always delivered on schedule. 
KEY STRENGTHS
Accomplished writer and communicator
Dedicated to providing intelligent, crisp, and captivating writing 
Detail-oriented
Deadline-driven
Enthusiastic and experienced researcher and interviewer
Excellent interpersonal skills
EDUCATION
Bachelor of Arts in English, University of Texas at Austin, 1997
200-Hour Hatha Yoga Certification, Yoga Yoga Teacher Training, Austin, Texas, 2002
EDITING CREDITS
Anaxos, Inc., 2005-present
Graduate Student Dissertation, 2004-2005; Austin Business Journal, 2004-2006;
Lowerre & Kelly/Frederick-Law, 2003-2004; Total Word Services, 2002-2003
WRITING CREDITS
The Good Life: 2004 – present  
Originally hired to write advertorial pieces for the November and December Gift Guides for this, the third-largest general-interest publication in Austin. Was awarded the magazine’s monthly fashion column soon thereafter, followed by assignments to write feature articles about Austin’s dining scene, and, finally, a monthly car column. Each project requires interviewing local business owners and writing upbeat copy.  
Anaxos, Inc.: 2005 – present 
As English Language Arts editor, my responsibilities included managing a staff of eight freelance writers, ensuring that their final products met required educational standards, page length restrictions, and scheduled deadlines. Also wrote scripts for video and Flash online lessons, produced review, quiz, and test questions, and wrapped entire project on time. Duties also included editing biology, math, and PTK books. Currently, I am working on two literary guide projects for Thomson Gale via Anaxos. 
ANN GUIDRY
WRITER
WRITING CREDITS (continued)
Seasonal Living Trading Company: 2006
Wrote web content and print advertising copy for this luxury outdoor living products startup. Worked closely with Seasonal Living founder to capture the essence of the company and to clearly define the company’s demographic. Collaborated with graphic and web designers to coordinate copy with visual elements and page layout. See www.seasonalliving.com. 
Fusion Learning Systems: 2006
My duties as instructional designer for Fusion included editing and reworking existing storyboard copy and researching and creating new storyboards for Riverdeep, an e-learning company based in Ireland. Writing “Destination Reading” lessons for sixth-eighth graders involved strict adherence to deadlines and writing guidelines.  
The University of Texas Distance Education Center: 2005 
Wrote and edited Flash animation scripts to be used as alternative teaching tools for high school world geography, world history, and U.S. history. Duties included reading other writers’ scripts for clarity, cohesiveness, and content, researching a wide variety of social studies topics and themes, and writing engaging, educational, age-appropriate scripts.
Market Metric: 2005
Wrote web and product copy for a chain of Wisconsin grocery stores. Created specific “voices” for each banner after carefully researching each stores’ particular demographic. 
Educational Testing Service: 2004 – 2005
Wrote passages for high school assessment tests. Project required strict adherence to a series of guidelines that included style, tone, content, word count, and voice.
Austin American-Statesman: 2004 – 2005 
Composed real estate profiles that were published in a special section of this capital city newspaper. Assignments required extensive research and interviews with neighborhood association members, real estate agents, and the like. 
 
LDB Interior Textiles: 2000 – 2005 
Wrote feature articles for this highly regarded soft home furnishings trade publication. Was responsible for covering the Dallas International Gift and Home Accessories show five years in a row. 
Macmillan Reference USA, Gale Group: 2001 
Wrote entries for Macmillan’s Animal Sciences for Students encyclopedia. Translated potentially complicated ideas to a target audience of high school students. The project entailed extensive research, information synthesis, and strict editorial constraints. 
CareerBuilder.com: 2000 – 2001
Pitched, researched, and produced feature articles for high-profile career-placement company. Quickly grasped story assignments and turned them into fresh, smart copy delivered fast.
The Austin Chronicle: 1999 – 2000
Critiqued fiction and non-fiction books for this local alternative newsweekly. Established and relied on a popular critical voice that was at once informative and engaging. 
