John Egan
8515 Brodie Lane Apt. 112, Austin, TX 78745 | 512-799-1022 | eganjohnj@aol.com
Professional Summary
Passionate, team-oriented professional with 20 years of experience in media. Organized and collaborative, with strong writing, editing and interpersonal skills. Specific expertise includes:
Inherent talent for creative thinking and idea generation.
Versatility in newspaper, Internet, radio and television news media.
Superb ability to build relationships in one-on-one, team or group settings.
Commitment and dedication to quality and excellence.
Professional Experience
Principal
May 2006-present, UpWord Communications, Austin, Texas
Report and write articles for publications such as National Real Estate Investor magazine and Small Business Review.
Consult with clients on public relations and media relations, including news releases and Web copy.
Editor
April 2004-May 2006, Austin Business Journal, Austin, Texas
Managed staff of 11 with budget of more than $600,000.
Teamed with publisher, other managers and other staffers to establish overall vision for publication.
Spearheaded 2004 redesign of the publication, which contributed to a significant rise in subscribers.
Created yearly economic forecast publication called Directions.
Launched weekly business-news segment on Austin CBS affiliate KEYE-TV.
Contributed business-news reports to Austin radio station KLBJ-AM.
Brainstormed with publisher, marketing director and others on various Business Journal events and programs, such as the Health Care Heroes awards program, the I-35 Corridor Growth Summit and the Williamson County Growth Summit.
Worked with publisher, marketing director and others on internal communications, such as event agendas, event scripts and e-mail promotions.
Regularly spoke to professional groups on a variety of business-related topics.
Managing Editor
August 1999-April 2004, Austin Business Journal, Austin, Texas
Collaborated with editor on vision for news products.
Handled day-to-day newsroom operations.
Coached reporters on creating, writing and editing stories for print and online editions.
Oversaw weekly report on small businesses.
Managed award-winning daily e-mail news updates.
Copy Editor
March 1998-August 1999, St. Louis Business Journal, St. Louis, Missouri 
Helped other editors plan weekly edition and special publications.
Edited stories, wrote headlines, designed pages, proofread pages.
Coordinated weekly commentary section.
Coached reporters on development of stories.
Crafted daily news updates for the Web and wrote copy for three daily radio newscasts.
Wire Editor/Copy Editor
June 1996-March 1998, Belleville News-Democrat, Belleville, Illinois 
Helped determine story placement during daily news meetings.
Selected stories for, chose art for and designed nation/world, business and state news pages.
Edited stories and wrote headlines.
Reporter
January 1986-June 1996, News Tribune, Jefferson City, Missouri
Covered state Legislature, state executive offices, state agencies and state politics for morning and afternoon editions.
Launched health care beat.
Helped create monthly news journal focusing on state government.
Education
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas; bachelor’s degree in news-editorial journalism, 1986
