BOOKMARKS:
University of Southern Mississippi
Hattiesburg, Mississippi 1999 – 2002
Page 1
Genna McQuilkin
1408 Alameda Drive - Austin, Texas 78704
gennamcquilkin @ yahoo.com
(970) 310 – 5857 
I want to join a creative team in Austin that shares my passion for transforming thoughts and ideas into
reality and can appreciate my instinctual drive to figure out how to get the job done. Anything is possible! 
Experience: 
Joe Slade White & Company, Inc. 
Political Media Consulting Firm (New York, D.C., & Austin)  July 2006 – October 2007
Production Manager / Producer 
Austin, Texas 
•  Schedule production resources and services for producing a wide range of media based on the
clients’ schedule, deadline, and budget. 
•  Daily coordination of production schedules for multiple projects by maintaining communication with
colleagues, outside vendors, media buyers, crews, studios, and talent agents nationwide. 
•  Provide time efficiency with hands-on supervised edit sessions, coordinating live edit sessions via
internet with company supervisors for quicker approval process, and pro-active problem solving. 
•  Research, gather, and organize creative elements for current and future tv and radio production. 
•  Find and develop new production resources (music, footage, studios, crew, and talent) and negotiate
fees and licensing with the agents, publishers, and studios to better fit our clients’ needs. 
•  Manage a detailed archive of man hours, resources utilized, and production elements incorporated
into all projects ensuring financial productivity while maintaining consistent, high quality productions 
•  Collaborate with the creative team to measure results and create strategic formulas for future
clients and their campaigns. 
Robert Berning Productions, Inc. 
Film Production, Ad Agency, and Media Strategy  March 2005 – July 2006
Film Producer / Broadcast Production Manager 
New Orleans, LA
•  Collaborated with the team to develop creative concept and coordinated every aspect of production
from initial creative meeting to completion. 
•  Created a production budget, detailed contract, shoot schedules, and timeline for completion for
each of the clients’ productions. 
•  Organized multiple day film shoots on location and in the studio. 
•  Point of contact for the clients on any project incorporating production. 
•  Hired and negotiated fees and contracts with crew, talent agents, and vendors. 
•  Scheduled edit sessions in the multiple edit suites and delegated duties to all crew from Pre-
Production through Post- Production and final spot delivery. 
•  Supervised workflow in various departments (Video, Motion GFX, artwork, music, etc.) via
department managers for several projects simultaneously. 
Page 2
2
Trial Practices, Inc. 
Litigation Support and Strategy Firm  2004 – 2005
Production Manager / Producer 
Tampa, FL
•  Designed strategic messaging through collaboration with our creative and research teams using
video, graphic design (print), and 3D animation as our vehicle of delivery. 
•  Developed and maintained production schedules by coordinating workflow with different department
managers. 
•  Point of contact for clients on projects involving production and assisted coaching sessions for them
on message and delivery. 
•  Developed relationships in our local media market to create a “healthy buzz” for our clients’ and
their stories. 
•  Produced, Co-scripted, supervised edit sessions and at times edited narrative mediation videos
using Adobe Premiere Pro, After-Affects, Photoshop, Adobe Audition, and Corel Draw. 
•  Assistant coordinator for focus research groups nationwide. 
WLOX – TV 13 
ABC New affiliate for the Mississippi Gulf Coast  2002 – 2004
News Producer / Video Editor 
Biloxi, MS 
•  Lead Producer for the news magazine show “The 4 O’ Clock Show, Co-Producer of Good Morning
Mississippi, fill in Producer for the Midday News, and all evening newscasts. 
•  Managed all show content including segment structuring, script composition, shot list, and video
designations. 
•  Coordinated scheduling for segment guest interviews, In-studio live show production, and pre-
recorded satellite segments and studio shoots for the show. 
•  Collaborated with seasoned reporters and photographers to develop story ideas and series
specials. 
•  Worked with VIP guests including chefs, musicians, actors, and artists. 
•  Produced and edited promos for the news broadcasts using Edit Star and Media 100. 
Education: 
University of Southern Mississippi
Hattiesburg, Mississippi 1999 – 2002
BA Degree in Radio, Television and Film with a Minor in Spanish
Awards & Affiliations: 
Multiple Gold, Silver, and Bronze Pollies (Joe Slade White & Co. – 2006 Elections) 
Multiple Gold, Silver, and Bronze Regional Addy Awards (RBP 2005 & 2006) 
Creative Summit Award Winner (RBP 2006) 
NATPE member (National Association of Television Program Executives) 
References available upon request
Genna McQuilkin
gennamcquilkin @ yahoo.com 
(970) 310 – 5857 
