JENNA COLLEY
3903 Peterson Ave., Apt. 202 	Phone: 512.567.1020	Austin, TX 78756	             jennacolleyemail@yahoo.com
OBJECTIVE:
To utilize my journalism skills, research expertise, entrepreneurial spirit and positive attitude while exploring issues on the economic, public policy and cultural forefront to the benefit of an innovative organization with a global reach that prioritizes professional integrity and values the well-being of its employees and clients.
EXPERIENCE:
Managing Editor 
CountryWatch.com,  Jan. 2006-Present
Edit for content and clarity weekly briefings of top international news stories and in-depth commentary for subscription-based web  site covering approximately 250 countries recognized by the United Nations. 
General Assignment Reporter (Drew Silvern Memorial Internship, presented to one Stanford University student annually)
San Diego Union-Tribune, San Diego, CA. July - Oct. 2007
Wrote several high-profile front page stories including "Coming Home," a series chronically the journey of a mother mourning the death of her son, a bomb specialist killed in Iraq, from the time she received his casket until his military burial two weeks later.
Worked with various editors to cover a wide-range of topics including military affairs, homelessness and economic development.
Managed budget for a weeklong reporting trip spent covering a team of U.S. Army bomb experts in the Mojave Desert.
Government Reporter 
Houston Business Journal, Houston, TX. Nov. 2000-July 2006.
Covered how government and legislative events on the local, state and national level effect the Houston economy. 
Wrote a weekly insider's column on the cross-section between local government and business. 
Discussed the week's top local stories on a Friday morning talk radio show.
Moderated a live debate between 2003 mayoral candidates on Fox News.
Profiled local business and political power brokers. Contributed to editorials. Filed daily breaking news on the company website.
Technology and Legal Affairs Reporter 
Austin Business Journal, Austin, TX. Oct. 1998-Nov. 2000.
Mined local and federal court system for breaking news while also covering the boom and bust of the Austin high-tech industry. Wrote feature stories on local ventures and profiled key players in Austin's business community.
INTERNSHIPS AND OTHER EXPERIENCE:
Texas Architect Magazine
Reported on issues of importance within the architectural community for monthly publication. 
Page layout and design, March 1997-Sept. 1997.
The Daily Texan 
Reviewed film, music, theater and literature. 1994- 1998.
Texas Department of Agriculture 
Used news judgment to compile daily news briefs from statewide and national newspapers for then Agriculture Commissioner Rick Perry. 
Served as the primary writer for the Texas Family Land Heritage Registry, a chronicle of Texas farmers and ranchers. May 1996-Dec. 1996
EDUCATION:
Stanford University, MA, Communication, June 2007 (Member, Stanford Alumni Association)
      - Created a new media venture in collaboration with  the MBA and computer science graduate programs.
University of Texas at Austin, Bachelor of Journalism, May 1998 (Member, Texas Execs Alumni Association)
AWARDS:
Lone Star Award, presented by the Houston Press Club (excellence in government reporting and feature writing)
Eagle Award, presented by American City Business Journals (overall excellence in reporting)
