Page 1
Jill A. Jones 16100 S. Great Oaks Dr.,Unit 2802 l Round Rock, TX 78681
512.293.4908 l jillj@austin.rr.com
Summary of
Qualifications
Education
Computer
Skills 
Ten years of experience in written communications, including eight years of
proposal development experience. Creative and detail-oriented with skills in
writing, research and graphic design.
Southwestern University, Georgetown, Texas
BA, French, Sociology minor, 1993
Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas
Secondary teacher certifi cation coursework, 1993 - 1994
Adobe Creative Suite (InDesign, Illustrator, Photoshop), Adobe Acrobat, 
MS Offi ce (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Access), LotusNotes, basic HTML
Work
Experience 
URS Corporation, Austin, Texas (through Aquent staffi ng fi rm)
Marketing Coordinator / Proposal Specialist
August - November 2007
v Coordinated, wrote, researched, and edited all phases of engineering, environ-
mental, infrastructure and transportation proposals and related materials in
response to state, municipal and commercial Requests for Proposals.
v Led proposal kickoff and review meetings and worked directly with technical
staff to guide and manage the prop osal pro cess from star t to finish.
Earth Tech, Inc.,Austin, Texas
Marketing Coordinator / Proposal Specialist
November 1999 - August 2007
v Sole mar keting/prop osal co ordinator for Ear th Tech’s Austin and Dallas off ices, 
responsible for planning, writing, editing and production of proposals and
related materials.
v Researched proposed projects and client requirements, gathered materials
from technic al staff and par tner fir ms, and compiled this infor mation in
narrative and graphic formats.
v Wrote proposal sections and edited sections written by engineering/technical
staff for clarity, style and responsiveness to client requirements.
v Provided writing and graphic design for presentations, articles, brochures, 
announcements, trade show displays and other marketing materials.
v Net wor ked with counter par ts from other fir ms and maintained knowledge of
industry conditions and developments.
v Served as lead marketing coordinator and graphic designer for development
of the 1.300-page winning proposal for the Trans-Texas Corridor (TTC-35) 
design-build project, as part of the Cintra Zachry, LP consortium.
Page 2
Work
Experience
(continued) 
Jill A. Jones
page 2 of 2
The Vendo Company, Fresno California
Marketing Assistant
April 1997- June 1999
v Wrote and designed brochures, press releases, presentations and other
marketing materials.
v Researched developments in the beverage and vending machine industries
for marketing bulletins and special projects.
v Trained sales force in use of contact management software, wrote and
produced user manual, and worked as primary contact with software
supplier to customize/troubleshoot database interface.
v Wrote and produced monthly newsletter in printed and web-based formats.
v Coordinated company participation in trade shows.
Administrative Assistant
October 1995 - April 1997
v Provided administrative support to North American sales force.
Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas
Instructional Assistant
January 1994 - May 1994
v Co-taught beginning French language class.
v Assisted in evaluation/grading of students’ daily work and exams.
v Provided one-on-one tutoring in French grammar and vocabulary.
Southwestern University, Georgetown, Texas
French Tutor
January 1990 - May 1993
v Provided one-on-one tutoring in French grammar and vocabulary
v Helped students develop pronunciation and conversational skills in French.
v Taught classes in professors’ occasional absence.
Professional
Memberships
Professional
Registrations 
Society for Marketing Professional Services
Notary Public, Texas
