Page 1
Michael Castellon
3625 Duval Road #533
Austin, TX 78759
806.441.8455
michaelcastellon@gmail.com
EDUCATION
Master of Arts, Technical Communication
Texas Tech University, May 2005
Bachelor of Arts, English Literature / Mass Communications
Texas Tech University, August 2003
EMPLOYMENT HISTORY
Corporate Communications Project Coordinator, National Instruments, June 2007 – Present
Develop communication and key marketing plans for company specializing in virtual instrumentation
and measurement software. 
Write or re-purpose online and print content to coincide with marketing campaign objectives and media
and public relation goals. Work closely with software engineers, product marketing managers, and
public relations staff to design and communicate key messages through diverse sets of channels. 
Project Manager for Apple iTunes U at Texas Tech University, February 2007 – May 2007
Develop marketing plans and content for Apple iTunes U at Texas Tech University. Utilize New Media to
target specific audiences. Work closely with Apple marketing communications staff and attorneys and
university officials to manage branding and trademark policies. Write, edit and direct video and audio
content for iTunes U storefront. Organize promotional events and giveaways in support of iTunes U
marketing mission. 
Media and Public Relations Coordinator / Staff Writer, Texas Tech University System Office of
Communications and Marketing, August 2005 - May 2007
Develop communication plans, key messages and communication vehicles needed to support the
organization's marketing, recruiting and philanthropic priorities. Develop the informational hierarchy, 
editorial planning, writing or re-purposing of online and print content. Develop goals and materials
related to positioning messages related to research, events and news items. 
Page 2
Pitch research stories involving colleges of business, law, education and water and wind research to
state and national media outlets. Organize news conferences and media events involving university
research and on-campus visits of state, national and international officials and VIPs. Solve technical and
production challenges related to online and print content. Create interactive content that assists site
visitors with information gathering and decision making to promote a positive user experience. Editing
the work of staff, proofreading, and collaborating with marketing consultants and designers. 
Collaborate with print publications staff and e-marketing projects to ensure deadlines are met. Work
closely with print editors, information technology analysts and senior marketing officials to produce
content for several research- and outreach-based publications and newsletters. 
Graduate Instructor, Texas Tech University Department of English, August 2004 –May 2005
Provided comprehensive instruction, feedback, evaluation and grades to university students enrolled in
freshman writing and composition program. Taught undergraduate writing courses in an interactive
online environment. Provided extensive technical support to online environment's user base and
assisted full-time faculty in developing and refining overall curriculum of the program. 
News Editor, The University Daily, 2003
Trained and managed team of 25 reporters in journalistic writing, source management, ethics of
journalism and publishing. Generated news leads and edited stories for style, accuracy and scope. 
Managed team of copyeditors under a daily deadline and assisted in publishing online content for
newspaper's Web site. 
News Reporter, The University Daily, 2002 - 2003, 2004
Covered Texas Tech University's administration affairs beat and crime beat. Generated both soft and
hard news features as well as investigative reports. Worked directly with university administrators and
state and local politicians under a daily 800-word deadline. 
TECHNICAL PROFICIENCY
Windows 2000, NT, XP
Linux/UNIX OS, Open Source Desktop Apps
Mac OSX
Wireless Networking
PageMaker
MS Office Suite
MS FrontPage
Page 3
HTML/XML
Macromedia DreamWeaver
VOLUNTEER EXPERIENCE
Hurricane Relief Team, American Red Cross, September 2005
Assisted evacuees affected by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita at temporary shelters in
Lubbock County, Texas. 
Grant Writer, Haven Animal Care Shelter, Summer 2004
Wrote several grant proposals for local animal shelter requesting funds from the Petco Foundations. 
Grant Writer, Ark-4-Pets Feral Cat Project, Summer 2004
Assisted local feral cat initiative in gathering and managing RFPs. Wrote and edited several funding
proposals. 
ESL Technical Editing Consultant, 2003
Provided pro bono editing services for underprivileged non-native English speakers completing
dissertations. 
PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
Society for Technical Communication: Member, Lubbock and Austin chapters
