BOOKMARKS:
ANDY SIEVERMAN
  PROFILE Highly organized professional with superb communicat
  PROFESSIONAL
  EXPERIENCE Project Manager
  G&S Typesetters, Austin, Texas
  November 1999—March 2008
  Responsibilities included project management and customer se
  Freelance proofreader and copyeditor
    Customer Service
Page 1
ANDY SIEVERMAN
1905 Barton Parkway * Austin, Texas 78704 * 512.447.0279 * [URL: "mailto:sieverman@sbcglobal.net"] sieverman@sbcglobal.net 
OBJECTIVE Utilize my education, professional experience, and language skills in
pursuit of excellence in an engaging work environment. 
PROFILE Highly organized professional with superb communication and project
management skills. Disciplined, detail oriented, and responsive to
deadlines. Adaptive proven problem solver committed to performance
excellence. 
PROFESSIONAL 
EXPERIENCE Project Manager
G&S Typesetters, Austin, Texas
November 1999—March 2008
Responsibilities included project management and customer service. 
Freelance proofreader and copyeditor
Sheshunoff Information Services
May 1999—November 1999
Responsibilities included proofreading and copyediting
for publisher of technical manuals. 
Managing Partner
Custom Photographic Labs, Inc., Austin, Texas
1977—1999 
Responsibilities included day-to-day operations management, customer
service, and business planning. 
SKILLS Project Management
Monitor projects (manuscripts from publishers) from start to finish, 
paying close attention to problem solving and schedule maintenance. 
Assess each project up front and execute a game plan to best accomplish
client’s goals. Coordinate with editorial staff and typesetting team to
ensure that quality standards and deadlines are met. Maintain art program
and work directly with authors and publishers in obtaining a complete set
of usable art files. Update schedules and input data daily so that
production reports remain accurate. Send out weekly status reports to all
clients and colleagues. 
Customer Service
Maintain regular contact with publishers, responding promptly to queries
and special requests as needed. Act as liaison between author and press, 
and between press and composition team, solving editorial problems, 
schedule conflicts, and pagination issues. Established and sustained
Page 2
excellent rapport with several clients. Represented G&S Typesetters on
sales visits to out-of-state clients. Served on a panel (problem solving
between authors and publishers) in seminar sponsored by client
(University of Iowa Press).
Personnel/Human Resources
Trained and supervised staff of fifteen at Custom Photographic Labs
which involved matching individual skills and work schedules with job
requirements. Evaluated employees regularly and made decisions
concerning hiring, promotions, and dismissals. Assisted with training
new hires and with annual employee evaluations at G&S Typesetters. 
Computer Skills
I regularly use the software applications Adobe Photoshop CS3, Adobe
Acrobat Professional, Filemaker Pro, Microsoft Word, and Stuffit. I am
familiar with, but not proficient in Adobe Illustrator CS3, and Microsoft
Excel. I regularly use utilities such as Rename and Tiff-Sight as well as
the ftp access software Fetch. I am quite comfortable with both Mac and
PC platforms. 
EDUCATION
MILITARY
SERVICE 
University of Texas at Austin
Bachelor of Arts—English
Minor in Photojournalism
Served in the United States Navy and Naval Reserve. 
Stationed in the Philippine Islands as Communications
Technician with top-secret security clearance. 
Honorable Discharge. 
References available on request
. 
