Lida Bresette Zolno	512-329-8239
2006 Big Canyon Drive	lbzolno@aol.com
Austin, TX  78746
Experience and Capabilities
More than 20 years working in marketing communications, advertising and public relations for international firms, agencies and as a freelance writer.  Have executed in-depth communications programs from developing proposals and making presentations to running large-scale special events, news conferences and seminars. Have written countless news releases, brochures, speeches and annual reports.  Have received numerous awards from the Public Relations Society of America, the International Association of Business Communicators, and from the Houston Advertising Federation, for both writing and event planning.
2005 – Present
Public Service Work
Board Member, Volunteer Healthcare Clinic.  Served three years as marketing chair for this organization that provides low-cost/free healthcare to the working poor of Austin.
Various positions with the Eanes Independent School District:  Westlake High School Guidance Committee (running the annual college fair and junior and senior class career days); public relations for the Westlake High School Swim Team; public relations chair for the Chap Club “Guitars and Golf” fundraiser, among others.
Member of Alumni Advisory Committee for Northwestern University.  Interview prospective students, speak at area high schools about the University, represent the school at college fairs.
1997 – 2005
Freelance writer and marketing communications projects for 3M, Continental Airlines and Seton.  Work included writing for the 3M website; bylined articles, speeches and event planning for Continental, and brochures and newsletters for the Seton cardiac program.
June 1993 – June 1996
Director of Communications/Marketing, Seton Healthcare Network, Austin, TX.  Responsible for overseeing all publications produced by the Seton network.  Managed staff of writers and designers.  Was primary contact with internal clients and physicians.  Wrote and produced “Good Health” magazine, various staff and physician newsletters, worked with outside advertising agency to develop media campaigns, developed various program brochures.
October 1991 – May 1993
Project work for Western Gas Corporation, Continental Airlines, and Intelliquest.  Work included lobbying on behalf of Western Gas before the Texas legislature, developing position papers, dealing with community organizations and hosting town meetings for this Colorado-based energy company.  For Continental, the projects involved speechwriting, news conferences and media relations on behalf of the airline’s cargo division.  Intelliquest, an Austin-based high-tech market research firm, required tombstone advertising and trade media news relations. 
July 1985 – September 1991
Senior Account Supervisor, Goodwin, Dannenbaum, Littman & Wingfield Advertising & Public Relations, Houston, TX.  Oversaw in-depth public relations campaigns for Texaco, Continental Airlines, First Interstate Bancorp, and Morrison-Knudsen, among others.  Developed new business, wrote proposals, handled media relations, numerous writing projects, lobbying efforts and special events.  Major projects included working with California-based First Interstate Bancorp on their acquisition and name-change of 51 Allied Banks across Texas, and working with Boise, Idaho-based Morrison-Knudsen and former lieutenant governor Ben Barnes on the plan to build high-speed rail in Texas (Texas TGV).
May 1983 – May 1985
Account Supervisor, Daniel J. Edelman Public Relations, Chicago, IL.  Responsible for all ongoing public relations and investor relations for several clients in the business/financial division of Edelman’s Chicago office.  Clients included Deloitte, Haskins & Sells, World Book Encyclopedia, and the Official Airline Guide, among others.  Wrote annual reports, brochures, newsletters, media relations.
June 1978 – April 1982
Marketing /Communications Representative, The First National Bank of Chicago.  Responsible for special events planning and public relations projects for the Cash Management Division.  Wrote brochures, annual reports, newsletters, and speeches for internal clients.
Education
Bachelor of Science in Journalism, Northwestern University’s Medill School of Journalism, Evanston, IL
Graduate work toward MBA in Marketing, DePaul University, Chicago, IL
