Page 1
William Robert Robinson, II
Austin, Texas
512-934-7531
 wrrobinson@gmail.com
SUMMARY OF QUALIFICATIONS
Marketing executive with extensive management experience in translating strategic guidance into tactical action for
commercial and consumer products and services distributed worldwide in support of both transactional and relationship sales models.
EXPERIENCE
September 2007 - Current
PharmaMeal – Chief Executive Officer, Austin, Texas
Contract Chief Executive Officer for an Austin, Texas based business to business service company that supports pharmaceutical
representatives and medical professionals through the planning, coordination, and delivery of high-quality cuisine and through the
complete documentation of transactions ensure pharmaceutical representative compliance with Food and Drug Administration
documentation mandates. Publically launched in October 2007, PharmaMeal has supported via online and telephonic ordering
capability over 50 sales representatives by providing over 2,000 meals for the Austin medical professional community. Key
accomplishments include:
x  Development Of Service Messaging And Branding To Drive Service Awareness In The Highly Disaggregated Pharmaceutical
Representative Support Space.
x  Development And Delivery Of Transaction Supporting B2B Website (PharmaMeal.com) And Content Rich PharmaNews And
Views Blog.
x  Deployment Of Print And Online Advertising Campaigns To Drive Customer Awareness And Demand Generation.
August 2006 – September 2007
ONSITE Electronic Discovery – Vice President Of Marketing, Austin, Texas
Vice President of Marketing for an Arlington, Virginia based company that is a top five provider of electronic discovery solutions to
include eForensics, eDiscovery, eReview, and consulting for corporations and law firms desiring one stop support for all litigation
services. Directly responsible for the planning and execution of all marketing projects and programs. Key accomplishments include:
x  Corporate Messaging Update And Rebrand To Drive Corporate Awareness In The Fast Growing Electronic Discovery Space.
x  Development And Delivery Of New Corporate Website (onsite3.com) That Serves As Center Of Gravity For All Corporate
Messaging Dissemination.
x  Establishment Of Formal Media And Analyst Relations Program To Maximize Market Understanding And To Ensure Proper
Positioning Of Both The Company and Company Services In The Market Place.
x  Development And Deployment Of Online Demand Generation Programs Designed To Drive Customer Interest And Subsequent
Sales Opportunities.
x  Development And Deployment Of Service Launch Materials And Training For Three New Services Targeting The Enterprise
Electronic Discovery Market.
July 2005 – July 2006
Renew Data Corporation – Senior Director Of Marketing, Austin, Texas
Marketing Director for an Austin, Texas based company that is a leading provider of information governance solutions to include
compliance (email) archiving, preservation archiving, and electronic evidence services for corporations and law firms that need strategic
proactive and immediate reactive solutions for audits, ediscovery and investigations. Directly responsible for the planning and execution
of assigned marketing projects. Key accomplishments include:
x  Research And Development Of Market Sizing For Compliance Driven Email Archiving And Electronic Discovery Market.
x  Planning And Deployment Of Application Service Provider Based Electronic Communication Capability For The Rapid And
Accurate Dissemination Of Information To Industry Analysts, Media Contacts, Partners, And Customers.
x  Development And Deployment Of Electronic Discovery Marketing And Sales Programs Designed To Meet Customer Needs
Ranging From Individual To Enterprise Projects.
x  Development And Deployment Of Deployment Of Marketing And Sales Information In Support Of The Launch Of Compliance
Services Targeted At The Email Archiving Market.
Page 2
October 2000 - May 2005
Crossroads Systems, Inc. – Director Of Marketing, Austin, Texas
Director of Marketing for an Austin, Texas based Technology Company that is a leading provider of storage network routing products
and an emerging provider of network centric database security and performance products. Directly responsible for the planning and
execution of marketing and marketing communications activities for two product lines that are moved to market OEM, two-tier
distribution, and/or direct sales models. Key accomplishments include:
x  Development And Deployment Of Corporate Website, Partner Extranet And Public Relations CRM Allowing For The Rapid And
Accurate Dissemination Of Information To Industry Analysts, Media Contacts, Partners, And Customers
x  Development of Sales/Marketing Lead Generation Process and Program To Ensure Rapid Demand Generation As Well As The
Mechanism To Report Status In A Concise Manner To Executive Management Team.
x  Development And Dissemination Of All Corporate And Product Messaging Via Print And Digital Modes Of Communication.
x  Development And Deployment Of OEM And Channel Marketing Activities To Include Product Training, Service Training And
Demand Generation In Support Of North American And European OEM And Channel Partners
x  Product Launch And Sustainment Of Four Enterprise-Class Product Families And Services Into Both North America And Europe
x  Management Of Four Direct Report Managers In Product Management, Product Marketing, and MARCOM Roles As Well As
Individual Contributorship In Development And Writing Of Corporate And Product Messaging.
JUNE 2000 – OCTOBER 2000
Azurix – Director Of Procurement Services – WaterDesk.com, Houston, Texas
Director Of Procurement Services responsible for the strategy, development, launch and maintenance of Internet based B2B
marketplace (exchange) focused on enabling ecommerce procurement activity for the $23 Billion water and wastewater industry. Key
accomplishments include:
x  Launch Of B2B Portal For Both US And European Buyers And Suppliers On Time Within Budget
x  Development Of Product Strategy For Online Procurement And Online Auction Tools As Part Of B2B Portal
x  Creation Of B2B Marketplace Value That Resulted In Acquisition Of WaterDesk.com
DECEMBER 1996 – JUNE 2000
COMPAQ COMPUTER CORPORATION – Product Marketing Manager, Houston, Texas
Product Marketing Manager for Compaq’s Prosignia and Deskpro brand of personal computers - winner of over fifty industry awards.
Directly responsible for the planning, coordination, and execution of product marketing and launch activities centered on hardware,
software, and internet enabled offerings targeted at both enterprise and small and medium business markets. Key accomplishments
include:
x  Launch Of Prosignia Family Of Desktop Computers Resulting In Generating Over 700 Million Dollars In Revenue
x  Development Of Internet Service Strategy For Scoping, Evaluating And Licensing Of Internet Services
x  Development Of Marketing Requirements Documents For Small And Medium Business Hardware And Software
x  Development Of Strategic Forecasting Model Used In Translating Business Opportunity Into Product Sales
x  Execution Of Channel Programs To Include Marketing And Sales Promotions For Over 30 Distributors And 10,000 Resellers
x  Launch And Management Of Two Commercial Desktop Families Into North America Technology Channel
x  Development And Implementation Of Direct Reseller Partner Program For Commercial Desktop Products
x  Development Of Internet-based Marketing Initiatives To Include The Product Information Tool. Currently Still Distributed To
Over 5,000 Hewlett Packard Partners
MARCH 1993 - NOVEMBER 1996
ELI LILLY & COMPANY - Neuropsychiatric Sales & Marketing Representative
Health Care Specialist for a Fortune 100 Health Care Company, responsible for the business development of Eli Lilly's
psychopharmaceutical products within both the public and governmental sectors of the State Of Arkansas. Accomplishments include:
x  Successful Territory Sales Launch Of Zyprexa, Lilly's New Antipsychotic
x  Successful Sales Maintenance Activities For Prozac, Lilly’s Market Leading Antidepressant
PFIZER, INC. - Central Nervous System Sales Representative
Health Care Specialist for a Fortune 100 Health Care Companies, responsible for the translation of corporate sales and marketing
strategies into specific business goals and sales activities targeted at all medical professionals within the fourth largest metropolitan
area in the United States. Key accomplishments include:
x  Territory Sales Ranking Moving From A Ranking Of 450/452 To 1/452 In Less Than One Year
x  Ranking In Top 10% Of Sales Representatives For Two Year Cumulative Sales Performance
Page 3
AUGUST 1985 - AUGUST 1992
U.S. ARMY - Troop Commander/Pilot, El Paso, Texas
Air Cavalry Troop Commander responsible for the supervision of thirty-four individuals in all military activities to include personnel
management, mission training, and property maintenance programs. Key accomplishments include:
x  Increased Maintenance Production By 21% And Operation Capability By 400% Without An Increase In Resources
x  Received Highest Possible Organizational Training Ratings For Aviation Readiness
U.S. ARMY - Operations Officer, El Gorah, Egypt
Responsible for operational and maintenance tasks of a 113 member team supporting the U.S. State Department's Camp David Accord
Compliance Program in the politically sensitive Middle East. Key accomplishments included:
x  Development And Deployment Of Aerial Surveillance Program For Eleven Nation Multinational Force
x  Received Highest Possible Ratings For Maintaining Expenditures Within 1% Of Projections Despite A Non-Projected 50%
Activity Increase In Support Of Persian Gulf War Requirements
U.S. ARMY - Operations Officer, Nuremberg, Germany
Responsible for the administration of an aerial surveillance program along the politically sensitive border between East
Germany, Czechoslovakia, and West Germany. Key accomplishments include:
x  Trained And Evaluated All U.S. Pilots Operating Within Five Miles Of Border, Resulting In Over 600 Flights Without Incident
And Conducted Tactical Planning And Coordination For A 515 Member / 74 Helicopter Aviation Unit
x  Recognized And Published In Aviation Digest For Writings On Small Unit Military Operations.
EDUCATION
Graduate Studies (Business), University of Arkansas. Grade Point of 3.5. August 1992 - January1993.
B.B.A. (Business Administration), University of Mississippi. Grade Point of 3.5. August 1981 - August 1985.
AWARDS/HONORS/CONTRIBUTIONS
Weblog Rated As A Top Online Resource For Electronic Discovery By The American Bar Association (2006 & 2007)
Establishment Of Information Governance Engagement Area Weblog/RSS Feed (2005)
University Of Texas Executive Education – Completion Financial Analysis In Measuring Business Performance (2003)
Technology Channel Group – Completion Of Channel Partnering Results Optimization Seminar (2003)
Developed Community Website For The Barbara Bush Library In Houston, Texas (2000)
Developed Digital Marketing Tools Featured In Computer Reseller News And Smart Reseller Magazines (1998)
Pfizer Vice-President's Club Member (1996)
Pfizer Regional Topper Club Member (1995)
Pfizer District Representative of the Quarter (Six Awards/1994 & 1995)
Meritorious Service Medal for Military Performance (1992)
Cum Laude Graduate in Business (1985)
Collegiate Football Scholarship /Varsity Football Letter for Athletic Contributions (1981)
