Minutes  Zoning Board of Appeals  MARCH 9, 2022
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
STEPHEN E. MELTZER, CHAIR | EDWARD COSGROVE, VICE CHAIR 
HEATHER O’DONNELL, CLERK | JOHN P. MCKENNA | LAP YAN
MITCHELL J. MATORIN | LEONARD LEVY 
MEMORIAL BUILDING – ROOM B2
150 CONCORD STREET, FRAMINGHAM, MA 01702
508.532.5456 – [URL: "mailto:ZBA@FRAMINGHAMMA.GOV"] ZBA@FRAMINGHAMMA.GOV
MINUTES: MARCH 9, 2022
BLUMER COMMUNITY ROOM/REMOTE
OPEN SESSION, 7:00 PM
CALL TO ORDER
Edward Cosgrove, Board Vice Chair, called the meeting to order at 7:00 pm and read the details of Governor Baker’s
Executive Order of March 12, 2020 that suspended certain provisions of the Open Meeting Law, due to the state of
emergency caused by the outbreak of the COVID-19 virus. Board members and some meeting contributors are
participating in this evening’s meeting remotely by telephone and Zoom video conferencing and in person conference. 
The meeting is also being recorded. Mr. Cosgrove asked for a Zoning Board attendance rollcall: 
Members Present in person: Edward Cosgrove; Heather O’Donnell; Leonard Levy; John McKenna
Members Present via remote conference: Lap Yan; Mitchell Matorin
Members Absent: Stephen Meltzer
The meeting quorum confirmed. Mr. Cosgrove reviewed the meeting agenda and rules. 
HEARINGS: NEW
22-03, 318 Bishop Street – Silva Development, LLC, D: 7, Z: G
Special Permit to demolish the existing building and to construct a 2-unit residential property
on the lot
Decision Deadline: 90 days close of hearing
Sitting on the hearing: Mr. Levy, Mr. Cosgrove, Ms. O’Donnell. 
Mr. Cosgrove stated the applicant’s advertisement into the record. 
Paul Desimone, the Applicant’s representative, stated that current structure is pre-existing non-
conforming and will be demolished. Mr. Desimone stated that the new structure will conform to
the rear and side setbacks with two small driveways. Mr. Desimone stated that existing water
and sewer systems will be utilized. Mr. Desimone stated that the current water shed goes from
the center of the lot down to each side other than the back. Mr. Desimone stated that the new
structure will conform to height requirements. Mike Haranas, the Applicant’s representative, 
stated that a two-family dwelling is only permitted by approval of the ZBA, which is why the
Applicant is before the Board. Mr. Haranas stated that the neighborhood already has two- or
multi-family dwellings. Mr. Haranas stated that the minimum lot size is eight-thousand (8,000) 
and the current lot size is slightly above eight-thousand and seven hundred (8,700) square feet. 
Ms. O’Donnell questioned if the two-family dwelling would be owner occupied. Mr. Haranas
stated that the Applicant’s aim is to sell the two-family dwelling, not to necessary rent the two
units. Mr. Matorin questioned the driveway setup. Mr. Desimone stated that the one driveway
City of Framingham  Page 1 of 5 
Page 2
Minutes  Zoning Board of Appeals  MARCH 9, 2022
will become two. Mr. Yan questioned if the property would become affordable units. Mr. 
Haranas stated that the two-family dwellings would be sold at the market rate, and not rented. 
Mr. O’Brien stated public testimony into the record. 
Christa Karnish, a community member, stated a concern with the number of bedrooms in each
unit. Ms. Karnish stated the building might be too large for the neighborhood, and not necessarily
fit in. 
Mr. Cosgrove stated that a site visit could be beneficial. Mr. Cosgrove stated a concern that there
are neighborhood concerns about the new structure fitting in with the current homes. Mr. Levy
stated that a site visit could be beneficial. Mr. Levy stated that the lot coverage is doubling, but
still underneath the maximum thirty-five percent (35%). Mr. Desimone stated that there are
garages for each unit, so parking shouldn’t be an issue. Mr. Desimone stated that there will be
plenty of front lawn space. Mr. Haranas stated that these two homes will be sold at market rate
and will most likely be sold quickly, as it is an ideal home for couple or young family. 
Michael Coratola, the Applicant’s representative, stated that the Historical Commission
approved the demolition of the current structure. Mr. Haranas stated that the initial structure
was built in the late 1800s. 
Mr. Yan stated that the Applicant has attempted to propose a structure as best they could within
the conditions of the bylaws. Mr. Matorin stated in agreement with Mr. Yan. Mr. Cosgrove stated
that completing a site visit is worth pursuing given the neighbor’s feedback. 
Moved: to continue to April 13, 2022. No discussion. 
Motion: Mr. Cosgrove 
Vote: O’Donnell-yes, Levy-yes, Cosgrove-yes 
Second: Ms. O’Donnell 
SIGN HEARINGS: NEW 
22-02, 571 Worcester Road - RS&H Massachusetts, Inc., D: 4, Z: B
Variance to allow construction of an accessory ATM drive-through structure over 7'-0" in height
Decision Deadline: April 10, 2022
Sitting on the hearing: Mr. McKenna, Mr. Yan, Mr. Matorin. 
Mr. McKenna stated the applicant’s advertisement into the record. 
Carlo Panloflora, the Applicant’s representative, stated that the proposed sign is for a
freestanding ATM. Mr. Panloflora stated that the new ATM is being constructed as separate from
current pedestrian and vehicle traffic. Mr. Panlorflora stated that the ATM will not be creating
an additional traffic. Mr. Panloflora stated that the ATM structure has already been approved by
the Planning Board. Mr. Panloflora stated that the ATM is in its own dedicated aisle and island
away from the main building. Mr. Panloflora stated the freestanding ATM design is consistent
with branding at other locations. Mr. Panloflora stated that the ATM design will help to provide
coverage for those pulling in to access it. 
Mr. Levy stated that the original design was denied because it is over seven (7) feet. Mr. Levy
questioned if the Applicant had submitted paperwork for this as a sign versus a structure. Mr. 
Panloflora stated that the Applicant was advised to apply for a signage variance. Mr. Matorin
Cit y of Fram ingham  Page 2 of 5 
Page 3
Minutes  Zoning Board of Appeals  MARCH 9, 2022
stated that the building department’s denial is rooted in a bylaw about drive-through access for
food service entities, which isn’t applicable for this Applicant. Mr. Matorin stated that Planning
Board has already approved the structure, but the initial denial of the signage doesn’t make
sense for what is presented. Mr. Matorin questioned the following procedural steps. Mr. O’Brien
stated that the denial is rooted in bylaws that aren’t appropriate for what is presented and the
Applicant could appeal the decision. 
Mr. McKenna stated that the protrusion on the structure is nine (9) feet and has signage on it. 
Todd Ford, the Applicant’s representative, stated that the signage is directional. Mr. McKenna
stated that the signage seems excessive with the building being so close. Mr. McKenna
questioned if additional signage for the main building is being proposed. Mr. Cosgrove stated in
agreement that the total amount of signage should be considered. Mr. Cosgrove stated that the
signage above the canopy is advertising in nature, but the signs below are directional. Mr. 
Cosgrove questioned the signage that is currently on the building. Mr. Panloflora stated that
there is a wall sign and sign in front of the entire complex not just the Applicant’s main building. 
Mr. Yan questioned if the proposed signage is the company standard. Mr. Panloflora stated that
it is the standard. Mr. Yan stated that the company standard does not necessarily fit the city’s
bylaws. 
Ms. O’Donnell questioned why the proposed ATM was not the shorter structure of the two
detailed in the Applicant’s proposal. Mr. Ford stated that the ATM structure would have still been
over seven (7) feet to accommodate a ten (10) foot vehicle clearance. Mr. Matorin stated that
non-compliant signs are being proposed, however the application is in regards to the
construction of the ATM itself. Mr. Matorin stated that the Applicant could withdraw their
application and consult with the Building Commissioner prior to re-submitting. Mr. O’Brien
stated that the ZBA could seek clarification from the building department. Mr. O’Brien stated
that the ZBA should render a decision based on what was advertised in the legal notice. Mr. 
Cosgrove stated that it would be up to the Applicant if they’d like to reproach the Building
Commissioner regarding their denial, or the ZBA could work through a mutual decision at the
present meeting. Mr. Levy stated that the total signage package needs to be looked at. Mr. 
Cosgrove stated that the structure has been approved, but the signage has not. 
Mr. Ford stated that the Applicant pushed for further clarification from the Building
Commissioner and were stuck in a series of continual conversations. Mr. McKenna stated that
the Applicant could continue this hearing until next month to see the signage modified to be
more directional in nature. Mr. McKenna stated that another option is to seek clarification from
the Building Commissioner or to hold a vote at the present meeting. Mr. Ford stated that the
ATM structure could contain signage just below the canopy and not above. Mr. Ford stated that
the ATM structures are pre-fabricated and manufactured so it’s unclear how much flexibility the
Applicant’s representatives could provide. Mr. Cosgrove stated that if the structure is below
seven (7) feet, then the signs can be approved as appropriate directional signage. Mr. Matorin
questioned the number of signs that counts towards two (2) signs if directional signage is utilized. 
Mr. Yan questioned if the company’s logo could be substituted with a graphical representation. 
Mr. Matorin stated a portion of the signage bylaw that’s pertinent to internal parking directional
signage. Mr. Ford stated that the official Applicant’s logo is the language that’s presented. Mr. 
Matorin questioned the size of the signage. Mr. McKenna stated that the circular symbol is
eleven-point-seventy-five (11.75) inches in diameter. Mr. Yan stated that the language on the
sign is less directional and more advertising-based. Mr. Panloflora stated that any other
proposed changes beyond just having the shorter ATM signage would need to be vetted through
Cit y of Fram ingham  Page 3 of 5 
Page 4
Minutes  Zoning Board of Appeals  MARCH 9, 2022
marketing prior to approval. Mr. Matorin questioned if the signs are illuminated. Mr. Panloflora
stated that they are backlit at static, low lumens, so the ATM is still lit at night. Mr. O’Brien stated
that the ATM is twenty-four (24) hour access. Mr. Panloflora stated slight illumination is
beneficial for safety around accessing the ATM. Mr. Yan stated that just having the Applicant’s
logo rather than the entire business name would be better. Mr. Panloflora stated that further
consultation with the Applicant is needed. 
Shannon Eisenwright, the Applicant’s representative, stated that retail branches are not
permitted to use just the circular business logo. Mr. Matorin stated that a business name is not
inherently advertising according to the bylaws. Mr. Matorin questioned the overall sign square
footage. Mr. McKenna stated that it is fifteen (15) square footage total, with three (3) five (5) 
square feet signs. Mr. Cosgrove questioned if the signs could be shrunk to four (4) square feet. 
Ms. Eisenwright stated that accommodations can be made. 
Moved: to approve the application with the secondary structure design choice without the
above canopy protrusion, with the limitation that each sign will be four square feet. No
discussion. 
Motion: Mr. Matorin  Second: Mr. Yan 
Vote: Matorin-yes, McKenna-yes, Yan-yes
OTHER BUISNESS
20-23, 85 Walnut Street - Robert Vinskus and 85 Walnut Street LLC, D: 5, Z: R-1
Variance to rebuild single family residence and front yard setback 30’ required
Second request for an extension received on February 24, 2022 – per section 7.12 of ZBA 
decision dated September 9, 2020 stamped by the City Clerk on September 23, 2020. First 
extension expires on March 9, 2022
Sitting on the hearing: Mr. Cosgrove, Ms. O’Donnell, Mr. McKenna. 
Mr. Cosgrove stated the applicant is seeking an extension on a previous decision. 
Robert Vinskus, the Applicant’s representative, stated that the notice of intent has been filed
with the Conservation Commission and required conditions are pending. Mr. Vinskus stated that
utilities have been removed from the site and the Applicant is currently working with the EPA on
asbestos abatement due to asbestos in the roof shingles. Mr. Vinskus stated that the next steps
would be to demolish the building, but the prior conditions need to be met. Ms. O’Donnell stated
that the community is looking forward to seeing the proposed project be completed. 
Moved: to approve an extension for six months, until September 14, 2022. No discussion. 
Motion: Mr. Matorin  Second: Mr. Yan 
Vote: McKenna-yes, O’Donnell-yes, Cosgrove-yes
Discussion Continued: Minimum requirements for ZBA submission
Mr. Cosgrove stated that the ZBA can continue this conversation when Mr. Meltzer is present at
the meeting. 
Discussion: ZBA Application – Fee Schedule due to the legal notice rate increase
Mr. O’Brien stated that the Metro West Daily News increased the cost of a legal advertisement
and they now require pre-payment. Mr. O’Brien stated that the ZBA could increase the fee
schedule or have Applicant’s directly pay for the legal notices. Mr. McKenna questioned if
another newspaper could be used. Mr. O’Brien stated that the newspaper needs to produce to
Cit y of Fram ingham  Page 4 of 5 
Page 5
Minutes  Zoning Board of Appeals  MARCH 9, 2022
a general circulation in print. Mr. O’Brien stated that the hope is to have the state law amended, 
but for now the city needs to find a solution. Mr. O’Brien stated that that language in the legal
advertisements can be shortened and consolidated. Mr. Cosgrove stated that the city could pay
the legal advertisement fees upfront and then have the Applicant reimburse the city. Mr. Levy
stated that an average cost for a legal advertisement could be generated and then pre-charged
to the Applicant when they submit their Application materials. 
MINUTES ACCEPTANCE 
Ms. O’Donnell made a motion to approve the minutes of February 9, 2022 as presented; Mr. 
Matorin seconded. No discussion. 
VOTE: Yan-yes; Cosgrove-yes; Levy-yes; O’Donnell-yes; Matorin-yes; McKenna-yes
ADJOURNMENT
Moved: to adjourn at 8:55 pm. No discussion. 
Motion: Mr. Levy  Second: Ms. O’Donnell
Vote: Yan-yes; Cosgrove-yes; O’Donnell-yes; Matorin-yes; McKenna-yes; Levy-yes 
Cit y of Fram ingham  Page 5 of 5 
