In attendance: 
7:02PM
7:03PM
7:04PM
7:05PM
7:06PM 
7:07PM
7:08PM
7:16PM
8:07PM 
Strategic Initiatives & Financial Oversight Committee (SIFOC) 
Remote Meeting Via Zoom
Monday January 10, 2022
7:00PM
MINUTES – Approved January 31, 2022
David Mawhinney, Chair; Mary Kate Feeney (Vice Chair), Scott Ellinwood, Joel
Francis, James Culhane, Bill McCarthy, David Kiklis, and LeRoy Watkins. 
Mr. Mawhinney called the meeting to order. 
Mr. Mawhinney started the meeting by raising the need to approve meeting
minutes for the September, November, and December Committee meetings, as
well as the October ARPA summit. 
Mr. McCarthy made a motion to approve the September 13, 2021 minutes and
Mr. Ellinwood seconded the motion. The motion carried unanimously with Ms. 
Feeney and Mr. Watkins abstaining. 
Mr. Mawhinney made a motion to approve the October 2021 ARPA
subcommittee meeting minutes and Ms. Feeney seconded the motion. The
motion carried unanimously among the members of the subcommittee. 
Ms. Feeney made a motion to approve the November 15, 2021 minutes and Mr. 
McCarthy seconded the motion. The motion carried unanimously
Mr. Mawhinney made a motion to approve the December 13, 2021 minutes and
Mr. Francis seconded the motion. The motion carried unanimously with Ms. 
Feeney abstaining. 
Mr. Mawhinney then moved on to the Committee’s End of Year report as it
currently stands and laid out a plan to review the document during the meeting. 
Committee members with deliverables noted that they would prepare their
sections for the Committee End of Year report by the end of the week. In light
of the need for the additional sections and the desire to deliver the report to
the new administration, a follow up meeting for Monday January 31, 2022 was
proposed by Mr. Mawhinney as an opportunity to finalize the report. 
Discussion then ensued for the remainder of the working portion of the meeting
that covered the editing of the current draft report and merging together
existing sections as appropriate. Significant discussion was had on the Water
and Sewer Enterprise fund, its debt servicing, strategic direction. Mr. Culhane
agree to provide additional feedback on the existing write-up with Mr. 
Ellinwood and Mr. Francis to review. 
The Committee then agreed to hold its next meeting on Monday January 31st, 
2022. The meeting will be held by Zoom. 
Page 2
8:08PM  Mr. Culhane then moved to adjourn the meeting and Mr. McCarthy seconded. 
The motion was approved unanimously and the meeting adjourned. 
