Minutes  Zoning Board of Appeals  JANUARY 12, 2022
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
STEPHEN E. MELTZER, CHAIR | EDWARD COSGROVE, VICE CHAIR 
HEATHER O’DONNELL, CLERK | JOHN P. MCKENNA | LAP YAN
MITCHELL J. MATORIN | LEONARD LEVY 
MEMORIAL BUILDING – ROOM B2
150 CONCORD STREET, FRAMINGHAM, MA 01702
508.532.5456 – [URL: "mailto:ZBA@FRAMINGHAMMA.GOV"] ZBA@FRAMINGHAMMA.GOV
MINUTES: JANUARY 12, 2022
REMOTE
OPEN SESSION, 7:00 PM
CALL TO ORDER
Stephen Meltzer, Board Chair, called the meeting to order at 7:00 pm and read the details of Governor Baker’s Executive
Order of March 12, 2020 that suspended certain provisions of the Open Meeting Law, due to the state of emergency
caused by the outbreak of the COVID-19 virus. Board members and some meeting contributors are participating in this
evening’s meeting remotely by telephone and Zoom video conferencing. The meeting is also being recorded. Mr. Meltzer
asked for a Zoning Board attendance rollcall; Yan-present; Cosgrove-present; McKenna-present; O’Donnell-present; 
Meltzer-present; Levy-present; Matorin-present the meeting quorum confirmed. 
Mr. Meltzer reviewed the meeting agenda and rules. 
HEARINGS: CONTINUED
21-27, 45 Chouteau Ave - Mark Smith, D: 2, Z: R-1 (SM, HO, RM; MM alt)
Finding to allow a new second floor as a vertical extension of a pre-existing non-conforming single-family
dwelling in R-1 zone
Decision Deadline: January 28, 2022
Sitting on the hearing: Mr. Meltzer, Mr. McKenna, Ms. O’Donnell; Alternate: Mr. Matorin. 
Mark Smith, the Applicant’s representative, stated the change in roofline for a total new roofline
of twenty-five point sixty-nine feet (25.69). Mr. Smith stated that the ceiling would be raised and
then trusses would be added to support the new roof. Mr. Smith stated that a revised floorplan
shows how the second floor becomes more useable. Mr. Smith stated that the square footage
increased by approximately three hundred (300) square feet. 
Mr. McKenna stated a concern over the total number of bedrooms. Mr. Smith stated that there
are currently three (3) bedrooms and the Applicant is proposing adding one additional bedroom
for a total of four (4). Mr. Yan stated a concern over the floor-area-ratio. Mr. Smith stated that
it would increase from 0.145 to 0.183. Mr. Smith stated that there is not a maximum floor-area-
ratio for residential zoning. Mr. Yan stated that there is an allowable maximum floor-area-ratio. 
Ms. O’Donnell stated that one is not listed in the bylaws. 
Moved: to approve as presented. No discussion. 
Motion: Ms. O’Donnell
Vote: O’Donnell-yes, Meltzer-yes, McKenna-yes 
Second: Mr. McKenna
City of Framingham  Page 1 of 5 
Page 2
Minutes
HEARINGS: NEW 
Zoning Board of Appeals  JANUARY 12, 2022
21-29, 350 (aka 300) Irving Street – Landscape Depot, Inc. and NSTAR Gas Company d/b/a
Eversource Energy, D: 9, Z: M
Amend previously issued Special Permits for storage and distribution in case no. 19-13 & case no. 20-06 in
order to replace the existing sales office/retail modular unit with a new, double-width modular unit, and
extend the existing Special Permit for an additional three years
Decision Deadline: 90 days close of hearing
Sitting on the hearing: Mr. Meltzer, Mr. Cosgrove, Ms. O’Donnell; Alternate: Mr. Matorin. 
Mr. Meltzer stated the applicant’s advertisement into the record. 
Paul Galvani, the Applicant’s representative, stated that the Applicant’s business model remains
the same, in that they are a wholesale landscaping company. Mr. Galvani stated that the
property contains a small trailer and outdoor storage. Mr. Galvani stated that the Applicant is
seeking to replace the small trailer, or modular unit, with a double-wide modular unit that would
continue to serve as an office space. Mr. Galvani stated that the Applicant is also asking that the
special permit be extended for an additional three (3) years as it expires in September 2022. Mr. 
Galvani stated that there has always been a modular unit on site to serve as an office and has
been replaced once in the past decade. Mr. Galvani stated that five (5) employees work for the
current modular unit. Mr. Galvani stated that the current modular unit is nine hundred and sixty-
nine (969) square feet and would increase to one-thousand and four hundred and eighty-eight
(1,488) if a double-wide modular unit was permitted. Mr. Galvani stated that additional parking
would be required, however the Applicant already meets the additional parking requirement
with current spaces. Mr. Galvani stated that the special permit conditions continue to be met. 
Mr. Galvani stated that the Applicant will be filing for minor site plan review with the Planning
Board, pending the Zoning Board of Appeal’s decision. 
Mr. Cosgrove stated a concern over current soil and environmental testing. Mr. Galvani stated
that there has not been a change. Mr. Galvani stated that the site can’t be disturbed, which is
why a modular unit is being proposed. John Mullen, the Applicant’s representative, stated that
the site is continually monitored by the DEP. Mr. Mullen stated that monthly and quarterly
monitoring are done, and that there have not been any updates in the last twelve (12) months. 
Mr. Cosgrove stated that the Zoning Board should continue to hold a three (3) year re-permitting
process. Mr. Cosgrove stated that a double-wide modular unit is acceptable. 
Ms. O’Donnell stated a concern over water and waste management. Mr. Galvani stated that
there is not a sewer system and the bathrooms are periodically serviced. Mr. Galvani stated that
the Applicant remains in compliance with DPW and the Board of Health. Mr. Galvani stated that
water tanks will be serviced approximately with the double-wide modular unit. Ms. O’Donnell
stated a concern over water runoff. Mr. Galvani stated that the water runoff will not be
impacted. 
Moved: to approve as presented, with the condition that if the modular unit is moved on site, 
it needs to be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals. No discussion. 
Motion: Mr. Cosgrove  Second: Ms. O’Donnell 
Vote: O’Donnell-yes, Meltzer-yes, Cosgrove-yes
21-30, 804 Waverley Street – Charles Zammuto, Manager, D: 8, Z: B
Variance to allow proposed mixed-use development within front setbacks
Cit y of Fram ingham  Page 2 of 5 
Page 3
Minutes  Zoning Board of Appeals
Decision Deadline: March 30, 2022 
JANUARY 12, 2022
Sitting on the hearing: Mr. Meltzer, Mr. Cosgrove, Ms. O’Donnell. 
Mr. Meltzer stated the applicant’s advertisement into the record. 
Terry Morris, the Applicant’s representative, stated that the Applicant has already gone before
the Planning Board and the hearing was continued into February. Mr. Morris stated an elevation
of the proposed building. Mr. Morris stated that the triangular lot is unusual and presents a
hardship. Mr. Morris stated that the necessary setback of thirty (30) feet is unable to be met. 
Mr. Morris stated that the property nearly meets all of the business requirements. Mr. Morris
stated that the bungalow that is currently on the property is being demolished. Mr. Morris stated
that there is a sidewalk on only one side of the lot. Mr. Morris stated that the Applicant is
proposing to add a sidewalk to better improve pedestrian circulation. Mr. Morris stated that if a
building was constructed with a required thirty (30) foot setback, it would be nearly unusable. 
Mr. Morris stated that initial building on the site could not be built within the required setbacks, 
as a rectangular building couldn’t be built in general. Mr. Morris stated that the size and nature
of the lot presents a hardship. Mr. Morris stated that there is a need for smaller apartment units. 
Mr. Meltzer stated a concern over what the proposed setback would be. Mr. Morris stated that
the proposed setback would be ten (10) feet which matches the current side setback. 
Mr. Levy stated a concern over what type of use would be utilized in the business zoning. Mr. 
Morris stated that a single-use service practitioner, such as a lawyer or accountant could utilize
the space. Mr. Cosgrove stated that the Applicant’s proposal will be a significant change to the
neighborhood. Mr. Morris stated that the Applicant will be presenting at a Neighborhood
Association in the coming week. Mr. Cosgrove stated a concern over if the application before the
Zoning Board will be modified as a result of discussions with the Planning Board. Mr. Morris
stated that the application before the Zoning Board would not change. 
Ms. O’Donnell stated a concern over parking. Mr. Meltzer stated that the parking is not entirely
relevant to the application before the Zoning Board. Ms. Cosgrove stated a concern over finding
a tenant for the business use portion of the building. Mr. Yan stated a concern over the rental
price of the individual units. Mr. Morris stated that affordable housing of concern to the
Applicant. Mr. Morris stated that the Applicant has other rental properties in the city. 
John Stefanini, a community member, stated that the Neighborhood Association is interested in
the idea of mixed-use structures. Mr. Stefanini stated that broader re-zoning would be beneficial
over an individual process. Mr. Stefani stated issues around parking still need to be resolved. Mr. 
Stefanini stated that overall the project could be beneficial. Mr. Stefanini stated a preference to
the Zoning Board that they continue the hearing. Mr. Stefanini stated that the Neighborhood
Association is not opposed to the Applicant’s project. 
Mr. Meltzer stated that without a variance the Applicant would be unable to build anything on
the lot. Mr. Meltzer stated that the Applicant demonstrates a clear need in regards to receiving
a variance. Mr. Stefanini stated a concern over moving too quickly in the process of approving
pieces of the Applicant’s plan. Mr. Cosgrove stated in agreement with Mr. Stefanini that the
Applicant’s proposal is significantly different than what is in the neighborhood. Mr. Cosgrove
stated that the community should be a part of the process. Mr. Meltzer stated that the
community should be part of the process, however the variance needs to come first. Mr. Morris
Cit y of Fram ingham  Page 3 of 5 
Page 4
Minutes  Zoning Board of Appeals  JANUARY 12, 2022
stated in agreement that the process of community involvement is important. Mr. Levy stated a
concern over why the Applicant was before the Zoning Board then if the process of community
involvement hadn’t been completed. Mr. Meltzer stated that the consideration is a political one, 
not a technical one, which is why the Applicant is before the Zoning Board now. Mr. Morris stated
in agreement with Mr. Meltzer. 
Moved: to continue until February 9, 2022. No discussion. 
Motion: Mr. Cosgrove 
Vote: O’Donnell-yes, Meltzer-yes, Cosgrove-yes 
Second: Ms. O’Donnell 
OTHER BUISNESS 
Minimum requirements for ZBA submission
When submitting for a variance, the applicant shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  A site plan done by a professional surveyor with a licensed seal on the plan. This site plan
shall include any proposed work to be performed. The proposed work shall be clearly labeled
and marked out with dimension of the proposed work and setbacks dimensions from the
property line. 
2.  Floor Plans of the existing building and all proposed additions. The proposed additions
shall be clearly dimensioned. 
3.  Elevations of all 4 sides of the building with dimensions showing the height of the existing
building and any proposed additions. 
4.  A section through the building showing the proposed area of work. This section shall also
show the dimensions of the setback to the property lines. 
5.  All zoning calculations to include at a minimum, but not be limited, to Floor Area Ration
(FAR), Open Space Ratio (OSR), lot coverage and plantings. These calculations shall include all
allowable FAR, OSR, lot coverage as per Framingham zoning ordinances and how the proposed
work varies from the allowable ordinances. 
6.  Applicant can submit, but is not required, a 3D rendering if they feel it helps the Board
understand the application better. 
7.  A description of the current Zoning Type and any changes that are being requested. 
8.  If practical a photograph of the current neighborhood and a description of how the
variance would affect it. Drawings do not have to be prepared by a license Professional, but all
drawings are to be drawn to scale and professionally drawn, sufficiently well enough for the
Board to understand the full scope of the application
Mr. McKenna stated a concern over trying to streamline the process for Applicants, whereas the
requirements listed in the ZBA submission are redundant to what is required by the Building
Commissioner. Mr. O’Brien stated that the applicants that the Zoning Board receives is only a
denial permit from the Building Commissioner, but not the original application plans. Mr. Meltzer
stated that the Zoning Board should ask for the original application plans. Mr. O’Brien stated that
the building plans that Applicants submit are sometimes different than what is submitted to the
Building Commissioner. Mr. McKenna stated a concern over the guidelines proposed, that would
put a financial burden on some applicants where it wouldn’t be applicable. Mr. Cosgrove stated
that the case that prompted these guidelines is slightly different, as that case involved an
Applicant that had not yet pursued a building permit, which is not common. Mr. Meltzer stated
that a site plan could be required for the first guideline, and that a surveyed plan could be
recommended rather than required. Mr. McKenna stated a concern over what is required by the
Building Department. Ms. O’Donnell stated a concern over the seventh guideline. Mr. Yan stated
Cit y of Fram ingham  Page 4 of 5 
Page 5
Minutes  Zoning Board of Appeals  JANUARY 12, 2022
that the seventh guideline is in reference to knowing the data from the submission sheet. Mr. 
Meltzer stated that Mr. O’Brien should feel empowered to deny applications that are not fully
completed. Ms. O’Donnell stated that knowing what the Building Department requires would be
beneficial. Mr. O’Brien stated that Zoning Board staff can more thoroughly look through
submitted applications. Mr. Levy stated that the Building Department requirements are available
on the city’s website. Mr. Meltzer stated that further information on the Building Department’s
requirements can be circulated. 
MINUTES ACCEPTANCE 
Mr. Matorin made a motion to approve the minutes of December 8, 2021 as presented; Mr. 
Cosgrove seconded. No discussion. 
VOTE: Yan-yes; Cosgrove-yes; Levy-yes; O’Donnell-yes; Matorin-yes; Meltzer-yes; McKenna-yes
ADJOURNMENT
Moved: to adjourn at 8:39 pm. No discussion. 
Motion: Mr. Yan  Second: Mr. Cosgrove 
Vote: Yan-yes; Cosgrove-yes; O’Donnell-yes; Matorin-yes; Meltzer-yes; McKenna-yes; Levy-yes 
Cit y of Fram ingham  Page 5 of 5 
