CITY OF FRAMINGHAM 
FISCAL YEAR 2021 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT BUDGET PROPOSAL 
GENERAL FUND ACCOUNT 
WATER AN D SEWER ENTERPRISE FUND ACCOUNTS 
Dr. Yvonne M. Spicer 
Mayor 
Thatcher W. Kezer III 
Chief Operating Officer 
Mary Ellen Kelley 
Chief Financial Officer 
Page 2
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Key Plan— FY2021 Location Specific Project Map 
(PDF Document) 
FY2021 Capital Projects 
General Fund 
Library Department 
Systemwide Technology Upgrade Plan ..................................................................................................3
Technology Services Department 
Data Storage and Virtual Environment Upgrade ....................................................................................3
School Department 
Exterior Envelope ....................................................................................................................................4
Paving Replacement/Stormwater Improvements at Brophy School .......................................................4
Replacement of Rooftop Air Handling Units, Ventilation and HVAC, Barbieri School ............................5
Security Enhancements throughout the District ......................................................................................5
Facilities Department 
Energy/Sustainability Projects ................................................................................................................5
Pearl Street Garage Exterior Envelope and Stairwell Repairs ...............................................................6
Memorial Building Exterior Envelope Repairs ........................................................................................6
Department of Public Works 
Annual Roadway Improvements .............................................................................................................7
Dudley Road Landfill Closure—Alternatives Analysis ............................................................................8
Potter Road Bridge Rehabilitation Construction .....................................................................................8
Union Avenue Right of Way and Final Design (for TIP21) .....................................................................9
Edgell Road/Central Street Intersection—Final Design ........................................................................10 
Arlington Street Area, Drains and Roads Design .................................................................................10 
Unaccepted Streets Improvements—Harmony Lane, Bonvini Drive, and Sax Road ...........................11 
Annual Traffic Calming ..........................................................................................................................11 
Annual MS4 Permit Implementation .....................................................................................................12 
Annual Drainage System & Water Quality Projects ..............................................................................12 
Water and Sewer Enterprise Fund: Sewer 
Annual Wastewater Pump Station Capital Equipment Replacement ..................................................13 
Gates Street Sewer Pumping Station—Design & Construction ...........................................................13 
Annual Various Sewer Improvements ...................................................................................................14 
Sewer Defects Repairs Phase III—Construction ..................................................................................14 
Worcester Road Sewer, Phase II Construction and Phase III Design ..................................................15 
Water and Sewer Enterprise Fund: Water 
Worcester Road Water, Phase II Construction .....................................................................................15 
Annual Various Water Improvements ...................................................................................................15 
Annual Various Hydrant & Valve Improvements ...................................................................................16 
Merriam Hill Water Tank Repair and Replacement—Assessment .......................................................16 
Flagg Drive (Fuller Middle School) Water Main Design & Construction ...............................................17 
2 
Page 3
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Library Department—Systemwide Technology Upgrade Plan 
Requested Authorization - $245,040—Free Cash 
Request Description:
Working in partnership with the City Technology Service Department, the Library will implement a three-year
program beginning in FY2021, which will replace all of the old and cobbled-together bits and pieces of 
technology with uniform workstations managed from new servers using up-to-date software. This renovation of
equipment will free up staff resources for public services like training and digital immersion, partnering more
closely with the Framingham Public Schools, etc. The outcome of this funding request will be felt 
community-wide. The Library will create a technology environment that encourages access to information, 
fosters community engagement, shares resources and content with other City Departments and promotes 
educational achievement. It’s been said that the true Public Library is one of the few remaining places where
members of the community can gather as citizens rather than consumers. By upgrading and having an efficient
plan to keep our technology current and relevant the Library will enhance its role as a trusted information 
resource in Framingham. 
Request Justification: 
The Framingham Public Library is working against the technological tide. The vast majority of our public 
internet PCs and all of our Staff PCs are old and out of warranty, dating back to 2008 in some cases. Staff
PCs often require the installation of additional memory just so staff can use a web browser simultaneously with
library software, two basic job necessities. Public PCs break, need to be re-imaged or rebuilt using parts 
harvested from other broken PCs. Rather than serving this community as the hub of innovation and
knowledge, the Library’s resources are being diverted into the practice of getting by and making do. In addition
to old PCs, our infrastructure is out of date and not sustainable. Our two physical servers are reaching the end
of their reliable service life as of November 2019. The virtual machines inside those servers are running on
outdated server software. 
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Technology Services Department—Data Storage and Virtual Environment Upgrade 
Requested Authorization - $151,965—Free Cash 
Request Description:
The proposal is to upgrade the City of Framingham's current virtualized server and storage environment. The
environment consists of two physically separate data centers, which both have production applications running. 
This equipment is utilized City-wide 7 days a week, 24 hours a day. The amount recommended is based on a
five-year no-interest lease with a $1 buyout at the end of the lease term. This amount will be included in the 
remaining years of the capital plan. 
Request Justification: 
The proposed upgrade would address the performance and capacity issues we are currently experiencing. The
upgrade will also address equipment that will be going end of support in FY21. Currently, the City’s server 
environment is 88% virtualized with 83 virtualized servers. These servers include (but are not limited to) our
integrated financial system, Cisco phone system, e-mail, file and print, and network monitoring applications. 
Currently, we have 14 virtual hosts. We are looking to reduce our virtual hosts’ footprint by installing hosts that
have a greater density of memory and CPUs, likely resulting in a reduction in electrical and cooling costs at
both of our data centers. 
The upgrade is sized to accommodate growth projections to support the future technology needs for the City of
Framingham. Allowing us to virtualize some of the remaining physical servers. 
The proposed solution will also provide a more robust disaster recovery solution providing more support for an
automatic failover in the case of a catastrophic failure in our main data center. This solution will also help better
store and secure the City's critical data from the many new malicious threats municipalities now have to deal
with, like ransomware. 
3 
Page 4
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
School Department—Exterior Envelope 
Requested Authorization - $2,000,000 
Request Description:
This funding request will be used in accordance with a
developed scope of work prioritization plan spreadsheet
for the replacement or repair of an existing wall, window, 
or sealant system components within a recommended
timeline for multiple schools. 
Request Justification: 
Exterior walls, windows, sealant systems, and associated
components are to be removed and replaced within a
recommended timeline in phases. 
Stress cracked foundation at 
Walsh Middle School. 
Failed perimeter window sealant at 
Hemenway Elementary School. (Pictured Left) 
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
School Department—Paving Replacement/Stormwater Improvements 
At Brophy Elementary School 
Requested Authorization - $955,000 
Request Description:
This project appropriation will be used to upgrade the 
Brophy Elementary Schools existing driveway, parking lot
and stormwater system. 
Request Justification: 
This is an on-going request for upgrades to existing school
driveways, parking lots, and stormwater systems. This also
ties to the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) requirement that all City buildings stormwater run
-off including roofs, is pretreated before allowing 
stormwater to run into streams, brooks, ponds, etc. All of
this work will be performed under the utilization of the
DPW’s Unit Pricing Contract. 
Existing driveway and parking lot conditions
at the Brophy Elementary School. 
4 
Page 5
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
School Department—Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) - Replace
Rooftop Air Handling Units (AHU’s) and Ventilation—Barbieri Elementary School 
Request Authorization—$200,000 
Request Description:
This funding request will be used for the demolition and installation
of a new HVAC system to replace the existing system at the 
Barbieri Elementary School. 
Request Justification: 
The HVAC air handling unit on the rooftop at the south end of the
Barbieri Elementary School has failed and needs to be replaced. 
Barbieri Elementary School rooftop units. 
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
School Department—Security Enhancements throughout the District 
Requested Authorization - $235,200 
Request Description:
This funding request will be used to further support and enhance security measures for our schools. 
Request Justification: 
The School Department has implemented increased security measures throughout the District and continues to
be mindful of past and ongoing school related security events across our nation. 
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Facilities Department— Energy/Sustainability Projects 
Requested Authorization - $1,268,361 
 Please reference this link for project information. 
5 
Page 6
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Facilities Department— Pearl Street Garage Exterior Envelope and Stairwell Repairs 
Requested Authorization - $631,312 
Request Description:
The repair of the existing structure and stairwells are imperative to keep the garage open. If masonry repairs
are not completed soon, the concrete decking and structure will be unrepairable. 
Request Justification: 
A Feasibility Study was conducted in 2020 to evaluate the Pearl Street Garage. This study prioritized structural
and stairwell repairs to keep the garage functional in its current use. The garage is home to all of the Memorial
Building’s municipal vehicles and equipment storage for the Weights and Measures Department. If repairs are
not completed the garage will continue to deteriorate and be deemed unsafe for use. If this occurs, the garage
will have to be demolished. Exterior and interior of the Pearl Street Garage. 
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Facilities Department—Memorial Building Exterior Envelope Repairs 
Requested Authorization - $1,821,461 
Request Description:
The Memorial Building’s exterior existing masonry must be addressed before becoming unrepairable. 
Preventing water infiltration on the exterior facade will preserve and prevent additional deterioration. The 
precast masonry pieces are at a critical point, and several sections are not repairable and will need to be 
replicated. If the infiltration continues, the masonry brick facade will start to lose the bond to the building. The
brickwork is still in good condition despite its age; however, the mortar joints are starting to fail. 
Request Justification: 
A Feasibility Study was conducted in 2020 to evaluate the entire building along with mechanical systems. This
study prioritized necessary repairs to keep water infiltration from continuing the damage on the exterior facade
before the deterioration is total removal and rebuild. Addressing the exterior brick and masonry facade will 
continue to preserve the building's envelope. 
Exterior of the Memorial Building. 
6 
Page 7
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Highway Department—Annual Roadway Improvements 
Requested Authorization - $3,100,000 
Request Description:
This program provides funding for the roadway resurfacing and roadway surface treatment improvements on
the City's arterial and secondary road segments, including pavement, curbing, sidewalks, drainage, signage, 
and pavement markings. Framingham Public Works is responsible for the maintenance of the City of 
Framingham’s roadway network and management of the Roadway Capital Improvement Program 
Request Justification: 
The roadway network is a critical piece of the City’s infrastructure, requiring considerable maintenance, as 
identified and prioritized according to the City’s Road Surface Rating (RSR) reported in the Pavement 
Management Program. Roadways are identified for rehabilitation based on traffic volume, repair costs, repair life
expectancy, and road condition, and are selected based on their benefit to the City. 
Concrete sidewalk installation on 
Evergreen Street. 
Compacting asphalt around new granite curbing on
Summer Street. 
Final paving operations on Beacon Street. 
7 
Page 8
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Sanitation Department— Dudley Road Landfill Closure—Alternatives Analysis 
Requested Authorization - $400,000 
Request Description:
The City of Framingham is in the process of closing
the Former Dudley Road Landfill per the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection Bureau of Waste Prevention (MassDEP).
The MassDEP’s Solid Waste Management Approval
of Landfill Assessment and Closure is a four-step
process. The City has completed the first two steps
of the process so far, the Initial Site Assessment
and the Comprehensive Site Assessment. 
Request Justification: 
The landfill closure process intends to protect public
health, safety and the environment by monitoring the 
level of contamination emanating from a solid waste
landfill and determining a baseline from which closure
alternatives can be evaluated, selected, designed and
implemented. Assessment of a landfill helps to ensure
that the closure technology implemented in the landfill
will result in the remediation of the site and prevent the
spread of such contamination. 
The FY2021 appropriation will provide funding for
the third step of the process, the Corrective Actions
Alternative Analysis (CAAA), as well as continued
water and air monitoring and quarterly reporting. 
The CAAA is conducted to determine the nature of
the landfill cap and any additional remediation
measures which will be needed to close the sanitary
landfill properly. Based upon the feedback the City
receives from the MassDEP regarding the 
Comprehensive Site Assessment Report, the City
will present alternatives to close the landfill formally. 
The CAAA is followed by a Corrective Action Design
(CAD) and review before any closure construction
activities can commence. Closure of the landfill is
anticipated in 2023. 
Solid Waste visible on the side slopes of the
former Dudley Road Landfill. 
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Engineering Department—Potter Road Bridge Rehabilitation Construction 
Requested Authorization - $500,000 
Request Description:
This Urban Collector Roadway bridge over the Sudbury
River will be repaired by eliminating the bridge joints over
the piers, installing a new membrane waterproofing on the
topside of the deck, cleaning and painting the steel 
bearings, repairing and sealing the deck and ends of the 
pre-stressed I-beams, replacing the severely deteriorated
section of bridge railing (north side), repairing the concrete
sidewalk, and repaving the roadway. The City of 
Framingham and the Town of Wayland have entered into
an inter-municipal agreement to share in the design and
construction costs of the remedial work. 
The north side of the Potter Road Bridge 
is severely deteriorated. 
Request Justification: 
The existing 88-foot two-span bridge was constructed
in 1957. At 62 years of age, the structure is showing
deterioration and need for repairs, which is 
underscored by the December 2017 Inspection Report
from MassDOT District 3. These repairs will extend
the existing bridge life, and avoid the need for major
rehabilitation or total reconstruction that would be
much more costly and disruptive. 
8 
A portion of the Potter Road Bridge is owned by
the Town of Wayland. 
Page 9
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Engineering Department—Union Avenue Right of Way and Final Design 
(for TIP21) 
Requested Authorization - $1,240,000 
Request Description:
This appropriation will provide funds for the construction of improvements along Union Avenue from Proctor
Street to Main Street that will not be included by the state funded Transportation Improvement Program (TIP).
Examples of these include property appraisals, easement acquisitions, and final design. 
Request Justification: 
Not having this funding will delay TIP funding and the completion of construction of this vital community corridor, 
including drainage improvements that reduce flooding along Union Ave, and stormwater pollution into Farm
Pond. This work includes items required from the local entity for the TIP construction, and others not funded by
the State. The sidewalk network along Union Ave. is not ADA compliant and needs to be addressed. The City
undertook significant utility improvements along this corridor in advance of the proposed transportation work. 
Pedestrian crossing signals at the intersection of Union Avenue and Mt. Wayte Avenue are non-existent. 
Geometric improvements will be made at the intersection of Union Avenue and Lincoln Street. 
9 
Page 10
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Engineering Department— Edgell Road/Central Street Intersection—Final Design 
Requested Authorization - $366,000 
Request Description:
The appropriation will fund the final design to 
improve the intersection of Edgell Road and 
Central Street. Proposed reconstruction includes, 
geometric improvements, the installation of a
traffic signal, and improved pedestrian mobility
and safety features. 
Request Justification: 
The proposed work will improve safety and 
reduce traffic congestion at the intersection. A
new traffic signal will include an exclusive 
pedestrian phase to improve mobility and safety
for all users, in concert with ADA compliant 
sidewalks along both sides of all roadways, 
crosswalks across all approaches, and improved
bicycle accommodation via consistent shoulders. 
This project is included in the FY2022 TIP. 
 For a larger view of the 25% Design, please click here. 25% Design rendering of Edgell Road at 
Central Street. 
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Engineering Department—Arlington Street Area, Drains and Roads Design 
Requested Authorization - $520,000 
Request Description:
This project will design drainage, road, and sidewalk 
improvements in the Arlington Street area. Design
work includes drainage improvements to improve 
system functionality, reduce flooding and comply with
the City’s  MS4 Permit. Road and sidewalk 
improvements will be designed to meet ADA 
standards. 
Request Justification: 
Funding for this project was deferred for the past three
years. Flooding frequently occurs at several locations
throughout this neighborhood, due to inadequate or
non-existent drainage. Some existing drainage pipes
were installed under buildings and on private property, 
making access for maintenance difficult. The current
drainage system is not in compliance with state 
regulations. 
Existing sidewalks and roads are in poor condition and
do not meet current ADA accessibility standards. Once
underground utilities are upgraded, new roads and
sidewalks will be installed. Water and sewer design
work was previously funded and is underway. By 
completing drainage work in tandem with water and
sewer improvements, it is more cost effective and less
impactful to residents. 
 For a larger view of the project limits, please click here. 
10 
Page 11
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Engineering Department—Unaccepted Streets Improvements—Harmony Lane, Bonvini
Drive, and Sax Road 
Requested Authorization - $440,000 
Request Description:
These funds would allow the City to improve certain
roads that are currently private and do not meet
minimum roadway standards. Funds would be used
to improve Harmony Lane, Bonivini Drive, and Sax
Road. Roads must be publically accepted before
necessary improvements are made. 
Request Justification: 
This project was deferred in FY20. There are still 13
private roads in the City of Framingham that were 
created under subdivision control and were intended
for eventual acceptance. These roads are not 
maintained by a homeowners association or other
consolidated entity. Therefore some of these roads
have deteriorated to an unacceptable level of 
disrepair. This request is to improve some of these
roads to an acceptable condition after they are 
publicly accepted. 
Harmony Lane (left) and Bonvini Drive (right).
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Engineering Department— Annual Traffic Calming 
Requested Authorization - $200,000—Free Cash 
Request Description:
This funding request will be used to study, design, and construct 
traffic calming measures and other related safety improvements to
public roadways as identified by the City Council, Traffic 
Commission or Public Works Department. The intent is to improve
the safety and livability of Framingham's streets and neighborhoods. 
Request Justification: 
Traffic congestion and safety are some of the most prevalent 
complaints from Framingham residents. These funds will allow for the
continued study, design and installation of physical features that
guide, warn, and manage the movement of vehicles, bicycles, and
pedestrians. 
Solar speed feedback sign recently installed on Wickford Road. 
11 
Page 12
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Engineering Department—Annual MS4 Permit Implementation 
Requested Authorization - $366,000 
Request Description:
This project will provide the necessary funds to
achieve compliance with Year 3 of the City’s
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Phase II Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer System (MS4) permit
requirements. Specifically, this project will
support consulting services for water quality
sampling to investigate potential sources of
pollution into the City’s drainage system and
water bodies, developing pollution control
plans, inspecting the City’s stormwater system, 
and mapping drainage assets. 
Request Justification: 
In addition to restoring or increasing system
capacity and improving water quality, this
work helps extend the life of roadway 
pavement and curbs, which are deteriorated
by undrained water. 
Water quality sampling at Lake Cochituate. 
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Highway Department—Annual Drainage System & Water Quality Projects 
Requested Authorization - $500,000 
Request Description:
This funding request is for the capital repair
of the City’s stormwater conveyance system. 
Typically these improvements are prioritized
to mitigate residential flooding or are made in
conjunction with roadway improvements. 
Projects include the replacement and/or
rehabilitation of deteriorating pipes, the
replacement and/or rebuilding of catch
basins, the restoration of open channels, and
the inspection of drainage lines through
closed-circuit television survey (CCTV).
Request Justification: 
Funding will restore and improve the
system’s capacity and reduce the risk of
flooding to vulnerable areas. This will also, 
provide water quality improvements, and
assist the City in complying with the EPA's
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
(MS4) permit requirements. 
The Highway Department making structural repairs to a
storm drain located on Lockland Ave. 
12 
Page 13
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Sewer 
Annual Wastewater Pump Station Capital Equipment Replacement 
Requested Authorization - $500,000 
Request Description:
This appropriation will provide for the replacement and 
upgrades of equipment at older wastewater pumping 
stations. The project includes the planned replacement of
pumps, motors, controls and others, as well as emergency
replacements. 
Request Justification: 
The lifespan and reliability of these stations can be 
extended a decade or more through the replacement of 
component parts as they become worn and inefficient, 
thereby reducing the near-term need for significant capital
expenditures. 
Antiquated pump station components (pictured right) 
causes maintenance to be more difficult and the pump
station less reliable. 
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Sewer 
Gates Street Sewer Pumping Station—Design & Construction 
Requested Authorization - $1,900,000 
Request Description:
Constructed in 1953, and last rehabilitated in 1984, the
aged Gates Street Pump Station requires significant
rehabilitation. Wastewater flow to the pump station will
be bypassed while repairs are accomplished in the wet
well, the pumps are replaced, and electrical
improvements are undertaken. This work will improve
operator safety, efficiency, and permit the pump station
to operate for many years to come. 
Request Justification: 
This wastewater pump station and associated force
mains has reached the end of their reliable service lives, 
and have outdated equipment. Failure of these stations
could result in Sanitary Sewer Overflows (SSOs), and
enforcement actions by the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP). 
Dry well at the Gates Street 
Sewer Pumping Station 
Gates Street Sewer Pumping Station building. 
13 
Wet well at the Gates Street 
Sewer Pumping Station 
Page 14
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Sewer 
Annual Various Sewer Improvements 
Requested Authorization - $375,000 
Request Justification: 
Repairs and improvements are needed to assure continuing sewer service to
ratepayers and compliance with regulations, to reduce costly emergency 
repairs and system maintenance, and delay needs for major capital 
investments. 
Request Description:
This appropriation provides funding for the Sewer Division to perform 
systematic improvements and repairs to sewer mains and manholes and to
respond to unanticipated sewer system failures. 
The Sewer Division recently fixed a section of broken sewer main on
Park Avenue (pictured right). This sewer break was caused by tree roots
growing into the pipe. 
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Sewer 
Sewer Defects Repairs Phase III—Construction 
Requested Authorization - $1,000,000 
Request Description:
This funding request will allow the City to continue
addressing high priority sewer main and manhole defects. 
Two common construction methods will be used, 
replacement “dig”  repairs (replacing sewer pipe) and
rehabilitation “no dig” repairs (sewer lining). In a recent
Sanitary Sewer Evaluation Survey (SSES),  sewer
infrastructure located between Waverly Street and
Worcester Road as well as areas east of Concord Street. 
Request Justification: 
This project was deferred from FY2020. 
Framingham has evaluated the condition of 
approximately 50% of its sewer system within the 
last decade, with a focus on identif ying high 
priority sewer repairs. These high priority repairs
include rectifying defects that contribute to 
infiltration, as well as spot repairs and 
rehabilitation that will extend the reliable service
life of sewer system assets. Infiltration is clean
water, such as groundwater, that enters the 
sanitary sewer system and, in turn, reduces the
capacity for wastewater flow. This capacity 
reduction can result in system backups and 
overflows, as well as fee increases from the
MWRA, which is based on total wastewater flow
from Framingham. 
A specialized contractor lining sewer pipes
through a manhole opening. 
14 
Page 15
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Sewer 
Worcester Road Sewer Construction, East of Concord Street, Westbound, Phase II
Construction and Phase III Design 
Requested Authorization - $4,400,000 
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Water 
Worcester Road Water Construction, East of Concord Street, Westbound, Phase II
Construction 
Requested Authorization - $4,925,000 
Request Description:
This funding request is for the second construction phase of
the Worcester Road Water and Sewer Improvements 
Project. The project would rehabilitate approximately 2,000
feet of aged sewer mains and 4,000 feet of water main and
appurtenances on Worcester Road/Route 9 westbound 
between Concord Street and the Natick town line. Also, this
appropriation would fund the design for the third phase of
the project, which consists of 5,200 linear feet of gravity
sewer that ties into Cochituate Road. 
Request Justification: 
Serving a major portion of Framingham's retail corridor, 
under a State road in need of rehabilitation, existing City
infrastructure is aged and in poor condition, with some 
undersized sections. There is a high risk of failure, which
would require costly emergency repairs as well as 
disruption of service and traffic. The existing sewer in phase
III is located within wetlands, which make maintenance 
access and emergency repairs extremely difficult, costly
and damaging to the natural resources. 
 For a larger view of the project limits, please click here. 
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Water 
Annual Various Water Improvements 
Requested Authorization - $350,000 
Request Description:
This appropriation will provide funds for the design and
reconstruction of the replacement of existing water
mains and appurtenances in various locations. The
work includes the replacement of water mains, 
services, and related equipment at locations identified
by department staff throughout the year. 
Request Justification: 
Throughout the year, small sections of water mains
require replacement or need to be increased in size. 
This project would allow the Department to survey, 
design and construct the work utilizing in-house staff
whenever possible or to contract out where immediate
attention is required. Particular attention will be placed
on locations requiring increased fire protection, proper
water circulation and those experiencing low volume
and/or pressure. 
15 
The Water Division recently installed new
water main on Prindiville Avenue. 
Page 16
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Water 
Annual Various Hydrant & Valve Improvements 
Requested Authorization - $250,000 
Request Description:
This appropriation will provide funds for the replacement of 
hydrants and gate valves, to be installed by in-house staff and 
contracted services as needed. The appropriation includes the 
purchase of hydrants, gate valves and related appurtenances and
equipment. Additionally, the Department will be continuing its gate
valve exercising program. 
Request Justification: 
One of the most critical services that the Water Division provides is 
ensuring adequate water volume and pressure for fire suppression
and maintaining hydrants in good working order. In accordance with
the City’s Water Master Plan recommendations, the Water Division 
replaces up to 50 hydrants and associated gate valves per year. In
addition to replacing these hydrants and valves, it is critical to 
exercise the more than 5,000 gate valves that control the flow of 
water throughout the distribution system and replace those that are
no longer functioning. Routine exercising of the valves by opening
and closing them ensures that they will be able to be operated in
emergencies. 
The Water Division replacing a fire hydrant on 
Old Worcester Road. 
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Water 
Merriam Hill Water Tank Repair and Replacement—Assessment 
Requested Authorization - $75,000 
Request Description:
An assessment will determine the cost-effectiveness of
rehabilitation to extend the service life of the tank in
comparison to the cost of replacing the tank. Replacing
the tank will be difficult and costly due to its location. This
study will result in the opinion of probable cost for the
recommended alternative. 
Request Justification: 
This project was deferred from FY2020. This 3.5 million
gallon water storage tank provides nearly half of the City’s
daily water supply. Built in 1962, this tank is the largest
and oldest of the City’s seven tanks. The Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection requires annual
exterior inspections and an interior inspection (via diver
or Remote Operated Vehicle) every five years. These
inspections indicate the tank is in good structural
condition, but that interior and exterior coatings and tank
appurtenances show extensive degradation resulting in
corrosion and should be recoated in the near future. 
Merriam Hill Water Tank. 
16 
Page 17
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Water 
Flagg Drive (Fuller Middle School) Water Main Design & Construction 
Requested Authorization - $1,933,600 
Request Description:
This project is for the replacement of 2,500 linear feet of
1955 8-inch cast iron water main along Flagg Drive
between Oaks Road and Warren Road, including curb to
curb mill and overlay paving. 
Request Justification: 
These replacements are timely with breaks in
this section of main, and the Fuller Middle
School construction project. In addition to the
heavy vehicle traffic that will quickly deteriorate
the pavement that is already showing signs of
disrepair, there will be numerous pavement
patches for the water, sewer and likely other
service connections to the new school, as well
as a sewer sag repair that will further deteriorate
the roadway. Also, there is growing recognition
that the 1950s cast iron pipe materials and 
installation are known to have a higher than 
average number of breaks. Construction will be
less costly when bundled together, and less
disruptive to the surrounding residential 
neighborhoods if completed before the opening
of the new school in the fall. 
 For a larger view of the project limits, please click here. 
17 
Page 18
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 Capital Vehicles and Equipment Requests 
General Fund—Rolling Equipment 
Fire Department - Engine 7 Fire Truck Asset Replacement.…………………...……………………………….. 19 
Parks & Recreation Department - Division Equipment Replacement.………………..…………………… 19-20 
Department of Public Works - FY21 Fleet Replacements………………………...…………………………….....21 
Highway Department - Stormwater Fleet Vehicles……………………………………………………….....…….21 
Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Sewer 
Replace Sewer Service Trucks - Unit 703, 704, and 728………………………………………………....22-23 
Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Water 
Replace Water Service Trucks - Unit 60, 616, 618, and 651................................................................23-24 
Rep lac e Wat er Ba ckh oe/ Lo ad er - Un it 651................................................................................................24 
18 
Page 19
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Fire Department—Engine 7 Fire Truck Asset Replacement 
Requested Authorization - $789,763 
Request Description:
Engine 7 is a 2009 fire truck built by KME and is 
assigned to Nobscot Station 7. Engine 7 is the station's
only frontline fire truck that is responsible for the 
Nobscot and Northwest quadrant of the City. 
Request Justification: 
This Capital Request was originally scheduled for
FY20 and was deferred. The replacement of this truck
addresses two Department needs. First, the 
Department is planning to standardize the fleet so that
all fire trucks are the same manufacturer and 
specifications. Having the same make and model of
fire trucks will reduce the costs of maintaining the fleet
because there would be common maintenance 
supplies, tools and mechanic familiarity. Second, this 
project would address the need to place primary response fire trucks on a standardized replacement schedule. 
Maintenance records indicate that repair costs accelerate when the apparatus has reached 10-12 years of 
service. Also, fire trucks are manufactured to meet nationally recognized fire service standards, which typically
change on a 10-year revision cycle to address the latest advancements in firefighter safety. 
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Parks & Recreation Department 
 Replace 1998 Kubota B21 Loader/Backhoe Tractor 
 Replace 2007 F450 4WD Cab and Chassis with a Dump Body and Plow 
 Rep lac e 2006 F25 0 4WD Pi ckup Tru ck wit h a Crew Cab 
Requested Authorization - $198,105 
FY2021 Parks & Recreation Department, General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Replace 1998 Kubota B21 Loader/Backhoe Tractor 
Request Description:
This funding request is for the replacement of a 1998
Kubota B21 Tractor with 33,443 hours of usage. The
Kubota is used daily in support of the Edgell Grove
Cemetery operations, such as grave digging, 
landscaping improvements, roadway repairs, brush
removal, and general maintenance through the facility. 
It’s the only tractor of its size to support these 
operations. During the winter, this machine is used for
snow removal operations and road re-grading. 
Request Justification: 
This tractor has long surpassed its life expectancy of
5,000 hours and is in desperate need of replacement. 
Floorboard corrosion is now causing fumes to enter
the tractor cab. 
19 
Page 20
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 Parks & Recreation Department, General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Replace 2007 F450 4WD Cab and Chassis with Dump Body and Plow 
Request Description:
This funding request is for the replacement of a 2007
F450 Dump Truck which has exceeded its life 
expectancy. This vehicle is used daily in support of Parks
Maintenance Department Operations including snow and
ice operations, landscape support, brush removal, 
hauling equipment, moving crews, cemetery, and burial
operations. 
Request Justification: 
Recently, the usage of this truck has greatly decreased
due to its current condition. Over the past three years, 
the Department has spent $20,264 in repairs, with an
additional need for $3,163 more in repairs. 
Rotting break lines requiring full replacement. 
FY2021 Parks & Recreation Department, General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Replace 2006 F250 4WD Pickup Truck with a Crew Cab 
Request Description: 
This funding request is for the replacement of a 2006
F250 Pickup Truck. This vehicle is used daily to
support Parks Maintenance Operations including
daily lining at over 60 fields throughout the city. 
This truck is responsible for transporting lining
equipment, paint, lime, and stencils by hauling a
trailer throughout the city. 
Request Justification: 
This truck has exceeded its useful life expectancy. 
Corrosion is allowing engine fumes to enter the cab
of the vehicle. 
Exterior cab corrosion. 
20 
Page 21
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Public Works Department—FY21 Fleet Replacements 
Requested Authorization - $1,141,832 
Request Description:
For FY21 the Department is taking a new approach to request General Fund Vehicle and Equipment 
Replacements. Historically, we would present each unit up for replacement and request an individual vote. 
By requesting a budgetary allotment, the Department will have the ability to reassess vehicles on the 
replacement schedule once funds become available. 
The combined number of vehicles/equipment up for replacement in FY21 is sixteen units, totaling over 
2.5 million dollars. 
Due to budgetary constraints, the Department has reduced its request to $1,141,832 for the replacement of
approximately eight units. 
Request Justification: 
The Department utilizes a five-year replacement schedule based upon vehicle/equipment age and mileage or
hours. Additional factors taken into consideration when preparing the replacement schedule are reliable 
service life, cost of maintenance, overall structural condition, availability of replacement parts, and downtime. 
The final determination of which vehicles will be replaced will be in concert with this schedule and made by
the Public Works Senior Management Team. 
Nearly all vehicles and equipment are utilized by the staff daily to perform routine maintenance, emergency 
repairs, and respond to unforeseen weather events. Also, almost all of the Department’s vehicles and 
equipment are utilized for the Snow and Ice Program, which is particularly destructive to both structural and
mechanical components. 
FY2021 General Fund Capital Improvement Project 
Highway Department—New Fleet Vehicles, Stormwater 
Requested Authorization - $351,000 
Request Description:
This funding request is for four new vehicles that will provide operational, maintenance and construction 
support for the new Stormwater Division. The addition of a Stormwater Division will increase the amount of 
maintenance and construction activities that will be performed and, in turn, create a need for additional dump
trucks and pickup trucks. 
The following vehicles are requested to support the Stormwater Division: 
  One (1) 40,000 GVW Cab and Chassis with a Dump Body and Plow 
  One (1) 15,000 GVW Cab and Chassis with a Dump Body and Plow 
  Two (2) 7,700 GVW 4WD Cab and Chassis with a Standard Truck Bed 
Request Justification: 
Maintaining and upgrading the City’s stormwater infrastructure will improve water quality and reduce pollution in
lakes, rivers, brooks, and streams. The acquisition of these vehicles is essential to achieve compliance with
Year 3 of the City’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer System (MS4) permit requirements. 
Two dump trucks will support rehabilitation and construction activities that require the hauling of excavated 
material, clean gravel, and asphalt to and from the site. One pickup truck will be to support the operation, 
maintenance and construction crew to haul the necessary tools and equipment to perform the work. The 
second pickup truck will be to support the stormwater utility inspector, performing inspections to ensure that
private construction and land disturbances meet the requirements set forth in their permit and continue post-
construction operation and maintenance activities. The two larger trucks will come equipped with plows to 
support the Snow and Ice Program during the winter months. 
21 
Page 22
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Sewer 
Replace Sewer Service Trucks - Unit 703, 704, and 728 
Requested Authorization - $205,751 
FY2021 Sewer Capital Fund Improvement Project 
Replace 2009 15,000 GVW 4WD Cab and Chassis with a Service Body, Crane, and
Plow, Unit 728 
Request Description: 
This vehicle is assigned to the Wastewater Pump Stations. It
is a dual wheel truck that has a truck-mounted crane as well
as a lift gate. This utility truck holds all necessary tools used
to perform daily maintenance on the City’s water and
wastewater pump stations and water tanks. The crane 
component is used to remove pumps from stations when
work is needed to be performed on the outside of the station. 
During the winter months, this vehicle is assigned to the
City’s Snow and Ice Program. 
Request Justification:
This vehicle has over 130,000 miles, is unreliable, and has
exceeded its 10-year life expectancy. Due to extensive 
undercarriage corrosion, the truck’s engine oil pan had to be
replaced for $2800. Additional usage will increase the 
potential for a major engine/transmission failure. The crane
is inoperable and unrepairable. It would cost between $8000
and $10,000 to replace this essential component, not 
including potential body modifications that may be required. 
Further repairs far exceed the value of this vehicle. 
FY2021 Sewer Capital Fund Improvement Project 
Replace 2008 9,800 GVW 4WD Cab and Chassis with a Modified Service Body and
Plow, Unit 704 
Request Description:
The City of Framingham is under an administrative 
agreement with the Attorney General’s Office for the 
proper handling of asbestos-containing material. 
The majority of asbestos-containing pipe in the City of
Framingham is located in sewer infrastructure. Therefore
the Wastewater Division has specifically retrofitted this
vehicle with all of the necessary tools and materials to
abate asbestos properly. 
This truck is outfitted with a sealed cap over the truck
bed, a mobile water tank, and a state-approved saw for
use on an asbestos pipe. 
Federal and State regulations require that all 
asbestos-containing material be transported in a sealed
enclosed compartment, separate from the cab. 
Request Justification:
This unit has exceeded its 10-year life expectancy and
has 110, 938 miles. Due to this unit’s age and high
mileage, the City has seen an increase in engine sensor
codes and engine performance. Additional usage will
increase the potential for a major engine failure causing a
strain on the division to properly abate asbestos-
containing material. A new engine and transmission would
22  cost close to $20,000. 
Unit #704 underbody and 
undercarriage corrosion. 
Page 23
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 Sewer Capital Fund Improvement Project 
Replace 2011 8,800 GVW 4WD Cab and Chassis with a standard truck bed, Unit 703 
Request Description:
The Materials Coordinator uses this truck to travel to local vendors to order and pick up parts and materials for
the Water and Wastewater Division. This truck is also used to deliver parts and materials from the DPW to job
sites as well as move parts throughout the DPW facilities.
Request Justification:
This vehicle will have reached its 10-year life expectancy by the time it is replaced and has 100,384 miles. 
FY2021 Water/Sewer Capital Fund: Water 
Replace Water Service Trucks—Unit 60, 616, 618 
Replace Water Backhoe/Loader with a Plow, Hammer, and Compactor—Unit 651 
Requested Authorization - $250,000 
FY2021 Water Capital Fund Improvement Project 
Replace 2011 8,800 GVW 4WD Cab and Chassis with a standard truck bed, Unit 60 
Request Description: 
This vehicle is assigned to the Operations Manager of the Water Division. The Operations Manager will use
this truck to travel throughout the City to oversee work that would impact the water distribution system 
performed by in-house staff and contractors. This truck is utilized to respond to emergencies at all hours of the
day and allows the manager to carry tools and parts to perform tasks on their own or with staff. 
Request Justification :
This vehicle will have reached its 10-year life expectancy by the time it is replaced and has 81,635 miles. 
FY2021 Water Capital Fund Improvement Project 
Replace 2008 9,900 GVW 4WD Cab and Chassis with a Service Body and Plow, Unit 616 
Request Description: 
This vehicle is assigned to the Capital Program 
technician to provide operational support to the City’s
major water and wastewater capital projects. This
truck is utilized for traffic control in construction work
zones and to respond to unforeseen emergencies and
customers. During the winter months, this vehicle is
assigned to the City’s Snow and Ice Program. 
Request Justification: 
This vehicle is currently out of service and is no longer 
operable. The vehicle has 110,438 miles, significant 
corrosion issues, and a slipping transmission. The cost
for a new transmission is approximately $6500. The
front frame, firewall, and spring buckets are rotted and
cannot be repaired. Further repairs far exceed the 
value of this vehicle. 
23 
Page 24
City of Framingham
FY2021 Capital Improvement Budget Proposal
FY2021 Water Capital Fund Improvement Project 
Replace 2012 13,000 GVW 4WD Cab and Chassis with Service Body and Plow, Unit
618 
Request Description:
This vehicle is assigned to the 11:00 a.m. to 7 p.m. shift of the Water Division. This truck is daily for dig safe
mark outs, water main flushing, valve and fire hydrant maintenance, and customer service calls. This vehicle
responds to emergencies investigating water main breaks and water meter issues. During the winter months, 
this vehicle is assigned to the City’s Snow and Ice Program. 
Request Justification: 
This vehicle is nearing its 10-year life expectancy and has 114,925 miles. 
FY2021 Water Capital Fund Improvement Project 
Replace 2006 Backhoe/Loader with a Plow, Hammer, and Compactor, Unit 651 
Request Description: 
This critical piece of equipment is used daily by the Water Division for excavation of hydrants, water main
pipe installation, and emergency response to system failures. This machine is equipped with a plow and is
a crucial piece of heavy equipment to the City’s Snow and Ice Program to clear parking lots and roads. 
Request Justification :
This piece of equipment has well exceeded its 12-year life expectancy. The unit has significant cab and
floorboard corrosion as seen in the adjacent photos. Most recently, the backhoe needed repairs to the arm
boom, it’s rotted oil pan and aged steering components replaced. This unit has 14,451 operating hours. Due
to the current age and hours on this machine with more use, there is a potential for more costly failures in
the near future. To replace the cab on this piece of equipment, it would cost approximately $10,000. Further
repairs will exceed the value of this machine. 
The Water Division’s backhoe/loader
is a vital piece of equipment and is
utilized daily. 
24 
