Framingham Public Schools
Robert A. Tremblay, Ed.D.,
Superintendent of Schools
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
Priscila Sousa, Chair • Jessica Barnhill, Vice Chair • Richard A. Finlay, Clerk
Adam Freudberg • Beverly Hugo • William LaBarge
Tiffanie Maskell • Jennifer Moshe • Valerie Ottaviani
Charlie Sisitsky, Mayor
Farley Building, 19 Flagg Drive, Framingham, MA 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9121 | www.framingham.k12.ma.us/schoolcommittee
SCHOOL COMMITTEE: OPEN MEETING MINUTES
DATE AND TIME:  March 30, 2022 at 7:00 p.m.
LOCATION: Remote
MEETING CALLED BY:  Chair Priscila Sousa
PRESENT:  Jessica Barnhill
Richard A. Finlay*
Adam Freudberg
Beverly Hugo
William LaBarge
Tiffanie Maskell*
Jennifer Moshe*
Valerie Ottaviani
Priscila Sousa
Mayor Charlie Sisitsky
ABSENT:  None
ALSO PRESENT: Dr. Robert Tremblay, Superintendent
Nilufar Noorian, Student Advisory Committee Chair
Lincoln Lynch, Executive Director of Finance and Operations
Joanna Hastry, Executive Assistant for the School Committee
Call to Order
The Chair called the meeting to order at 7:01 p.m., announced those in attendance, and noted
that School Committee member Tiffanie Maskell, Mayor Charlie Sisitsky, and Student Advisory
Committee Chair Nilufar Noorian were joining remotely. She said that the meeting is being
broadcast live on the Government Channel, can be viewed Live on Facebook on the
Framingham Public Schools Facebook Page, and noted information on how to participate in
public comment in person and through Zoom. She said that Facebook comments are not the
formal way to participate in public comment since there are voice options through Zoom. She
asked for a moment of silence to think about all those lost and who are suffering in our
community, nation, state, nation, and world. 
1 | Page
Page 2
Public Comment
Christine Mulroney spoke about how the Massachusetts economy is working great for those
who are at the top, but it is not reaching most of the people and communities, the pandemic
has heightened the economic and racial disparities, and new revenue is necessary to improve
our education and Pre-K programs. She said that the Fair Share Amendment is a proposal to
amend the Massachusetts Constitution and would create an additional tax of 4 percentage
points on a portion of a person's annual income above $1 million, and this new revenue would
be approximately $2 billion a year which would be spent on quality public education, affordable
public colleges and universities, and repair and maintenance of roads and public transportation.
She said that this will be on the November 2022 statewide ballot and the MTA is working with
community groups to get the message out about this important ballot initiative.
Robert Bolles said that last night's budget meeting was pretty scary for taxpayers on a fixed
income, and he is counting on all to make every tax dollar work for the student and the
taxpayer.
Announcements from the Chair
There were no announcements from the Chair.
Mayor’s Update
Mayor Sisitsky said that in anticipation of voting on the school budget he would like to
acknowledge the fact that he developed a close working relationship with the Chair, school
administration, and School Committee subcommittees to craft a responsible budget that meets
the needs of the school department and hopes that this can continue in the future.
Superintendent’s Update
COVID-19
Dr. Tremblay said that this week there were 27 positive COVID-19 cases within the pool testing,
it is averaging around 15-20 a week so they are watching this for any increases, but it is nothing
to be concerned with now. He said that the District is currently at a 62% vaccinated rate, with
86% of staff vaccinated and 58% of students. He spoke to upcoming vaccination clinics through
partnership with the Edward M. Kennedy Community Health Center, the Framingham
Department of Public Health and Metrowest Pharmacy will provide an immunization clinic in
May where families can access all childhood vaccines as well as COVID vaccines and boosters,
and the Brazilian Women’s Group of Boston will broaden the offerings at the clinic to include
Know your Rights materials and other incentives.
Staff Recognition
Dr. Tremblay recognized FPS staff Mynette Shifman, Alicia Arnold, Ellen Makynen, Judy Styer,
Inna London, Carolyn Banach, and Tiffany Lillie, some of whom were present at the meeting
virtually, for their involvement in an emergency response for an infant in distress at the FHS
Staff childcare in early March. He spoke to their professionalism, calmness, and nursing skills
that helped save the little girl's life. There was a round of applause. 
2 | Page
Page 3
Dr. Tremblay introduced Michelle Kinsella who he said negotiated to make an amazing event for
students. Ms. Kinsella said that they had an event called Prom Shop yesterday where they were
able to provide 103 dresses and 41 tuxes to students. FHS Principal Carolyn Banach thanked all
who helped out and said that this event also included measurements, alterations, purses, and
shoes. A round of applause was given. Members thanked them for this event and for going
above and beyond such as providing alterations.
Announcements
Dr. Tremblay said that Barbieri Elementary School just had a multilingual production of 101
Dalmatians and Fuller Middle School had a trilingual production of A Midsummer Night’s
Dream.
He said that the Manager of Translation and Interpreting Services Bernardo Llorente will be
presenting “The Keys to Translation Management” as part of Umass Amherst’s Translation
Center’s Foundation of Language Access in Schools Training. He said that this is sponsored by
the Office of Strategic Transformation of the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education.
He said that the FPS Human Resources Department received the Eugene H. Rooney, Jr. Public
Service Award at the 37th Annual Performance Recognition Awards Ceremony today. He said
that FPS was the only public school district honored by Education Secretary Peyser, Lt. Governor
Polito, and Governor Baker.
Student Advisory Committee (SAC) Presentation
SAC Chair Nilufar Noorian, Alternate Chair Hamza Rifki, and member Samuel Perlman shared
their presentation on Time Management, Extracurriculars, House Model and General Topics
that included the procedure, the student population, the percentages of answers and follow up
question answers. They shared their conclusions which included that the House Model system
has either remained the same or improved from the previous system, many students mentioned
that they would like to get emails or updates from their steering classes on how they can get
involved, most students indicated that they have access to after-school opportunities, support
services, and they can make-up work easily (those that could not had work, sports, or other
commitments), having an advisory block would be helpful, there are a variety of course, club,
and sports suggestions provided by respondents, areas of strength included academics, course
offerings, after-school clubs, and opportunities for students, areas of improvement included
utilization of space, incorporating useful life skills into the curriculum, and lunch options, 936
students responded to the survey (~37% of the student body), and there is a disconnect
between what students do not think are offered, but actually are.
Mr. Finlay asked for information on how we can improve the late buses from dropping students
off 30 mins away from their home and asked if there could be collaboration with Keefe Tech for
offering such as auto classes, etc. Ms. Moshe suggested that the bulletin boards showing
extracurriculars be in multiple languages and have an explanation of what the clubs details are,
and said that she appreciates that some are focused on life skills. Ms. Noorian said that she
believes that information is on the website, although it probably needs to be updated, and said
3 | Page
Page 4
that students can also talk to the advisor or their counselor for information on extracurriculars.
Ms. Hugo said that in the Teaching and Learning Subcommittee they spoke about possibilities of
life skills offerings, such as financial literacy. Members thanked the SAC members for their work
and how it was great how much feedback they received on this survey. Mr. Freudberg said that
the School Committee could think about their goals and how items in this survey could align, he
suggested looking at the City Youth Council and FHS Student Council to help get information
out, said that he would like to look at expanding clubs and athletics where it makes sense, and
spoke to the multiyear effort to look at high school start time, the benefits of it, and the effect
on all schools. Ms. Banach said that they will be looking at all the information provided from
the survey, especially looking at a possible advisory block when looking at the new schedule.
Vote on the FPS FY23 Budget Request to the Mayor
Executive Director of Finance and Operations Lincoln Lynch said that they are requesting a vote
on the FY23 budget which is a 5.02% increase. He said that he is confident the District can
afford to do this to support all students with the support of the City's local contribution, the
increase in Chapter 70 aid and Circuit Breaker Reimbursement, revolving accounts and grants.
He said this proposed budget will add 51.7 new positions. He said that $2.5 million is from FY22
Circuit Breaker carryover to balance the budget and based on projections, which he will present
on April 6th, as of June 30th there will be $3.7 million that will cover the $2.5 million and leave
$1.2 million to cover any increase in Special Education Out of District tuitions.
Ms. Sousa said that the committee can follow the State Ethics Commission’s multi-step voting
process before the final budget vote if members need to recuse themselves from certain
sections. For the final vote all members can participate in, if members first recuse themselves
on the line item votes.
*Ms. Maskell recused herself at 8:24 p.m.
Motion: To approve the Buildings & Grounds Department Budget of $9,757,046.
Moved: Mr. Finlay Seconded: Mr. LaBarge Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (8-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Barnhill, LaBarge)
*Ms. Maskell returned to the meeting and Mr. Finlay recused himself at 8:26 p.m.
Motion: To approve the Food Services Department Budget of $0.
Moved: Ms. Barnhill Seconded: Mr. LaBarge Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (8-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
*Mr. Finlay returned to the meeting at 8:27 p.m.
Motion: To approve the Substitute Salary Budget of $2,000,000.
Motion: Mr. Finlay Seconded: Mr. LaBarge
Discussion: Mr. Freudberg said that if no members are recusing this can be part of the main
vote on the budget. Mr. Finlay withdrew his motion.
*Ms. Moshe recused herself at 8:28 p.m.
Motion: To approve the Community Resource Development Budget, including the Explorers
Program, of $823,844. 
4 | Page
Page 5
Moved: Mr. Freudberg Seconded: Ms. Barnhill Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (8-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
*Ms. Moshe returned to the meeting at 8:29 p.m.
Motion: To approve the full FY23 Budget request of $154,198,044 and submit to the Mayor.
Moved: Mr. LaBarge Seconded: Mr. Finlay Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Executive Director of Finance & Operations Update
FY22 Operating and Capital Budget
Mr. Lynch said that the FY22 YTD in the packets shows 65.93% expended and encumbered and
they continue to clean up the charges to ESSER-III from the Operating Budget with the City. He
said that he will have a memo on projections for the April 6th meeting.
Transportation Update
Mr. Lynch went over the FPS Transportation Update which was provided in packets and included
driver attendance, NRT on time performance which showed a 5.62% late rate this reporting
period, the number of students effected on late busses, planned doubled up runs, number of
drivers in the NRT pipeline, percentage of time Edulog mobile app is up and running, and
athletics transportation data. NRT staff Dave Lathbury and Pete Delani went over their report
that included an overview, highlights, bus status, driver training pipeline, road tests passed by
month, labor analysis, and recruiting update.
Members asked what problems there may be in order to get a permit, and expressed concerns
that not many seem to have passed, and if there is any local advertising in Framingham,
including utilizing the Media and Communications Department and Human Resources
Department in order to help advertise. NRT said that the pipeline shows people who have
fallen off the pipeline or passed the test and then they also come off the pipeline. They said
that some staff while training for the CDL license will work and drive with their 7d license and
some decide to just stay as a 7d drivers. They said the 6-10 weeks is usually when they see if a
driver is going to be able to pass the permit test or not and continue in the pipeline or not.
They said that they are recruiting specifically for Framingham including an Open House coming
up and a recruiter who is hyper focused on Framingham. Mr. Freudberg said that NRT will make
more money when they run more routes and suggested that they look at whether retention or
hiring bonuses would be a good decision for them. Ms. Sousa spoke to a bill to provide driver’s
licenses to undocumented immigrants, and asked if they have factored this into future
projections for hiring. NRT said that they are bound to what the RMV allows and would have to
look into this, as the RMV only accepts some countries’ driving records and not others, and
drivers need a certain amount of years experience before being able to obtain a 7d or CDL
license. Ms. Moshe asked if any of the drivers who have passed the CDL test have left and if so
if they are leaving just Framingham or NRT in general. NRT said that there was one driver who
voluntarily left and then one that was involuntary, and the voluntary driver who left moved out
of the transportation industry completely. They noted that Framingham drivers do see student
management as a challenge to their jobs, and they are working on the district with that. 
5 | Page
Page 6
Vote to Support Deed Filing for the Activity and Use Limitation (AUL) for the Framingham High
School
Director of Building and Grounds Matt Torti introduced Carol Bois and said that she is our
licensed site professional who performed a peer review for this AUL. Carol Bois spoke to the
history of the area in question and said that there is still some contamination probably 9-14 feet
below the surface and under the building, and with regulation changes this can be left as long
as it can be shown that no-one is currently being exposed to it and to place a notice of AUL on
the deed for the property. She said that it is deeded to the inhabitants of the Town of
Framingham and it likely only needs the Mayor’s signature with authorization from the City
Council, but the City Solicitor said that it would be helpful for the School Committee to have
knowledge of this as well as approval.
Motion: To support the deed filing for the activity and use limitation for the Framingham High
School and to recommend that the City Council and Mayor approve.
Moved: Mr. Finlay Seconded: Ms. Hugo
Discussion: Ms. Barnhill asked for the specific location. Ms. Bois said that it is by the loading
docks outside J wing and the raised field 9-14 feet below the surface, so there is no exposure.
Mr. Freudberg said that he does think the School Committee has a role or vote in this, and asked
that the motion be amended to include the Mayor’s approval. Motion amended. He asked if
this would affect any future projects, such as any construction impact for roofs. Ms. Bois said
that she can't think of any that would be affected as it is subsurface.
Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Vote on the MSBA Core Program Submission
Mr. Torti said that there was a meeting with the Chair, Superintendent, State Officials, and
MSBA onsite at Hemenway Elementary School and it was made clear that the Statement of
Interest (SOI) that was submitted initially was not accepted, and that the future SOI should
define the problem and deficiencies with the Hemenway School building listed. He said then
once MSBA completes a feasibility study they will determine next best steps such as possible
alternate sites.
Motion: To authorize the Superintendent to submit to the Massachusetts School Building
Authority the Statement of Interest for the dated April 29, 2022 for the Hemenway Elementary
School due to the deficiencies and priorities described in the Statement of Interest Form and
hereby further specifically acknowledges that by submitting this Statement of Interest Form, the
Massachusetts School Building Authority in no way guarantees the acceptance or the approval
of an application, the awarding of a grant or any other funding commitment from the
Massachusetts School Building Authority, or commits the District to filing an application for
funding with the Massachusetts School Building Authority. And For the school committee to
formally request concurrence from the City Council and Mayor where applicable on the
submission to the MSBA.
Moved: Ms. Barnhill Seconded: Mr. Finlay
Discussion: Ms. Sousa expressed concerns about micromanaging other branches of
government, but will agree to the end of the motion if others feel it is necessary. Mr. Torti said
that they will be submitting this to the City Council and Mayor for their next agenda. Ms.
6 | Page
Page 7
Barnhill said that due to deadlines this would help send the Committee’s support to make it
happen sooner than later. Mr. Freudberg spoke of the need to work collaboratively on this.
Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Public Hearing and Vote on Massachusetts Inter-District School Choice Program (Policy JFBB)
Dr. Tremblay said that per Massachusetts General Law districts are considered to be part of the
inter-district school choice program unless they vote to not be part of it. He said that his
recommendation is to not be part of it, as there isn’t extra classroom space due to enrollment.
Public Hearing
Robert Bolles said that he is in support of the Superintendent's recommendation.
Motion: To approve the Superintendent’s recommendation to not participate in the
Massachusetts Inter-District School Choice Program.
Moved: Ms. Barnhill Seconded: Ms. Hugo Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Subcommittee Reports
Mr. LaBarge said that the warrants were signed with a total of $1,865,333.95 and a payroll total
of $4,948,552.47 on the dates of March 21st and March 25, 2022.
Mr. Freudberg, as the Chair of the Finance and Operations Subcommittee, spoke about tracking
the budget going forward with the Mayor and suggested members reach out to their respective
City Council members with Dr. Tremblay and Mr. Lynch. He said that they will plan to have a
meeting in April once Mr. Lynch is back on topics including the FY22 closeout plan, FY23 status,
introduction to the new Food Services Director, and transportation.
Ms. Maskell, as the Chair of the Policy Subcommittee, said that the Policy Subcommittee has
approved the policies up for a first reading.
Motion: To approve Policies LA: Education Agency Relations Goals, LB: Relations with Other
Schools and School Districts, LBC: Relations with Nonpublic Schools, and LDA: Student Teaching
and Internships for first readings.
Moved: Ms. Hugo  Seconded: Ms. Barnhill Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Ms. Maskell said that the next meeting will be held on April 14th.
Ms. Hugo, as the Chair of the Climate Change, Environment, and Sustainability Subcommittee,
said that they met on March 21st with staff and community partners and they reviewed and
voted on the Climate Policy which they referred to the Policy Subcommittee for an eventual first
reading. She said that they are looking at a next meeting date to work on goals and discuss with
administration what can be done in the next two years. She said that the School Committee will
be sharing a booth with the Environmental Club on Earth Day. 
7 | Page
Page 8
Ms. Moshe, as the Chair of the Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Subcommittee, said that the next
meeting is tomorrow at 4:00 p.m.
Approval of Minutes, Gifts, and Field Trips
Motion: To approve the two $2500 donations to the Athletics Revolving Account from Fitts
Insurance and Herb Connolly Acura.
Moved: Mr. Finlay Seconded: Mr. LaBarge
Discussion: Ms. Maskell asked if we still have scoreboards in the gym with Herb Connolly listed
on them and said that she thought the policy said that there is no advertising with gifts.
Discussion on how this was approved in the past with a five year plan of payment and how the
policy may have changed since then. Ms. Maskell asked if there is a written agreement for the
advertisement.
Roll Call Vote: (8-1-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Barnhill, LaBarge. No: Maskell)
*Mr. Finlay recused himself at 9:43 p.m.
Motion: To approve the anonymous donation of $4009.60 to cover the High School band’s
hotel to airport transportation costs during the trip to Florida.
Moved: Ms. Barnhill Seconded: Mr. LaBarge
Discussion: Ms. Maskell said that this trip is in two weeks, they have been fundraising since
January, and asked why this is just now coming to the School Committee for approval of the
field trip. Dr. Tremblay spoke to the confusing language within the policy and how they will be
reviewing the policy and process so they are more streamlined.
Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (8-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Motion: To approve the field trips of Walsh Middle School Robotics Club to the World
Championship in Dallas, Texas , Framingham High School Overnight Trip to Mass Audubon Long
Pasture Wildlife Sanctuary, and Framingham High School Drama Company and Marching Band
Trip to Walt Disney World in Orlando, FL
Moved: Ms. Hugo  Seconded: Mr. LaBarge
Discussion: Mr. Freudberg said that the field trip policies were reviewed in 2018 along with
legal review and overnight field trips do have to be approved by the School Committee.
Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (8-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
*Mr. Finlay returned to the meeting at 9:51 p.m.
Motion: To approve the Open Session minutes of February 16, 2022 with the corrected spelling
to the last name of Bolles.
Move: Mr. Freudberg Seconded: Ms. Barnhill Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Adjournment
Motion: To adjourn.
Moved: Mr. LaBarge Seconded: Ms. Ottaviani Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
8 | Page
Page 9
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
The meeting was adjourned at 9:53 p.m.
Meeting Materials
Agenda
Vaccination Data
Student Advisory Committee Presentation
FY23 Budget Book
School Committee Department Budget Narrative
Draft School Committee Budget Letter
FY22 YTD
Transportation Memo from FPS
Transportation Dashboard from NRT
Document on Deed Filing for the Activity and Use Limitation for FHS
AUL Draft Notice
Memo on MSBA Core Program Submission
Memo on Inter-District School Choice Program
Warrants
Policy Summary and Draft Policies for First Readings
Draft February 16, 2022 Minutes
Gift Memos
Field Trip Forms
Field Trip form for Disney World
Woods Hole Field Trip Form
These minutes were approved by the Framingham School Committee in Open Session on May 4,
2022.
These minutes were sent to the City of Framingham for posting on May 5, 2022. 
9 | Page
