Framingham Public Schools
Robert A. Tremblay, Ed.D.,
Superintendent of Schools
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
Priscila Sousa, Chair • Jessica Barnhill, Vice Chair • Richard A. Finlay, Clerk
Adam Freudberg • Beverly Hugo • William LaBarge
Tiffanie Maskell • Jennifer Moshe • Valerie Ottaviani
Charlie Sisitsky, Mayor
Farley Building, 19 Flagg Drive, Framingham, MA 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9121 | www.framingham.k12.ma.us/schoolcommittee
SCHOOL COMMITTEE: OPEN MEETING MINUTES
DATE AND TIME:  March 16, 2022 at 7:00 p.m.
LOCATION: Remote
MEETING CALLED BY:  Chair Priscila Sousa
PRESENT:  Jessica Barnhill
Richard A. Finlay*
Adam Freudberg
Beverly Hugo
William LaBarge
Tiffanie Maskell*
Jennifer Moshe
Valerie Ottaviani
Priscila Sousa
Mayor Charlie Sisitsky
ABSENT:  None
ALSO PRESENT: Dr. Robert Tremblay, Superintendent
Nilufar Noorian, Student Advisory Chair
Lincoln Lynch, Executive Director of Finance and Operations
Joanna Hastry, Executive Assistant for the School Committee
Call to Order
The Chair called the meeting to order at 7:02 p.m. and noted that this meeting was being held
remotely in accordance with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Actions Suspending Certain
Provisions of the Open Meeting Law. She announced those in attendance, noted that School
Committee member Tiffanie Maskelll, Student Advisory Chair Nilufar Noorian, and Mayor
Sisitsky were joining remotely. She said that the meeting is being broadcast live on the
Government Channel, and can be viewed Live on Facebook on the Framingham Public Schools
Facebook Page. She noted information on how to participate in public comment in person and
through Zoom and said that Facebook comments are not the formal way to participate in public
comment since there are voice options through Zoom. She asked for a moment of silence to
1 | Page
Page 2
think about all those lost and who are suffering in our community, nation, state, nation, and
world.
*Due to an issue with Zoom the Zoom ended at 7:06 p.m. and was restarted with all those in
Zoom rejoining in under a minute at 7:06 p.m.
Public Comment
FTA President Christine Mulroney said that the number of English as a Second Language (ESL)
coaches and language aides have not changed in most buildings, but the number of scholars has
dramatically increased. She said that if we want to provide an equitable environment we need
to take a hard look at what we are prioritizing to support our newcomers and need more
outreach to recruit community members who can speak Portuguese and Spanish. She spoke to
the increase in Chapter 70 and the inflation rate and said that it is disappointing that the District
did not set as a priority the needs of our students by attracting and maintaining staff by setting
a salary schedule that is more competitive with our surrounding communities.
Clark Williams spoke to the 2020 petition that the Framingham High School’s Black Student
Union launched to end the use of School Resource Officers (SROs) and to the research that has
been published on the effects of school police officers upon a school disciplinary culture. He
said that research has linked SROs to increased discipline by removal and spoke to the success
of restorative justice techniques in other communities. He asked what the aims of the
Framingham Public School District are in employing a School Resource Office that would not be
better accomplished by a district employee that is not trained and authorized to detain and
arrest students by force.
Announcements from the Chair
The Chair said that the School Committee met in Executive Session earlier tonight to discuss
strategy with respect to collective bargaining because an open meeting might have a
detrimental effect on the bargaining or litigating position of the public body and the chair so
declared pursuant to G.L. c. 30A, s. 21(a)(3), specifically for Units A, B, C, N, S, & T, to consider
the purchase, exchange, lease or value of a real property if the Chair declared that an Open
meeting may have a detrimental effect on the negotiating position of the public body pursuant
to G.L. c. 30A, § 21(a)(6), specifically in regards the property located at 77 Bethany Road
Framingham, MA, and for approval of Executive Session minutes pursuant to G.L. c. 30A, §
21(a)(7) and G.L. c. 30A, s. 22(g)(1), specifically February 2, 2022.
Mayor’s Update
Mayor Sisitsky said that they have had productive meetings with school administration and
subcommittees and he is optimistic for the budget being in good shape for the meeting with the
City Council to review finances and revenue projections.
Remarks from the Student Advisory Committee (SAC)
SAC Chair Nilufar Noorian said that Principal Banach announced that FHS won 7 sportsmanship
awards from MIAA (Massachusetts Interscholastic Athletic Association). She wished luck to all
sophomores taking MCAS next week and gave a reminder to all high schoolers that Term 3
closes on April 1st. 
2 | Page
Page 3
Superintendent’s Update
COVID-19
Dr. Tremblay said that there were concerns when masks were made to be a personal choice, but
so far they have not seen any bullying or a spike in COVID-19 cases.
Update on Future MSBA Core Program Submission for Southside School
Dr. Tremblay said that there was a site visit today at Hemenway Elementary School set up by the
Senate President’s Office which the Chair, local legislators, and representatives from MSBA,
among others, attended. He said that it was made clear in conversations that for the next Core
Program Submission we need to identify a school building that needs to be replaced or fixed in
the application, and in this case that would be the Hemenway Elementary School as it is the
next listed for a capital project. He said after applying, and if it is accepted, they would then
determine through a feasibility study if that building can be renovated or if a new building will
need to be built and if so the best location. He said that with those recommendations and
suggested timeline it will not be designated as a Southside School submission at this point, and
although the City Council took action on purchasing the Bethany property on the Southside, the
first steps would be seeing what the next options are and if an alternate site is needed. Ms.
Sousa added that it was explained at this meeting that this was the best route to obtain
approval from MSBA. Mr. Freudberg said that timing wise we will need another location on the
Southside much sooner than the useful end of the Hemenway building, and said that we should
be thinking of what we do with that building if we do not get accepted into the MSBA program
and do not receive any funds from them. He said that this should also be communicated to the
Hemenway community and future parents and students so they have an understanding of what
this means, especially with labeling the project with Hemenway. Dr. Tremblay said the
application had to be tied to an existing Framingham School building, but there will not likely be
any impacts in upcoming years even if it is accepted into the MSBA pipeline. He said that his
vision for the future, with the proper approvals, would be to have a southside school with an
Early Childhood Center and preserve a northside campus for additional Preschool expansion.
Discussion and Vote on Unit A Framingham Teachers MOU
*Mr. Finlay and Ms. Maskell recused themselves at 7:35 p.m.
Ms. Sousa said that this was approved earlier in Executive Session. Assistant Superintendent of
Human Resources Inna London said that this was ratified by 90% of the voting members and
spoke to some of the substantial changes that were made to be in full alignment with the
Strategic Plan and vision for FPS. Some of the changes that were made included the elimination
of the high school schedule which will help provide flexibility, a commitment to increase the
diversity of staff and cultural competency of all entering employment, and establishing greater
flexibility in filling hard to fill positions.
Motion: To approve the Unit A MOA as presented.
Moved: Mr. LaBarge Seconded: Ms. Hugo
Discussion: Mr. Freudberg said that there is a spreadsheet online with a detailed list of what
was changed for this contract and gave thanks to all involved. He said that the transition to a
new Mayor helped with support and financial aspects to have a long term balance for District
needs and to support the workforce. 
3 | Page
Page 4
Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (8-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Barnhill, LaBarge, Mayor Sisitsky)
*Mr. Finlay and Ms. Maskell returned to the meeting at 7:38 p.m.
Superintendent’s FY23 Budget Recommendations Presentation
Executive Director of Finance and Operations Lincoln Lynch shared the FY23 Budget
Recommendations Presentation on the screen and said that the last time it was presented it
was an increase of 8.2%, but after discussions with City administration and the Finance and
Operations Subcommittee it was agreed upon to aim for a 5-5.6% increase. He said that this
proposal shows a 5.99% increase which was obtained by using $2 million in Circuit Breaker
Carry-Over, an increase in turnover savings, and retirement savings.
Ms. Maskell asked why Chapter 70 funds are going to the City if the intention is for students,
there are a substantial amount of low income and ELL students coming in, and we should be
using the extra money to get rid of bus fees or the supports that teachers are asking for with ELL
students instead of giving back to the City. Mr. Lynch said that we are slated to recieve $11.8
million in Chapter 70 funds and just the cost of insurance for the new positions in the budget
would be $986,000, not including current employees, and insurance is paid for by the City and
not out of the School Department budget. He said that the intention is to support the City with
funding for the insurance which benefits the District and provides a better chance to have
positions added within our budget. Discussion on the possibility of using some of the City’s
Chapter 70 funds for Capital Budget items such as roofs coming off of warranty. Ms. Maskell
said that there is no guarantee that funds will be approved for those projects, or approved for
specific school department projects, and would suggest keeping the funds for District items.
Mr. Freudberg said that many things were discussed at the Finance and Operations
Subcommittee including that there is support and agreement from the Mayor and CFO which
hasn’t happened since 2018, how the City has a perilous water sewer issue and backlog of
capital projects that they may use Chapter 70 funds for, but we do know that they are also
providing health insurance for all District employees. He said that the CFO spoke about how
usually there is 7% allocated in the budget for health insurance but this year it may be up to
10%, and the CFO had said that all City departments are asked to submit a level service budget
this year, but the School District is submitting a level service plus due to reasons such as the
Student Opportunity Act. He said that he would like certainty on when the Mayor’s
appropriation request on capital is coming and more certainty in the budget book about health
insurance costs for new positions and current positions. He noted that the local contribution
and local tax impact is down from last year due to state aid.
Mr. Lynch continued the presenation and discussed the options to get down to a 5.02% increase
which included increasing turnover savings by another $500,000, reducing new positions by
$423,752 by 6.5 positions and to increase the FY22 Circuit Breaker Carryover from $2 million to
$2.5 million. He said that the goal is to reduce the Circuit Breaker Carryover every year to
eventually get down to zero. Ms. Maskell asked what the new positions would be that would be
reduced, and said that she thinks there are a lot of administrative positions and we should be
keeping forward facing positions. Mr. Lynch said that they would be positions that were not
needed for compliance or ESSER-III funded positions that are being moved to the Operating
4 | Page
Page 5
Budget, and included positions such as increasing the Assistant Director for ESL Grant Funding,
a utility person district wide for Building and Grounds, a district wide webmaster position, a
school nurse in a multi-disability classroom, Social Emotional Behavioral (SEB) Coaches at
Cameron and Walsh, a Human Resources Talent Recruitment Strategist, and an increase to the
English Lanaguage Development (ELD). He explained the reasoning for why these were cut and
discussions within the departments and their agreement. Ms. Maskell said that she does not
agree with getting rid of the nurse or SEB coaches, and spoke to how there have been a lot of
behaviors that that position could help with as well as that ESSER-III funds were intended to
help with social emotional learning.
Public Hearing on the FY23 Budget Proposal
The Chair noted that the public hearing was advertised in the paper as well as members have
discussed it with their constituents.
Christine Mulroney said that if there needs to be a budget reduction of $3 million there needs
to be very careful thinking about what positions are cut. She said that there are concerns about
the amount of administrators in this District and the amount they are paid versus what is lacking
in the schools which is direct services to students, and caseloads are out of control and
employees are leaving.
Discussion on the FY23 Budget Proposal
Mr. Finlay said that the Superintendent restructured the administration when he started in
order to reorganize and look to support education. Ms. Sousa said that she is looking forward
to having a brand new Mayor and City Council to work on the budget with, as in the past there
were bad experiences, and she is glad that there is a focus on equity. Mr. Freudberg spoke in
support of phasing out the Circuit Breaker Carryover, how the $1.4 million that was immediately
cut from last year was put back by the new Mayor and CFO, and how there are no existing
positions being cut or eliminated. He said that in the recent Teaching and Learning
Subcommittee meeting it was discussed the possibility of having Health Education start for
grades K-5 and asked if any federal money could be used for a new position, or what the
financial aspect would be in order to do that. Assistant Superintendent of PreK-12 Education
Amy Bright said that there have been discussions around that, but it would include many
variables and planning such as time on learning, dual language programs, choice time, the
language allocation model, what would the curriculum and standards be, and who would teach
that.
Update from the Strategic Initiatives and Financial Oversight Committee (SIFOC) Members
Appointed by the School Committee
SIFOC members who were appointed by the School Committee Joel Frances and LeRoy Watkins
gave an update that included their Annual Report that was distributed to the School Committee,
City Council, and the Mayor and was included in packets. They said that this report serves as an
update and summary on the activity of the last year, a place to centralize their thoughts on
different topics, and to stress key points they felt were important to the three appointing
bodies. They said that there are centralized themes around budgeting, capital planning, and
use of revenue sources for the City. There is also a message around collaborating as a City
5 | Page
Page 6
amongst various groups to be able to address some of the financial headwinds the City is facing
and recommendations to be discussed with the various groups. Mr. Freudberg said that he
appreciates the work done, the one City mentality, and how they pointed out that the school
department has the most buildings when considering capital needs and looking at all the
different areas of funding and other departments' needs.
Advertising Process to Seek Applicants for the School Committee’s Appointments to the
Strategic Initiatives and Financial Oversight Committee (SIFOC). The Seat for the Individual At
Large Expires June 30, 2022
The Chair said that the seat for an Individual At Large for the School Committee’s SIFOC
appointments expires in June 2022, a vote is scheduled to fill this vacancy on June 1st, and there
is a draft advertisement in the packets. There was discussion on the past processes for selecting
applicants which included a subcommittee who interviewed applicants and brought a
recommendation to the full committee, or if there is only one applicant they interview in front
of the full committee. Discussion on an end date for applications with the decision of April
22nd.
Motion: To add the deadline for applications to be April 22nd at 5:00 p.m. to the advertisement
and post it.
Moved: Ms. Hugo  Seconded: Ms. Moshe
Discussion: Mr. Freudberg suggested that there be coordination with the new City
administration, Citizen Participation Officer, Chamber of Commerce and Superintendent when
posting and promoting the vacancy and encouraging volunteers.
Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Executive Director of Finance & Operations Update
FY22 Operating and Capital Budget
Mr. Lynch said that the YTD Budget in the packet shows a 65.58% expenditure rate, we are in
good financial standing, and gave a reminder that staff will still be paid through the summer.
Ms. Maskell asked why some line items are over 100 percent, such as Special Education
services. Mr. Lynch said that there were charges to the Operating Budget that will be moved to
the Circuit Breaker for Special Educaiton services, for Psychology Services they will be shifting
the budget within the Health and Wellness Department so it is not over 100%, and summer
salaries within the Community Resource Department will be moved from the Operating Budget
to ESSER-III.
FY23 Capital Plan Revisions and Updates to the Mayor and City Council
Director of Building and Grounds Matt Torti and Assistant Director of Building and Grounds
Thomas Begin shared slides showing revisions to the FY23 Capital Plan including updated costs
that are anticipated due to escalation, supply chain and delivery issues, and the rising cost of oil
and materials, among other items. This included a 30% increase in funding for each project,
which is a rough total of $4 million. Some of the other updates included the City Council voted
to allocate funds for the design for the mid-year request for the Farley roof, but requested that
the funds for the roof be added to the FY23 request and the fire alarm replacement and repairs
have been removed and will be funded through the Operating budget instead. 
6 | Page
Page 7
Subcommittee Reports
Mr. LaBarge said that the warrants were signed for a total of $3,898,090.42 and a payroll total of
$4,774,031.90 on the dates of February 28th and March 7, 2022.
Mr. Freudberg, as the Chair of the Finance and Operations Subcommittee, said that the legal
services review policy was changed last year to assign the Finance and Operations
Subcommittee to review the legal services before the budget process. He said that the
subcommittee met last night to discuss and recommended that the committee continue with
the three current law firms. He said that they also discussed reviewing the City Solicitor’s role
with his pending retirement and what this means later this year for the District, the Mayor and
the CFO. He said that in the meeting a member also requested that there be a financial review
of the Special Education legal expenditures with a review of options for savings.
Motion: To accept the Finance and Operation Subcommittee’s recommendation to continue on
with the three current law firms.
Moved: Mr. Freudberg Seconded: Mr. Finlay Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Mr. Lynch said that the NRT Routing Topic was also disussed at the Finance and Operations
Subcommittee where he gave an update that NRT has asked for a detailed request from the
District for all the changes that would have to happen in order for NRT to take over the entire
transportation operation, such as changing the routing system, parent portal app, etc. He said
that this has been taking a toll on current staff as well as being able to hire new staff, as they are
nervous if they will continue to have a job. He said that he will give an update when NRT gives
an estimate of what this would cost. Ms. Moshe asked if NRT can keep current employees and
said that there should not be a cost on transferring over to a different parent app. Ms. Maskell
said that this is the committee’s fiduciary job to make sure we are doing the right thing, and
asked that the one time fees be separated instead of being included in the large packet/sum.
Mr. Freudberg said that the Finance and Operations Subcommittee will continue to track this.
Mr. Finlay, as the Chair of the Building and Grounds Subcommittee, said that they met on March
10th to discuss the Capital Budget and they tabled looking at goals until further review and to
see where the Capital Budget process is.
Motion: To increase the Capital Budget projects by the estimated costs presented and send to
the Mayor for a Capital Budget total of $16,129,806.
Moved: Mr. Finlay Seconded: Mr. LaBarge
Discussion: Mr. Freudberg said that the Mayor has the authority to submit the Capital Budget
and the City Council does not. Mr. Finlay amended the motion.
Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Subcommittee Chairs noted upcoming meeting dates including the Climate Change,
Environment, and Sustainability Subcommittee on Monday where they will discuss and vote to
refer to the full committee Policy EBACA, Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Subcommittee on
7 | Page
Page 8
March 31st, Policy Subcommittee tomorrow, and Teaching and Learning Subcommittee with a
hold on the date of April 11th.
Approval of Minutes and Gifts
Motion: To approve the Open Session minutes of February 2, 2022 and the Executive Session
minutes of February 2, 2022 as approved in Executive Session and adjourn.
Moved: Ms. Barnhill Seconded: Mr. Finlay
Discussion: Ms. Maskell said that she would be recusing herself from the Executive Session
minutes. Ms. Barnhill withdrew her motion.
Motion: To approve the Open Session minutes of February 2, 2022.
Moved: Mr. LaBarge Seconded: Ms. Hugo Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Motion: To approve the Executive Session minutes of February 2, 2022 as approved in
Executive Session.
Moved: Ms. Barnhill Seconded: Mr. LaBarge Roll Call Vote: 7-0-2
(Yes: Hugo, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Barnhill, LaBarge. Abstained: Finlay, Maskell)
Adjournment
Motion: To adjourn.
Moved: Ms. Barnhill Seconded: Mr. Finlay Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Meeting adjourned at 9:01 p.m.
Meeting Materials
Agenda
Vaccination Update Memo
Memo on Unit A MOA
Superintendent's FY23 Budget Recommendations Presentation
Draft FY23 Budget Book
New Positions List
SIFOC Annual Report 2022
Draft SIFOC Notice of Vacancy
FY22 YTD
FY23 Capital Budget Update Presentation
Warrants
Legal Services Review Memo
Finance and Operations Subcommittee Motion on Legal Services
Policy BDG: School Attorney
Attorney Contracts
Draft February 2, 2022 Minutes
These minutes were approved by the Framingham School Committee in Open Session on April
27, 2022. 
8 | Page
Page 9
These minutes were sent to the City of Framingham for posting on May 5, 2022. 
9 | Page
