Framingham Public Schools
Robert A. Tremblay, Ed.D.,
Superintendent of Schools
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
Priscila Sousa, Chair • Jessica Barnhill, Vice Chair • Richard A. Finlay, Clerk
Adam Freudberg • Beverly Hugo • William LaBarge
Tiffanie Maskell • Jennifer Moshe • Valerie Ottaviani
Charlie Sisitsky, Mayor
Farley Building, 19 Flagg Drive, Framingham, MA 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9121 | www.framingham.k12.ma.us/schoolcommittee
SCHOOL COMMITTEE: JOINT OPEN MEETING MINUTES
DATE AND TIME:  March 29, 2022 at 7:00 p.m.
LOCATION: Remote
MEETING CALLED BY:  Chair Priscila Sousa
PRESENT:  Jessica Barnhill
Richard A. Finlay
Adam Freudberg
Beverly Hugo
William LaBarge
Tiffanie Maskell
Jennifer Moshe
Valerie Ottaviani
Priscila Sousa
Mayor Charlie Sisitsky
ABSENT:  None
ALSO PRESENT: Dr. Robert Tremblay, Superintendent
Lincoln Lynch, Executive Director of Finance and Operations
Louise Miller, City Financial Officer
City Councilors Philip R. Ottaviani, Noval Alexander, Tracey Bryant,
Michael P. Cannon, George P. King, Jr., Janet Leombruno, Christine
A. Long, Leora Mallach, Adam C. Steiner, John A. Stefanini, and
Cesar G. Stewart-Morales
Carmine Gentile, 13th Middlesex District, MA House of
Representatives
Dennis Giombetti, Senate President Spilka’s Office
Danielle Gregoire, 4th Middlesex District, MA House of
Representatives
Jack Patrick Lewis, 7th Middlesex District, MA House of
Representatives
Maria Robinson, 6th Middlesex District, MA House of
Representatives 
1 | Page
Page 2
Call to Order
The Chair called the meeting to order at 7:02 p.m., announced those in attendance, and noted
that School Committee members Jennifer Moshe and Tiffanie Maskell were joining remotely.
She said that the meeting is being broadcast live on the Government Channel, and can be
viewed Live on Facebook on the Framingham Public Schools Facebook Page. She noted
information on how to participate in public comment through Zoom and said that Facebook
comments are not the formal way to participate in public comment since there are voice
options through Zoom.
Joint Meeting with the Framingham City Council and Honorable Legislative Delegation to
Discuss City Revenues
Mayor Sisitsky thanked everyone for joining and said that an important step in deciding upon
the budget for the upcoming fiscal year is to determine what the revenues would be in FY23.
He said that per the Charter, the budget was to be presented by May 1st, however they are
planning on doing this earlier, possibly by mid-April for extra time to review and ask questions.
City Financial Officer (CFO) Louise Miller shared the financial presentation which included
information on building the FY23 Budget, financial indicators, FY23 Operating Budget drivers,
trends in FY23 projected revenue, Community Preservation Act, Enterprise Fund, Free Cash,
historical data local receipts, State Aid, the Tax Levy, the sustainability of the Tax Levy, balanced
revenue and expenditures, FY23 Budget development, and next steps. Some of the items noted
during the presentation included how it is anticipated that the health insurance premiums
would rapidly and drastically increase and they are working with a consultant to manage these
changes, the level of unpredictability in State Aid which cautions against using the full increase
to support the Operating Budget increases as the deficit would need to be made up through
another revenue source in the future, and a challenge with the Chapter 70 Allocation being that
Framingham spends more than the allocation on education.
State Representatives Jack Patrick Lewis, Maria Robinson, Danielle Gregoire, Dennis Giombetti,
and Carmen Gentile were invited to speak. Their comments included that the nearly 20%
increase in Chapter 70 funding was the result of the Student Opportunity Act that included a
new formula taking several new factors into consideration, such as the number of English
Language Learners and Low-Income Students. It was noted that this may not be replicated at a
20% level going forward and it should not be expected as such.
Ms. Sousa thanked the Delegation for the substantial increase in Chapter 70 Funding and said
that the collaboration within the budget has allowed for the School Committee to take bolder
steps and have bolder visions for equity here in Framingham, such as with starting to advocate
for a south side school as a means for correcting the root cause of bussing issues and renewed
efforts and enthusiasm for equal access to quality Pre-K programs. Mr. Freudberg noted that
tomorrow evening the School Committee will vote upon a budget request to be submitted to
the Mayor and spoke to the collaboration and meetings prior that has led to an agreed upon
number for the budget which has not happened since the transition from a town to a city. He
said that the economic impacts of the pandemic and the Water & Sewer Enterprise Fund
matched with what to do with the Chapter 70 funds, and the Chapter 70 Funds decreased the
2 | Page
Page 3
amount of the City’s share of the School Department budget by $4.4 million. He said that this
means it will be 5.8% less of a cost to local taxpayers from last year for the school district line
items. He said that the Student Opportunity Act helped to invest in students most in need,
invest in staff, fulfill contractual obligations, address inequities such as Title IX compliance,
additional Pre-K student slots, and more. He said that there is a large gap for youth to
participate in recreation throughout the City and the Parks & Recreation Department previously
released a plan to build a recreation center. He asked if there is a way to support this in the
FY23 Operating Budget such as through the one-time ARPA funds, and if this was something the
School Department and School Committee could assist with as it would benefit many students.
Mayor Sisitsky said that it is being considered among other needs and when there is a new
Economic Development Director he will be asking them to find creative ways to create a
recreational center. Ms. Maskell reiterated that the increase in Chapter 70 funds is based upon
English Language Learners and Low-Income students, and in order to meet the goal of a 5%
increase in the School Department Budget there were cuts to a nursing position and two or
three critical Social Emotional Behavioral Coaches. She said that it is important that children
and families are still supported as they recover from the pandemic and that the $3 million given
back to the City could fund those cut positions.
City Councilor Adam Steiner said that it is important to recognize that the school system was
incredibly important to the residents, and in his opinion has been chronically underfunded for
decades. He said that it is important to keep the collaborative spirit in working together, but to
remember the school system is playing catch-up and it is the City’s responsibility to make sure
they have the resources they need. City Councilor Michael Cannon asked for clarification on the
positions Ms. Maskell mentioned. Dr. Tremblay said that they are not cuts from the budget, but
cuts from new position proposals and they were vetted with the Director of Health and
Wellness. He said that there were no reductions in current staff, and the cuts were to proposed
positions that had not been filled. City Councilors voted to refer the matter of the budget to the
Finance Subcommittee.
Adjournment
Motion: To adjourn.
Moved: Mr. LaBarge Seconded: Mr. Freudberg Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Meeting adjourned at 8:31 p.m.
Meeting Materials
Agenda
FY2023 Financial Presentation
These minutes were approved by the Framingham School Committee in Open Session on April
27, 2022.
These minutes were sent to the City of Framingham for posting on May 5, 2022. 
3 | Page
