Framingham Public Schools
Robert A. Tremblay, Ed.D.,
Superintendent of Schools
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
Priscila Sousa, Chair • Jessica Barnhill, Vice Chair • Richard A. Finlay, Clerk
Adam Freudberg • Beverly Hugo • William LaBarge
Tiffanie Maskell • Jennifer Moshe • Valerie Ottaviani
Charlie Sisitsky, Mayor
Farley Building, 19 Flagg Drive, Framingham, MA 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9121 | [URL: "http://www.framingham.k12.ma.us/schoolcommittee"] www.framingham.k12.ma.us/schoolcommittee
SCHOOL COMMITTEE: OPEN MEETING MINUTES
DATE AND TIME:  January 5, 2022 at 7:00 p.m.
LOCATION: Remote
MEETING CALLED BY:  Beverly Hugo
PRESENT:  Jessica Barnhill
Richard A. Finlay
Adam Freudberg
Beverly Hugo
William LaBarge
Tiffanie Maskell
Jennifer Moshe
Valerie Ottaviani
Priscila Sousa
Mayor Charlie Sisitsky
ABSENT:  None
ALSO PRESENT: Dr. Robert Tremblay, Superintendent
Joanna Hastry, Executive Assistant for the School Committee
Call to Order
Ms. Hugo called the meeting to order at 7:01 p.m. and noted all in attendance. She said that
per the City Charter she is named as the presiding officer to lead this reorganization meeting as
the member with the longest time served in office. She said that this meeting is being
broadcast live on the Government Channel and can be viewed Live on Facebook on the
Framingham Public Schools Facebook Page.
Election of Chair, Vice-Chair, and Clerk
Ms. Hugo said that according to the City Charter the first meeting following an election a
reorganization of the School Committee takes place to elect officers. She asked if there were
any nominations for Chair.
Motion: To nominate Priscila Sousa as Chair of the School Committee.
Moved: Mr. Finlay Seconded: Ms. Barnhill
Motion: To nominate Adam Freudberg as Chair of the School Committee.
Moved: Ms. Maskell Seconded: Mr. LaBarge
Page 2
Discussion: Mr. Freudberg said that he was thankful for the nomination and if it was the will of
the full committee he would accept it, and noted that four years is a long time to be Chair. He
said that he would encourage the committee to focus on the rules to follow as a governing body
and to be transparent. He spoke to all of the achievements over the past four years. He said
that he respectfully declines the nomination and asks for the nomination to be withdrawn. He
said that he has created a transition memo which will be shared with all members. Motion
withdrawn.
Motion: To close nominations for the Chair.
Moved: Mr. LaBarge Seconded: Mr. Finlay Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Roll Call Vote for nomination of Ms. Sousa as Chair: 8-0-1
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Barnhill, LaBarge. Abstained: Maskell)
Ms. Hugo switched seats with the new Chair Ms. Sousa and Ms. Sousa became the presiding
officer for the remainder of the meeting.
Mayor Sisitsky swore Ms. Sousa in as the School Committee Chair.
Ms. Sousa thanked members for the nomination. She spoke to her experience coming to
Framingham from Brazil, having to learn English, and her education in Framingham Public
Schools. She spoke of her experience as a guardian having to navigate Special Education
services and how there is still more work to do in that area. She said that being trilingual she
will be able to help families.
Ms. Sousa asked if there were any nominations for Vice Chair.
Motion: To nominate Jessica Barnhill as Vice Chair of the School Committee.
Moved: Mr. Finlay Seconded: Mr. Freudberg
Motion: To close nominations for Vice Chair.
Moved: Mr. LaBarge Seconded: Ms. Hugo Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Roll Call Vote for Ms. Barnhill as Vice Chair: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Mayor Sisitsky swore Ms. Barnhill in as School Committee Vice Chair.
Ms. Sousa asked if there were any nominations for Clerk.
Motion: To nominate Richard A. Finlay as Clerk for the School Committee.
Moved: Ms. Ottaviani Seconded: Ms. Moshe
Motion: To nominate William LaBarge as Clerk for the School Committee.
Moved: Ms. Maskell Seconded: Ms. Hugo
Motion: To close nominations for Clerk for the School Committee.
Moved: Ms. Barnhill Seconded: Ms. Moshe Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Page 3
Roll Call Vote for William LaBarge as Clerk for the School Committee: 4 (Yes: Hugo, Freudberg,
Maskell, LaBarge)
Roll Call Vote for Richard A. Finlay as Clerk for the School Committee: 5 (Yes: Finlay, Moshe,
Sousa, Ottaviani, Barnhill)
Mr. Finlay elected Clerk by a 5-4 vote.
Mayor Sisitsky swore Mr. Finlay as Clerk for the School Committee.
State Ethics Law and Open Meeting Law Compliance
Ms. Sousa said that provided on each desk for members is a form from the Attorney General’s
Division of Open Government for them to sign and return to the City Clerk, and all members
have been provided the materials on the Open Meeting Law. She said that members will also
be receiving a link to read through the State Ethics Law materials and will need to take a test
and submit the online certificate by next week.
Re-establishment of the Temporary Subcommittee on Rules and Administration
Ms. Sousa said that the committee has automatically set up the creation of this subcommittee
to reconvene at the start of each term. She said that anyone who is interested in serving on it
should let her know of their interest, and she will appoint up to four members by early next
week.
Public comment
FTA President Christine Mulroney said that the FTA is committed to maintaining in person
learning while also promoting the health and safety of our students, educators, and families
which is difficult to achieve with the recent surge in COVID-19. She spoke to the difficulties
which included that not all staff were available to receive the rapid testing distribution over the
weekend, staffing in buildings is limited due to staff needing to quarantine or isolate which
leads to concerns of supervision of all students, there is noncompliance with mask wearing with
students, the CDC’s decision to reduce the amount of time to isolate at home to five days is
concerning and puts families and children at risk of exposure, there are concerns that at home
tests are not as simple for families to use, and there was faulty information from DESE about
K-95 masks that were provided to staff. She spoke to nurses and educators being overwhelmed
and the need for remedies to the difficulties, as well as teachers being informed of positive
cases in their classrooms and communication on the layout of classrooms for physical
distancing.
Dhurba Sen said that he is inviting everyone to the Vigil for Democracy tomorrow at 6:00 p.m. in
downtown Framingham. He said that this is to remember the events at the Capital last year. He
spoke to the organizations that are involved in this event including the League of Women
Voters.
Nicole Doak said that cloth and paper masks are not effective against the Omicron variant of
COVID-19 so the Framingham Coronavirus Community Outreach group has launched an
initiative to collect monetary and mask donations to distribute to Framingham public school
students in need. She said that students will receive four masks, and they have already
distributed 250 masks in the last two days since starting. She said that they will not be able to
Page 4
sustain this so asks that the City and School Committee consider providing masks for our
students, as the effective ones against Omicron are pricey.
Heather Gonzalez said that she is concerned with the mental health of students and spoke to an
email that was sent from a FPS staff that said that students who are caught in physical
altercations will be issued the maximum consequences allowed up to and including suspension,
expulsion, and charges by the police department. She said that staff and students must be kept
safe, but that includes students who are struggling, there should be emphasis on proactive
measures to avoid confrontations and restorative justice practices. She said that she is
requesting information on how many students have been suspended long term, permanently
expelled and arrested or charged by the Framingham police this school year, what schools those
students attend, and their race, ethnicity, and gender.
Dr. Tremblay spoke to some of the previous comments and said that he consults regularly with
the Department of Public Health and Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. He
said that in coordination with the Department of Public Health he issued a statement today for
a pause on non-essential school activities such as extracurricular activities. Mr. Freudberg asked
for clarification on an email that was sent out with unclear language in regards to the policy that
is in place requiring pooled testing and Test and Stay. Dr. Tremblay said that Test and Stay is still
occurring, but does not apply to fully vaccinated individuals, and they are trying to reduce the
number of samples in pool testing in order to be able to follow up with any positive pools for
additional tests. He said they have to constantly change and reallocate resources to where
problems may be.
Seat Assignment Drawing
Ms. Sousa noted that the seats for the Chair, Vice Chair, Clerk, Mayor, Superintendent and
Student Advisory Representative would remain the same. Ms. Hugo, at Ms. Sousa’s request,
drew names out of a bag for the order of selection of seats. Members chose their seats as
names were drawn. Ms. Hugo chose the seat next to the Superintendent, Ms. Moshe chose the
seat next to Ms. Hugo, Ms. Maskell chose the seat next to the Student Advisory Representative,
Mr. Freudberg chose the seat two seats from the Clerk, Mr. LaBarge chose the seat next to the
Clerk, and Ms. Ottaviani chose the seat next to Ms. Maskell.
Adjournment
Motion: To adjourn.
Moved: Mr. LaBarge Seconded: Ms. Maskell Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
The meeting was adjourned at 7:46 p.m.
Meeting Materials
Agenda
Certificate of Receipt of Open Law Meeting Materials
2020 Rules and Administration Subcommittee Report
Chair Transition Memo
These minutes were approved by the Framingham School Committee in Open Session on
February 16, 2022.
Page 5
These minutes were sent to the City of Framingham for posting on February 18, 2022.
