Framingham Public Schools
Robert A. Tremblay, Ed.D.,
Superintendent of Schools
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
Priscila Sousa, Chair • Jessica Barnhill, Vice Chair • Richard A. Finlay, Clerk
Adam Freudberg • Beverly Hugo • William LaBarge
Tiffanie Maskell • Jennifer Moshe • Valerie Ottaviani
Charlie Sisitsky, Mayor
Farley Building, 19 Flagg Drive, Framingham, MA 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9121 | www.framingham.k12.ma.us/schoolcommittee
SCHOOL COMMITTEE: EXECUTIVE SESSION MINUTES
DATE AND TIME: January 12, 2022 at 5:00 p.m.
LOCATION: Remote
MEETING CALLED BY: Chair Priscila Sousa
PRESENT: Jessica Barnhill
Richard A. Finlay
Adam Freudberg
Beverly Hugo
William LaBarge
Valerie Ottaviani
Tiffanie Maskell*
Jennifer Moshe
Priscila Sousa
ABSENT: Mayor Charlie Sisitsky
ALSO PRESENT: Superintendent Dr. Tremblay, Director of Finance and Operations
Lincoln Lynch, Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources Inna London, Assistant
Superintendent of PreK-12 Education Amy Bright, Attorney Dave Connelly, Director of
Community Resource Development Tiffany Lillie*, Executive Assistant to the School
Committee Joanna Hastry
Call to Order
The Chair called the meeting to order in Open Session at 5:02 p.m. and noted at the end of this
session the Committee will not reconvene in Open Session. She noted that this meeting was
being held remotely for the Open and Executive Session portions, and listed all in attendance in
the room. The call to order and roll call vote to enter Executive Session was done publicly
through conference call.
Motion: To conduct strategy sessions in preparation for negotiations with nonunion personnel,
and for contract negotiations with nonunion personnel, pursuant to G.L. c. 30A, s. 21(a)(2),
specifically regarding the Superintendent’s nominee Tiffany Lillie for the position of Assistant
Superintendent for Equity, Diversity, and Community Development and for approval of
Executive Session minutes pursuant to G.L. c. 30A, § 21(a)(7) and G.L. c. 30A, s. 22(g)(1),
specifically December 8, 2021 and December 15, 2021.
Moved: Mr. LaBarge Seconded: Ms. Hugo Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
Page 2
Page 3
Executive Director of Finance and Operations said that the teachers also receive increases for
steps which Assistant Superintendents do not, and the COLAs were lowered due to budget cuts
from the Mayor. Ms. London noted that per DESE emergency licenses are the exact same as any
other license, there is no distinction.
Motion: To accept the proposed contract for Tiffany Lillie as Assistant Superintendent for
Equity, Diversity, and Community Development with a salary of $155,000 and to waive
confidentiality for approval at the next Open Session meeting.
Moved: Mr. Freudberg Seconded: Mr. Finlay Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (9-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Maskell, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Approval of Minutes
Motion: To approve the Executive Session minutes of December 8, 2021 and December 15,
2021 with proposed redactions.
Moved: Ms. Hugo Seconded: Ms. Moshe
*Ms. Maskell recused herself at 5:46 p.m.
Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (8-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Adjournment
Motion: To adjourn.
Moved: Ms. Barnhill Seconded: Mr. LaBarge Roll Call Vote: Unanimous (8-0-0)
(Yes: Hugo, Finlay, Moshe, Freudberg, Sousa, Ottaviani, Barnhill, LaBarge)
Meeting adjourned at 5:47 p.m.
Meeting Materials
Agenda
Memo on Superintendent’s Appointment for Assistant Superintendent for Equity, Diversity and
Community Development
Draft December 8, 2021 Executive Session Minutes
Draft December 15, 2021 Executive Session Minutes
These minutes were approved by the Framingham School Committee in Executive and Open
Session on February 2, 2022.
These minutes were sent to the City of Framingham for posting on February 3, 2022.
