Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
Title: Obesity and microbiota: an example of an intricate relationship
Keywords: Microbiota,Obesity,Diet,Probiotics
ModDate: 2017/06/15 15:29:12+02'00'
Subject: Genes Nutr, doi:10.1186/s12263-017-0566-2
Author: Sabrina Duranti
CreationDate: 2017/06/10 17:43:19+08'00'
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Microbiota,Obesity,Diet,Probiotics
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s12263-017-0566-2
xmp:dc:publisher: Genes & Nutrition
xmp:dc:description: Genes Nutr, doi:10.1186/s12263-017-0566-2
xmp:dc:subject: Microbiota; Obesity; Diet; Probiotics
xmp:dc:title: Obesity and microbiota: an example of an intricate relationship
xmp:dc:creator: Sabrina Duranti; Chiara Ferrario; Douwe van Sinderen; Marco Ventura; Francesca Turroni
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2017-06-15T15:29:12+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2017-06-10T17:43:19+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2017-06-15T15:29:12+02:00
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:d6f7c06a-a308-48aa-a8da-f7db443a6d77
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:f3738677-bdcc-42bc-aef0-d92b567f3509
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:c932cb1e-5144-493a-9d0c-03e061bb1a99
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2017-06-10T21:46:28+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Francesca Turroni
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5363-0231
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: TeBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Background
Review
  The etiology of obesity
  Obesity and diet
  Diet and microbiota
  Links between obesity and host genetics
  Microbiota and obesity
  Early microbe contact and the risk of obesity
  Probiotic bacteria and prebiotic in prevention and treatment of obesity
  Preclinical and clinical studies based on probiotic therapy
  Preclinical and clinical studies using prebiotics
Conclusions
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Authors’ contributions
Competing interests
Consent for publication
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Publisher’s Note
Author details
References
Page 1
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18
DOI 10.1186/s12263-017-0566-2
REVIEW  Open Access
Obesity and microbiota: an example of an
intricate relationship
Sabrina Duranti1†, Chiara Ferrario1†, Douwe van Sinderen2, Marco Ventura1 and Francesca Turroni1*
Abstract
It is widely accepted that metabolic disorders, such as obesity, are closely linked to lifestyle and diet. Recently,
the central role played by the intestinal microbiota in human metabolism and in progression of metabolic
disorders has become evident. In this context, animal studies and human trials have demonstrated that
alterations of the intestinal microbiota towards enhanced energy harvest is a characteristic of the obese
phenotype. Many publications, involving both animal studies and clinical trials, have reported on the successful
exploitation of probiotics and prebiotics to treat obesity. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these
observed anti-obesity effects of probiotics and prebiotic therapies are still obscure. The aim of this mini-review is
to discuss the intricate relationship of various factors, including diet, gut microbiota, and host genetics, that are
believed to impact on the development of obesity, and to understand how modulation of the gut microbiota with
dietary intervention may alleviate obesity-associated symptoms.
Keywords: Microbiota, Obesity, Diet, Probiotics
Background
Diet and lifestyle have a crucial influence on the health
status of humans, and it is widely accepted that various
metabolic syndromes represent diet-induced diseases
that account for one of the largest global health prob-
lems [1].  Nevertheless, the etiology of metabolic syn-
drome is multifactorial and apart from diet other
variables such as host genetics and environmental fac-
tors are assumed to be involved. A growing list of publi-
cations have implicated the gut microbiota, i.e.,  the
community of microorganisms residing in the gastro-
intestinal tract (GIT),  as one of the major players
involved in the development of certain metabolic syn-
dromes [2].  In this context, there are several studies
clearly showing that diet, and thus nutrient availability,
modulates the composition and activity of the gut
microbiota [3]. In particular, recent metagenomics-based
studies have identified the gut microbiota as an environ-
mental factor influencing whole-body metabolism by
affecting not only energy balance but also immune and
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:francesca.turroni@unipr.it"] francesca.turroni@unipr.it
†Equal contributors
1Laboratory of Probiogenomics, Department of Chemistry, Life Sciences and
Environmental Sustainability, University of Parma, Parco Area delle Scienze
11/a, 43124 Parma, Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
gut barrier functions [4, 5]. The human gut is considered
a bioreactor with a huge diversity of bacterial taxa, pre-
dominantly belonging to the Firmicutes and Bacteroi-
detes phyla [6],  and shaped by different environmental
parameters.
Disruption of the state of homeostasis among mem-
bers of the gut microbiota may cause imbalances among
bacterial communities residing in the intestine, a situ-
ation that has been referred to as dysbiosis [7]. Dysbiosis
is frequently associated with the development of a var-
iety of diseases ranging from localized gastroentero-
logical disorders to neurological, respiratory, metabolic,
hepatic, and cardiovascular illnesses [8].  Obesity
increases cardiovascular disease through different risk
factors, i.e., elevated triglycerides, high low-density lipo-
protein (LDL)-cholesterol, low high-density lipoprotein
(HDL)-cholesterol, high blood pressure, and elevated
blood glucose and insulin levels [2].
Diet, the clinical definition of which is the total food
intake by an individual over a given time period, is be-
lieved to be linked to obesity with the gut microbiota
also playing an important role [4]. Thus, the hypothesis
that obesity can be controlled by modulating the gut
microbiota may lead the way to effective therapeutic
interventions [9, 10].  It is known that different
© The Author(s). 2017 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 2 of 15
environmental factors, including diet, influence the rela-
tive abundance of certain bacterial phyla in the gut and
consequently their functional attributes, with an impact
on host metabolism [11]. Gut microbiota of obese indi-
viduals exhibit reduced taxonomic diversity and conse-
quent diminished metabolic capacity compared to the
microbiota of lean individuals [12, 13]. Actually, an effi-
ciently fermenting microbiota may promote an obesity
status, whereas a low-efficient bacterial community may
promote leanness due to reduced energy harvest from
carbohydrate, as well as lipid fermentation [14].
The strong correlation between diet, gut micro-
biota, and obesity is gaining significant research inter-
est [2, 15],  especially in order to better understand the
etiology of obesity and to generate novel prevention and
treatment methods. The current review will focus on the
importance of diet as the responsible factor for obesity, in
particular through its effect on gut microbiota maturation
during infancy. We will also discuss available approaches
on how to exploit beneficial bacteria to influence the com-
position of the gut microbiota and thus to modulate en-
ergy harvest efficiency.
Review
The etiology of obesity
Obesity and overweight are defined as abnormal or
excessive fat accumulation, resulting from an amount of
ingested energy that is higher than the amount expended
[16].  The World Health Organization (WHO) has 
defined an overweight individual as someone having a
body mass index (BMI, i.e.,  the weight in kilograms
divided by the height in meters squared) between 25.0
and 29.9 kg/m2, and an obese person as someone with a
BMI greater or equal to 30.0 kg/m2 [16].
The worldwide prevalence of obesity has doubled dur-
ing the last 30 years, and consequently, WHO has
declared obesity as a current global epidemic. In 2014,
about 1.9 billion adults were deemed to be overweight
[17].  This number corresponds to about 39% of the
world population older than 18 years. About 13% of
wordwide adult population, corresponding to 600
million people, is considered obese [16].  Childhood
obesity has increased exponentially in infants and young
children (aged 0 to 5 years) during the past 25 years
having increased from 32 million globally in 1990 to 42
million in 2013 [16, 18].
Obesity is considered to be a major risk factor for
other metabolic complications, such as type 2 diabetes,
insulin resistance, metabolic inflammation and non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease, hypertension, and certain
types of cancer [19, 20].  The incidence of type 2 dia-
betes, which is strictly correlated with BMI and age,
is on the increase and has been reported to affect
422 million adults globally [21]. A high BMI is associ-
ated with risk of coronary heart disease and stroke
[22].  High BMI and obesity are also associated with
colorectal cancer in men and breast cancer in post-
menopausal women [23] (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the diet–microbiota–obesity correlations. Interactions between diet and gut microbiota in lean and obese
subjects: nutrition, energy intake, and microbiota modulation are reported. For lean individuals, possible microbiota enterotypes are shown.
For obese individuals, obesity-correlated diseases and possible dietary manipulations are illustrated
Page 3
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 3 of 15
The obesity pandemic is tightly linked to an increase
in energy availability and sedentariness. The etiology of
obesity is multifactorial and environmental, involving
dietary, genetic, pathological, and lifestyle factors [24],
though the individual contributions of these factors may
not always be fully understood.
There is a strict correlation between diet, microbiota,
and obesity [25].  As a clear example of this, carbohy-
drates are a vital source of energy for the human body,
yet humans have very limited abilities to degrade and
utilize dietary mono-,  oligo-,  or poly-saccharides [26].
Remarkably, various members of the gut microbiota,
known as saccharolytic microorganisms, degrade these
complex glycans thereby providing the host with a
variety of metabolites, in particular short-chain fatty
acids (SCFAs) which impact on glucose, cholesterol,
and lipid metabolism [27, 28].  In addition, the inges-
tion of different types of food, such as different kinds
of carbohydrates, may influence the gut microbiota
composition [29].
Interestingly, the gut microbiota has been shown to
regulate energy metabolism and fat storage, and is
believed to be a driving force in the development of
metabolic disorders associated with obesity [30].
Obesity and diet
Obesity and metabolic syndrome in general are influ-
enced by many physiological factors that are strongly
associated with diet and lifestyle, in addition to genetic
and environmental factors [31].
Before the development of agriculture and animal hus-
bandry, human diet was necessarily limited to wild
plants, berries, roots, and raw animal foods. With the
domestication of plants and animals, and the processing
of such foods, the original nutrient characteristics of
these unprocessed foods have changed rapidly with ad-
vancing technology following the Industrial Revolution.
Food products have profoundly changed during the last
decades, thanks to various food processing and preserva-
tion technologies [32],  modifications that have intro-
duced food with higher (and more readily available)
calories, yet with a lower nutritional value, as compared
to fresh vegetables and fruits [33].  The ongoing
westernization, urbanization, and mechanization pro-
cesses that have happened in most countries around the
world have resulted in a population with a sedentary life-
style and a high fat content, high energy-dense diet [34].
As populations become more urbanized and with rising
incomes, diets high in sugar, fat, and animal products
replace the traditional diets that are rich in complex
carbohydrates and fibers [35] (Fig. 1).
A general assumption is that a diet in which fat repre-
sents more than 30% of its total energy contributes to 
the development of obesity [36]. In a balanced diet, car-
bohydrates should represent the greatest portion of the
energy intake (55–60%),  with proteins contributing
about 15% of the energy intake (and as mentioned above
fat being no more than 30%) [37].  In a high fat diet
(HFD),  similar to a typical western USA diet, the per-
centage of total food energy derived from the three
major macronutrients is as follows: carbohydrate
(51.8%), fat (32.8%), and protein (15.4%), and with high
levels of refined sugars, refined vegetable oils, and salt
[38]. The health consequences of a HFD have been re-
ported to be rather diverse (Fig. 1).
The modified fatty acid composition of a western diet,
which is usually rich in saturated and trans fatty acids,
increases the risk of chronic vascular disease by elevat-
ing (blood serum) concentrations of total and LDL-
cholesterol [39].
An altered sodium-potassium ratio is caused not only
by the high amount of salts in certain diets but also from
the use of refined oil and sugars that are poor in potas-
sium. Diets low in potassium and high in sodium may
lead to a variety of chronic illnesses, including hyperten-
sion, stroke, kidney stones, and cancers of the gastro-
intestinal tract [40].
An important remedial role is played by dietary fibers
that can reduce total and LDL-cholesterol concentra-
tions by delaying gastric emptying, which may reduce
appetite and thus help to control caloric intake [41]. Inu-
lin, resistant starch, and beta-glucans are important diet-
ary fibers, which have been well studied and shown to
modulate gut microbiota [42]. Inulin has been reported
to regulate gastrointestinal motility and appetite, reduce
fat mass accumulation, and affect adipose tissue metab-
olism [43]. Ingestion of resistant starch and beta-glucans
causes a satiating effect [44].  Sufficient fiber intake
should amount to 25–30 g/day, while in a typical west-
ern diet this is about 15 g/day [37] (Fig. 1).
The change from a traditional diet to a western diet
may alter the gut microbiota composition, thereby influ-
encing various aspects of human health because of the
strong correlation between diet and gut microbiota, as
illustrated in the next section.
Diet and microbiota
The diet represents one of the most important factors
that determine gut microbiota composition [3]. The gut
microbiota is now considered an organ, which regulates
numerous physiological pathways and affects different
host functions [45]. A substantial portion of gut physi-
ology, including the modulation of gut motility, intes-
tinal barrier homeostasis, nutrient absorption, and fat
distribution, is believed to be influenced by the mutualis-
tic relationship between intestinal microorganisms and
their human host.
Page 4
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 4 of 15
During the last decade, several studies have evaluated
the influence of diet on the human gut microbiota com-
position and its consequent impact on metabolic func-
tions [46, 47]. Interestingly, David et al. [3] showed that
the human gut microbiota is rapidly modified by dietary
changes. Different gut microbiota assemblies were
shown to possess a varying capacity to produce particu-
lar metabolites, including SCFA, such as butyrate,
phenolic acids, and branched-chain fatty acids [48].
Arumugam et al. [49] introduced a number of distinct
gut microbial profiles, called enterotypes, which are cur-
rently believed to encompass three different microbial
patterns dominated by Prevotella, Bacteroides, or Rumi-
nococcus that are not restricted to a specific geographical
origin [49]. However, enterotypes seem to be influenced
by the diet followed by the host. In this context, individ-
uals following a diet rich in protein and animal fat are
associated with the Bacteroides enterotype, while Prevo-
tella dominated individuals ingesting more carbohy-
drates [50] (Fig. 1).  This indicates that only a limited
number of well-balanced host-microbial symbiotic states
exist that may respond differently to diet and drug in-
take. Nonetheless, despite the fact that the enterotype
hypothesis is conceptually appealing, it has been sub-
jected to a lot of scientific debate. In fact, to synopsize
microbiota variation into three discrete clusters would
imply that these enterotypes are relatively stable over
time, a situation that is not true for healthy subjects
where enterotypes are highly variable over time [51]. In
addition, clustering methodologies can be sensitive to
sampling bias and selection criteria prejudices [51].
Concerning the impact of different food constituents
on the gut microbiota, the contribution of dietary fibers,
such as resistant starch (RS) and inulin, as well as fat
and proteins should be mentioned [15]. Notably, an RS-
based diet was reported to provoke increased abundance
of Ruminococcus bromii,  as well as uncultured Oscilla-
bacter and Eubacteria rectale [52].  In contrast, in the
case of subjects following an inulin-based diet members
belonging to the Bifidobacterium genus and Atopobium
group were shown to undergo a significant increase in
abundance, while members of the Bacteroides/Prevotella
groups showed a reduction in relative numbers [53].
Furthermore, an HFD was shown to result in a modifica-
tion of the gut microbiota composition and a stimulation
of the bile acid secretion and increased fecal concentra-
tion of secondary bile acids [54]. In particular, this diet
provoked an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant
microorganisms, such as Alistipes, Bilophila, and Bacter-
oides [3]. Finally, a high intake of protein and low carbo-
hydrate intake was shown to result in a reduction in the
abundance of Roseburia and Eubacterium [55]. Interest-
ingly, a protein-rich diet decreased the production of bu-
tyrate as well as fiber-derived, antioxidant phenolic 
acids, and an increase in branched-chain fatty acids,
which result from fermentation activities by gut bacteria
[55]. Therefore, these combined data clearly demonstrate
that the gut microbiota composition is a reflection of
various dietary lifestyles.
Links between obesity and host genetics
Recently, it has been demonstrated that host genetics has a
direct influence on various metabolic syndromes, such as
diabetes and obesity. Several studies performed in mice as
well as in humans have revealed specific associations be-
tween host genotype and microbiota composition [56–59].
In this context, leptin, i.e., the so-called satiety hormone,
plays different roles in human physiology by regulating ap-
petite and body weight, and insulin secretion [60, 61].
Different studies have demonstrated that leptin genes (lep)
and the corresponding leptin receptor (LEPR) exert a spe-
cific effect on the gut microbiota composition [62–65]. In
detail, leptin-deficient ob/ob mice revealed an increased
susceptibility to Klebsiella pneumoniae and Streptococcus
pneumoniae,  suggesting that leptin somehow protects
against bacterial infection [66]. Furthermore, comparison
between obese, leptin-deficient mice, and wild-type, lean
mice, highlighted that the microbiota of obese mice was
characterized by a lower abundance of Bacteroidetes [62].
In a rat model, the loss of the leptin receptor resulted in an
increase in Holomonas spp. and Sphingomonas spp. and
decreased levels of Bifidobacterium spp. [65].
Another gene that was shown to be involved in
obesity as well as in cardiovascular disease is repre-
sented by apoA1 gene, which encodes for the Apoli-
protein A1, and mutation of which increases the
development of these diseases/metabolic disorders
[67].  Notably, polymorphism of the apoA1 gene has
been correlated with a different gut microbiota com-
position in mice, characterized by an enrichment of
Desulfovibrionaceae and a depletion of members of
the Bifidobacteriaceae family [68].
Another genetic trait, which has been shown to be in-
volved in the development of obesity, is represented by
the human phospholipase D1-encoding gene (pld1). The
gene product of pld1 was shown to provoke glycerol
phospholipid hydrolysis with the concomitant produc-
tion of phosphatidic acid, which is an intracellular mes-
senger implicated in several cellular processes, including
obesity [69].  SNPs of pld1 gene were associated with
abundance levels of genus Akkermansia muciniphila
[70]. It has been proposed that a lower abundance of A.
muciniphila may induce the development of obesity in
mice [71]. Thus, the existence of correlations between a
polymorphism of PLD1 and this bacterial taxon may
represent an example of how host-associated genotype
that is responsible for a specific gut microbiota profile,
ultimately influencing the development of obesity.
Page 5
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 5 of 15
Microbiota and obesity
It is widely accepted that a high level of microbial com-
plexity, i.e.,  high number of different microbial phylo-
types present in healthy adult subjects, plays an
important role in maintaining immune homeostasis [72].
In this context, comparison of gut microbiota differences
between lean and obese individuals suggests that the
microbiota of obese subjects is less complex [12], though
this finding is still highly debated. An important func-
tional sign that differentiates the microbiota of obese vs.
lean individuals is represented by the fermentable ability
exhibited by the members of the gut microbiota: this
capability depends on the non-digestible dietary compo-
nents introduced with the diet, which are ultimately cru-
cial in SCFA generation by the gut microbiota [73].
These molecules affect host adiposity stimulating the
hepatic de novo liponeogenesis, modulating the trigly-
ceride storage, and consequently promoting energy stor-
age [4].  Moreover, in healthy people, the produced
SCFAs represent about 10% of the total energy obtained
from the diet [74], and this energy is stored by the host
body as fat [73]. SCFAs can be used as energy sources
by the host but can also act as regulators of energy in-
take and energy metabolism. This notion is supported
by the finding that germ-free mice, in which a gut
microbiota is absent, gain less weight when fed with a
high-fat diet compared to conventionally raised mice
[75].  Moreover, obese, leptin-deficient (ob/ob) mice ex-
hibit a gut microbiome enriched in genes involved in the
recovery of energy from food [5]. Transplantation exper-
iments of the gut microbiota from ob/ob mice and lean
donors to germ-free mice provoked a significant increase
in total body fat (from 27 to 47%) in mice colonized by
the ob/ob mice microbiota. No significant increase in
body fat was detected for mice colonized with the lean
mice microbiota [5],  demonstrating that the obesity-
associated gut microbiota has an increased capacity to
harvest energy from the diet.
Differences in the gut microbiota between lean and
obese animals reveals that a microbiota, which is able to
extract more energy from a given diet, is typified by a re-
duced presence of taxa belonging to the Bacteroidetes
phylum and a proportional increase in members of the
Firmicutes phylum [62]. The alteration of the microbiota
equilibrium between Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, with
the increase of one phylum with respect to the other,
was shown to be associated with a higher presence of
enzymes for (complex) carbohydrate degradation and
fermentation [5].
An interesting study aimed at investigating differences
in the microbiota composition between obese and lean
individuals in humans revealed significantly reduced
levels of Clostridium perfringens and Bacteroidetes in
obese compared to lean subjects [76].  Recently, a 
specific bacterial taxon was demonstrated to be associ-
ated with obesity, i.e., Christensenellaceae spp., and pro-
posed as a novel microbial biomarker for obesity [77].
The member of this family was shown to reduce weight
gain in mice and to modulate the gut microbiota
composition [77]. In addition, other key members of the
human gut microbiota, such as Bacteroides thetaiotami-
cron in association with Methanobrevibacter smithii,
were shown to potentiate the process of adipose tissue
accumulation [78]. Finally, A. muciniphila is associated
with a healthier metabolic status, since it improved glu-
cose homeostasis, blood lipid content, and body com-
position following a diet-imposed calorie restriction in
humans [79]. However, these findings were simply asso-
ciations since the causality between the presence of A.
muciniphila and healthier metabolic status has not been
established.
All these findings have corroborated the notion that
obesity is correlated with a microbiota exhibiting an im-
balanced Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, associated with
an increase in Actinobacteria phylum and a decrease of
Verrucomicrobia [12, 80].
There are ample publications which suggest correla-
tions between body mass index and the presence of spe-
cific gut microorganisms [81–84].  In support of this, a
recent clinical study involving 263 individuals, including
134 obese, 38 overweight, 76 lean, and 15 anorexic sub-
jects, underlined the importance of a small number of
microbial biomarkers that are linked to obesity, encom-
passing Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, M. smithii, Escherichia
coli, and various Lactobacillus species [85].
Only some of these microbial biomarkers such as
Bacteroidetes or M. smithii have subsequently been con-
firmed in other studies [6, 12, 85, 86]. In this context, it
should be mentioned that recent findings suggest the ex-
istence of a “dose-dependent” relationship between cer-
tain species of bacteria and archaea in the human gut,
and BMI [85]. Specifically, a clear correlation exists be-
tween the number of Lactobacillus reuteri cells and
obesity, where a higher abundancy of L. reuteri is associ-
ated with a higher BMI [85].
Recently, the fungal microbiota, i.e.,  mycobiome, has
been characterized using Internal Transcribed Spacer
(ITS)-based sequencing approach in obese and non-
obese individuals [87].  Interestingly, this study showed
that the mycobiome of obese subjects has an increased
presence of the phylum Ascomycota, the class Saccharo-
mycetes, and the families Dipodascaceae and Saccharo-
mycetaceae, and an enhancement of fungi belonging to
class Tremellomycetes, as compared with non-obese indi-
viduals. Specifically, Mucor racemosus and Mucor fuscus
were the species more abundantly represented in non-
obese individuals compared to obese counterparts indi-
cating that the relative abundance of the Mucor genus
Page 6
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 6 of 15
increased after weight loss in obese subjects in a manner
analogous to Bacteroidetes [87].
In order to overcome obesity, many dietary strategies
have been put forward for effective weight reduction.
However, most of these fail to maintain a long-term
effect in reducing body weight. Intestinal microbiota
alteration has been suggested to have a significant im-
pact on this post-dieting period [88, 89]. Recently, a core
microbiota that persists after successful dieting and
weight regain has been found and this bacterial commu-
nity contributes to enhanced metabolic derangement
mediated by metabolite-induced effects on host metabol-
ism [90].  It is proposed that this persisting microbiota
may predispose the host to metabolic consequences in
these repeated weight-gain cycles.
Early microbe contact and the risk of obesity
The human intestine is considered sterile at birth [72],
and the gut microbiota colonization process in infants
commences during delivery and is enhanced by breast-
feeding [91]. Recently, this hypothesis has been revised,
even if it is largely debated, since it is proposed that an
initial colonization process occurs during gestation [92].
Experimental evidence suggests that under normal ges-
tational conditions bacteria from the maternal gut are
transmitted into the mother’s blood stream and can
ultimately either reside in the placenta or pass through
the placenta and enter the amniotic fluid [93, 94]. The
intestinal microbiota of neonates typically exhibits low
diversity and a relative dominance of the phyla Proteo-
bacteria and Actinobacteria [45, 72, 95, 96].  Several
factors, such as gestational age, diet (e.g., breast milk vs.
formula milk),  sanitation, and antibiotic treatment are
thought to influence the gut microbiota development
and composition with the emergence and dominance of
members of the Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes and reduc-
tions of other phyla, such as Proteobacteria and Actino-
bacteria [72].  Microbe-host interactions are considered
crucial for the health of the host, and even at the first
stages of life, such interactions are considered risk fac-
tors that impact on allergic diseases and development of
obesity [72, 91, 97]. Another relevant and clear factor in-
fluencing the gut microbial development of the baby is
the maternal weight-status (i.e.,  lean vs. obese).  In this
context, one study has highlighted that a child born
from an obese mother possesses different levels of Fae-
calibacterium spp., Oscillabacter spp., Blautia spp., and
Eubacterium spp. compared to a child born from a lean
mother [98]. Moreover, it has been shown that the pres-
ence of a low concentration of Bacteroides spp. and a
high level of Lactobacillus spp. in the newborn during
the first 3 months of life may cause child obesity and
overweight [99]. These data underscore the notion that
the maternal microbiota is an important provider of 
microbes that colonize the infant gut and that this ma-
ternal microbiota transfer process impacts on the overall
physiological conditions of the newborn [98, 99]. Thus,
maternal obesity can be considered a predictor for child
overweight [100].  Interestingly, another important fac-
tor that influences the gut microbiota composition of
infants and affects the risk of obesity is human breast
milk (HBM) [101].  HBM is a complex biological fluid
that provides all necessary components, such as car-
bohydrates (lactose and oligosaccharides), fats, lipogly-
cans, proteins, enzymes, hormones, and microbes, for
the development of the newborn [101].  Breast milk is
not only considered crucial from a nutritional pro-
spective but it also represents an important vehicle
for vertical transmission of bacteria from mother to
child [102–104].  It has been shown that the biodiver-
sity of the infant gut microbiota is influenced not
only by the maternal health status, mode of delivery,
gestational age of the mother, and weight gain during
pregnancy but also by maternal BMI [105, 106].  In
particular, breast milk of obese mothers is character-
ized by a reduced microbiota diversity and distinct
microbiota composition as compared to that from
lean mothers, which was shown to contain a higher
abundance of Bifidobacterium and lower counts of
Staphylococcus [97].  Furthermore, Kalliomaki et al.
[107] showed lower levels of Bifidobacterium spp. in
infants that developed obesity during the first 7 years
of their life compared to normal-weight children. This
study proposed that the increased presence of Bifido-
bacterium spp. during the early stages of life may
provide protection against overweight and obesity.
Another factor that may influence the development of
pediatric obesity is exposure to antibiotics in early stages
of life [108–110]. During infancy, which is the window
of time before a stable microbial community has devel-
oped, the microbiota seems to have increased suscepti-
bility to perturbations [111].  Assuming that intestinal
microbiota can modulate host metabolism [5, 62, 112] it
is, therefore, plausible that agents that specifically
modulate the microbiota, such as antibiotics, can affect
body weight. A greater nutrient absorption due to re-
duced bacterial populations, increasing production of
microbiota-derived calories, reduction of microbial me-
tabolites that inhibit absorption, and altered hepatic
metabolic signaling and/or intestinal defenses are the
proposed mechanisms [5, 108]. Of course, the variations
in metabolic outcomes that are associated with antibiotic
exposure seem to be largely dependent on the dose of
antibiotics, timing of administration, and diet. Moreover,
antibiotic use during pregnancy seems to have relevant
consideration as discussed above, as infants acquire at
least a part of their early life microbiota from their
mothers [113, 114].
Page 7
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 7 of 15
Probiotic bacteria and prebiotic in prevention and
treatment of obesity
Modulation of gut microbiota through the use of prebi-
otics and probiotics are claimed as possible strategies for
the prevention of weight gain in obese-prone subjects
and a non-invasive treatment for those individuals
suffering from severe obesity.
Prebiotics are food components that confer health
benefits to the host through the stimulation of growth
and/or metabolism of beneficial bacteria including spe-
cific members of the gut microbiota [115].  Prebiotics
generally include carbohydrates that are not accessible
to the enzymes produced by the human body [e.g.,
fructo-oligosaccharides (FOS),  galacto-oligosaccharides
(GOS),  gluco-oligosaccharides, xylo-oligosaccharides,
inulin, resistant starch, arabinoxylan and arabinogalac-
tan, lactulose, and raffinose],  which means that they
reach the distal sections of human GIT still intact where
they constitute fermentable substrates for intestinal bac-
teria [116]. Prebiotics are considered as a nutritional tool
to promote bacterial proliferation in the lower intestine,
to induce modification of gut microbiota and, thus, to
counteract fat mass accumulation and related metabolic
disorders [117, 118].
In contrast, probiotics are health-promoting microor-
ganisms, which are defined according to FAO/WHO as
“live microorganisms that after ingestion confer health
benefits to the host maintaining the gut microbiota cor-
rect equilibrium” [119], a definition recently updated as
follows: “live microorganisms that, when administered in
adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host”
[120]. The health-promoting effects exerted by probiotic
bacteria are mediated by the interaction with other gut-
associated microorganisms and with the host [121].
Reported health benefits encompass modulation of the
immune response, maintenance of the intestinal barrier,
antagonism of pathogen adhesion to host tissue, and
production of different metabolites such as vitamins,
SCFAs, and molecules that act as neurotransmitters in-
volved in gut–brain axis communication [122–124].
Currently, the large majority of commercially used pro-
biotic bacteria belong to two genera, i.e., Bifidobacterium
and Lactobacillus, both of which are typical inhabitants
of the human intestine.
In a small number of cases, the role of particular
Lactobacillus species on the modification of the body
weight, both in animals and human beings, has been
assessed [125].  However, the resulting data are rather
contradictory and variable depending on the species as
well as the strains involved. In this context, probiotic
therapy based on Lactobacillus rhamnosus [126], Lacto-
bacillus delbrueckii [127],  and L. reuteri [128] was
shown to result in weight increase perhaps because of
their pro-inflammatory effects, while other Lactobacillus 
species, such as Lactobacillus fermentum [129] and Lacto-
bacillus gasseri [130, 131] were associated with weight
loss. Finally, certain species, such as Lactobacillus sporo-
genes, showed no significant effects on weight [125].
In a similar manner, species belonging to the Bifido-
bacterium genus, which represent microorganisms that
are common inhabitants of mammalian GIT and which
are associated with conferring beneficial effects on the
host, were shown to have anti-obesity effects. For ex-
ample, Bifidobacterium pseudocatenulatum,  Bifidobac-
terium longum,  and Bifidobacterium adolescentis have
been shown to reduce body weight and blood serum
levels (i.e.,  total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, LDL-
cholesterol, triglyceride, glucose, leptin and lipase levels)
[132, 133].
Preclinical and clinical studies based on probiotic therapy
There are quite a number of studies reporting anti-
obesity effects based on probiotic supplementation,
which specifically act to mitigate lipogenesis, inflamma-
tion, and weight loss [4, 10, 134, 135]. Other trials sug-
gest that the microbiota is involved in increased gut
permeability for lipopolysaccharides, in lipogenesis, and
in regulating fat storage and adiposity [4, 134, 136, 137].
An intriguing study has evaluated body weight effects
as a result of supplementation of mice receiving an HFD
for 12 weeks combined with a probiotic mixture encom-
passing both lactobacilli (Lactobacillus paracasei CNCM
I-4270, L. rhamnosus I-3690) and bifidobacteria (Bifido-
bacterium animalis subsp. lactis I-2494).  All strains
significantly attenuated HFD-induced weight gain,
improved glucose–insulin homeostasis, and reduced
hepatic steatosis [10]. In addition, a significant reduction
was observed of pro-inflammatory macrophage infiltra-
tion into adipose tissue, which is one of the causes of
chronic adipose inflammation, insulin resistance, and
other obesity-associated complications [10, 138].
Another preclinical study performed in diet-induced
obese C57BL/6J mice treated with Lactobacillus curvatus
HY7601 and Lactobacillus plantarum KY1032 for
10 weeks showed reduced body weight gain and fat ac-
cumulation, as well as lowered levels of plasma insulin,
leptin, total-cholesterol, and liver toxicity biomarkers.
All these data indicate that treatments with certain pro-
biotic bacteria may counteract diet-induced obesity and
modulate genes associated with metabolism and inflam-
mation in the liver and adipose tissue [139].
L. plantarum strain HAC01 was shown to provoke
similar effects of those described above, associated with
a reduction of adipose tissue accumulation and a regula-
tion of gene expression related to lipid metabolism in a
diet-induced obesity murine model [140].  Various re-
ports indicate that the benefits on body weight are medi-
ated by metabolic effects, such as amelioration of lipid
Page 8
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 8 of 15
profile, improvements in insulin resistance, and control
of glycemic values.
Various published studies have involved the probiotic
L. rhamnosus GG strain [137, 141]. Apart from a physio-
logical effect exerted by this strain in terms of reduction
of weight gain in mice, it was observed that L. rhamno-
sus GG can protect animals from HFD-induced insulin
resistance, as well as attenuate adiposity in the liver and
mesenteric adipose tissue [141]. Notably, not only viable
L. rhamnosus GG cells can elicit such an anti-obesity
effect but also purified exopolysaccharides from L.
rhamnosus GG cells can reduce adipogenesis and
decrease fat pads and inflammation in mice through
Toll-like receptor 2 expression in HFD-fed mice [137].
Another L. rhamnosus isolate, strain PB01, was also
shown to exhibit anti-obesity activity. Specifically, strain
PB01 was administered to diet-induced obese (DIO)
mice and their normal-weight (NW) controls, resulting
in weight reduction, which has been attributed to a pro-
tective effect of this strain on nociception circuits [142].
Similarly, the administration for 30 days of L. paraca-
sei CNCM I-4034, Bifidobacterium breve CNCM I-4035,
and L. rhamnosus CNCM I-4036 reduced hepatic steato-
sis in part by lowering serum lipopolysaccharide, and
elicited an anti-inflammatory effect in obese rats [143].
A significant reduction of total body and visceral adi-
pose tissue weight, together with improvement in insulin
sensitivity was observed in Wistar rats following a short-
term treatment with probiotic mixtures containing a
concentrated biomass of 14 probiotic bacteria belonging
to the genera Bifidobacterium,  Lactobacillus,  Lactococ-
cus, and Propionibacterium [144]. Similarly, the individ-
ual administration of Lactobacillus casei IBS041,
Lactobacillus acidophilus AD031, and two bifidobacterial
strains, i.e.,  Bifidobacterium bifidum BGN4 and B.
longum BORI, to HFD-fed mice for 8 weeks revealed po-
tential anti-obesity effects of these strains. In fact, B.
longum BORI was shown to significantly suppress mur-
ine weight gain and lower total cholesterol levels in the
liver, while L. acidophilus and B. bifidum BGN4 were
shown to significantly decrease triglyceride levels in the
liver, showing a potential suppression of lipid deposition
in this organ [145].
The effectiveness of probiotic therapy in the control/
reduction of body weight was evaluated not only in ani-
mal experiments but also in human clinical trials. In this
context, a group of women with excess body weight or
obese phenotype (25< BMI <40) were enrolled for a ran-
domized, double-blind trial to receive a probiotic mix
based on L. acidophilus and L. casei, Lactococcus lactis,
B. bifidum,  and Bifidobacterium lactis for 8 weeks.
Supplementation with a probiotic mix reduced abdom-
inal fat and increased antioxidant enzyme activity as
compared to dietary intervention alone [146]. 
Various studies have shown that bile acids act as sig-
naling molecules in the host and thereby regulate en-
ergy, glucose, and lipid metabolism [147, 148]. Recently,
it has been postulated that microbial metabolism of bile
acids may also play a role in the regulation of host
weight gain, particularly given that individual bile acids
are regulators of host energy metabolism [135, 148, 149].
It is worth mentioning that numerous well-known pro-
biotics exhibit bile salt hydrolase (BSH) activity [150]
and this activity may partially account for their meta-
bolic effects. It has been proposed that microbial BSH
activity significantly alters both gastrointestinal and hep-
atic host functions [135, 149]. Using both germ-free and
conventionally raised murine models, it was demon-
strated that gastrointestinal expression of BSH results in
local bile acid deconjugation with concomitant alter-
ations in lipid and cholesterol metabolism, signaling
functions, and weight gain. Moreover, it was shown
that BSH mediates a microbe-host dialogue that func-
tionally regulates host lipid metabolism confirming its
role in metabolic syndrome [135].  Specifically, the ex-
pression of cloned BSH enzymes in the gastrointes-
tinal tract of gnotobiotic or conventionally raised
mice significantly altered plasma bile acid signatures
and regulated transcription of key genes involved in
lipid metabolism and gastrointestinal homeostasis.
This high-level expression of BSH in conventionally
raised mice caused a significant reduction in host
weight gain, plasma cholesterol, and liver triglycerides,
demonstrating the overall impact of elevated BSH ac-
tivity on host physiology [135].
Apart from certain lactobacilli and bifidobacteria,
other microorganisms, sometimes referred to as the next
generation probiotics and belonging to A. muciniphila
[71], Pediococcus pentosaceus [151], Saccharomyces bou-
lardii [152], and Bacteroides uniformis [153] have been
evaluated for their potential anti-obesity effects. Interest-
ingly, the presence of A. muciniphila, a mucin-degrading
bacterium that resides in the mucus layer of healthy in-
dividuals [154],  was shown to be inversely correlated
with body weight [155] and type 1 diabetes [156].  The
abundance of A. muciniphila is significantly lower in
obese mice, and a daily treatment with this bacterium to
HFD-induced obese mice for 4 weeks normalized diet-
induced metabolic endotoxemia and adiposity, reduced
body weight, and improved body conformation, i.e.,  fat
mass/lean mass ratio, without changes in food intake
[71]. A specific analysis on the potential associations be-
tween specific microorganism and adipose tissue inflam-
mation during obesity revealed that A. muciniphila
abundance is inversely correlated with altered adipose
tissue metabolism suggesting the existence of a link be-
tween the abundance of this species and adipose tissue
homeostasis on the onset of obesity [157].
Page 9
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 9 of 15
A clinical trial involving a dietary intervention of 49
overweight and obese adults displayed a significant asso-
ciation between A. muciniphila abundance and meta-
bolic health. In fact, subjects with higher gene richness
and A. muciniphila abundance exhibited the healthiest
metabolic status, particularly in fasting plasma glucose,
plasma triglycerides, and body fat distribution [79].
Recently, it has been demonstrated that treatment of
mice with non-viable A. muciniphila cells, which had
been killed by pasteurization, enhanced its capacity to
reduce fat mass development, insulin resistance, and
dyslipidemia [158].  This effect seems to be due to an
interaction between Toll-like receptor 2 and a specific
protein, which is not affected by the pasteurization
process, and which is present in the outer membrane of
A. muciniphila [158].  These findings suggest that non-
viable A. muciniphila may be used as a therapeutic agent
for the treatment of obesity and associated disorders.
A study involving P. pentosaceus LP28, administered
to HFD-induced obese mice for 8 weeks, showed a re-
duced body weight gain and liver lipid contents (trigly-
ceride and cholesterol) compared to a control group
[151].  Recently, this strain was used in a clinical trial
confirming the results obtained in the murine study.
Furthermore, LP28 heat-killed cells display an anti-
obesity effect that reduces BMI, body fat, and waist
circumference, indicating that the LP28 strain repre-
sents a candidate for metabolic syndrome prevention/
treatment [159].
As mentioned above, another probiotic strain tested
for its potential anti-obesity feature is B. uniformis
CECT 7771. This strain was administrated to obese
C57BL/6 mice for 7 weeks, and the resulting effects in-
cluded a reduced serum cholesterol, triglyceride, glucose,
insulin, and leptin levels, improved oral tolerance to glu-
cose, and a significant reduction in total body weight
gain [153]. Recently, this strain was tested in a preclin-
ical study to evaluate its safety following acute oral ad-
ministration, revealing that no adverse effects were
observed with regards to general health status or food
intake [160].
Finally, the yeast S. boulardii was assayed for its anti-
obesity properties. The administration of this strain to
obese mice and type 2 diabetic mice for 4 weeks reduced
body weight, fat mass, and hepatic steatosis, and caused
a modification of the gut microbiota composition, which
was characterized by a significant increment of Bacteroi-
detes and a reduction of the levels of Firmicutes, Proteo-
bacteria, and Tenericutes phyla [152].
In summary, several preclinical and a small number of
clinical studies involving different bacterial strains have
been performed, showing that nearly all tested strains
elicited varying anti-obese effects. However, in order to
increase the understanding of such microbes and more 
specifically the various members of the gut microbiota
that affect obesity in humans, multi-omic approaches in-
volving key target tissues and a precise evaluation of
microbiota composition should be combined for the
generation of testable hypotheses. Such hypotheses will
first have to be validated in animal models, followed by
double blind, placebo-controlled interventions in
humans (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2 Strategies used to improve human health by gut microbiota
modulation. Multi-omic approaches are employed to increase the
understanding of how the microbiota may affect human metabolism.
Such approaches will be crucial in order to dissect differences in the
microbiota composition between healthy people and those who are
affected by metabolic disorders. In a second step, different experimental
in vitro and in vivo models are used to identify the underlying
mechanisms responsible for the modulation the gut microbiota,
which will be important to create the basis for human intervention
trials and subsequent treatments
Page 10
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 10 of 15
However, despite the increasing number of scientific
reports on the anti-obesity activity of certain microbes,
it is important to consider that the observed effects may
vary dramatically from one individual to another as a
consequence of the high inter-individual variability of
the gut microbiota composition. In addition, the ob-
tained results may also vary based on the tested micro-
organism, since the anti-obesity properties could be
strain specific.
Preclinical and clinical studies using prebiotics
Prebiotics are considered to exert anti-obesity activ-
ities through the selective modulation of specific
microorganisms of the human gut microbiota. How-
ever, the underlying molecular mechanisms driving
this response are far from being completely under-
stood. Both animal and human clinical studies have
investigated the potential anti-obesity features of
various prebiotics, which associate the observed anti-
obesity activity with alterations in hormone produc-
tion, synthesis of SCFAs, and a decrease in bacterial
lipopolysaccharides [155, 161–163].  Recently, the
intervention with dietary inulin-type fructans (ITF) in
30 obese women for 3 months (16 g/day) selectively
modified the gut microbiota composition, without
provoking any significant change in host metabolism,
and ultimately did not cause a significant effect on
body weight [164].  In addition, treatment with ITF,
but not the placebo, led to an increase in Bifidobac-
terium and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii.  However,
both bacteria negatively correlated with serum lipo-
polysaccharide levels. Similarly, a study enrolling 24
diabetic females that received (10 g/day) inulin or
maltodextrin for 8 weeks (compared to a control
group) revealed that inulin supplementation seems to
modulate inflammation and metabolic endotoxemia
in women with type 2 diabetes [165].  ITF consump-
tion has also been reported to selectively modulate
Bifidobacterium spp. and decreases fecal SCFA con-
centration in 15 obese women that received 16 g/day
ITF for 3 months. These bacterial fermentation end
products were shown to positively correlate with
BMI suggesting that SCFA might be involved in body
weight increase [166].
Inulin supplementation seems to have an impact on
gastrointestinal hormones such as glucagon-like peptide-
1 (GLP-1), peptide YY (PYY), ghrelin, and related pep-
tide hormones both in animals [167–169] and in
humans [43, 162, 170].  Emerging findings suggest that
these enteroendocrine peptides are involved in the regu-
lation of glucose homeostasis, energy balance, appetite
sensations, and food intake [171, 172].
Prebiotic supplementation has been shown to influ-
ence not only appetite perception and fat mass storage 
but also host energy homeostasis. A satiating effect of
resistant starch, supported by changes in neuronal activ-
ity in hypothalamic appetite regulation centers, has in-
deed been reported [44].  Similar results were obtained
with the dietary supplementation of β-glucan that
appears to have an effect on appetite regulation and an
impact on energy intake [173].
On the other hand, a small number of studies have
explored the effects of a prebiotic on liver diseases (i.e.,
inulin, raftilose, FOS, lactulose).  Specifically, hepatic
steatosis, which is characterized by abnormal lipid stor-
age in liver, is closely linked to metabolic syndrome, as
associated with obesity. In this context, it was shown
that fermentable carbohydrates are involved in decreas-
ing hepatic lipogenesis [174, 175].
Prebiotics seem to mediate microbial SCFA produc-
tion, which has multiple roles in host homeostasis
[176].  Specifically, prebiotics that are able to prefera-
bly stimulate the production of propionate and butyr-
ate, as opposed to acetate, are of particular interest,
since acetate constitutes a lipogenic and cholestero-
genic substrate in the liver, while the production of
propionate may decrease the hepatic lipogenic poten-
tial [177].  Nevertheless, this is depending not only on
the prebiotic compounds but also on the presence of
specific members of the gut microbiota promoting the
conversion of these food ingredients into these
particular SCFAs.
Conclusions
The incidence of obesity and metabolic disorders has
seen a dramatic increase among the human popula-
tion in recent decades. Diet and lifestyle have an im-
portant impact on the development and evolution of
obesity, though recent studies have also revealed the
key role of the microbiota in the incidence and sever-
ity of this metabolic disorder. However, many details
of the complex relationship that exists between
microbiota, diet, and host remain to be unraveled.
There is an urgent need for dietary interventions that
provide unambiguous proof of the effectiveness of
various dietary supplements (prebiotics and/or probio-
tics) with regards to modulation of the gut microbiota
composition and/or metabolic activity to ultimately
improve human health in the context of obesity. A
better understanding of the impact of specific mi-
crobes on host physiology will be crucial in order to
develop future therapeutic strategies to prevent and/
or treat metabolic disorders including obesity. How-
ever, obesity is not only microbiota-driven thus a
careful evaluation of all factors that are involved, in-
cluding, but not limited to, host genetics, diet, and
lifestyle, should be taken into account.
Page 11
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 11 of 15
Abbreviations
BMI: Body mass index; BSH: Bile salt hydrolase; DIO: Diet-induced obese;
FOS: Fructo-oligosaccharides; GIT: Gastrointestinal tract; GOS: Galacto-
oligosaccharides; HBM: Human breast milk; HDL: High density lipoprotein;
HFD: High fat diet; ITF: Inulin-type fructans; ITS: Internal Transcribed Spacer;
LDL: Low density lipoprotein; LEPR: Leptin receptor; NW: Normal weight;
PYY: Peptide YY; RS: Resistant starch; SCFA: Short-chain fatty acids;
WHO: World Health Organization
Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
Funding
This work was funded by the EU Joint Programming Initiative—A Healthy
Diet for a Healthy Life (JPI HDHL, [URL: "http://www.healthydietforhealthylife.eu/"] http://www.healthydietforhealthylife.eu/)
to DvS (in conjunction with Science Foundaion Ireland [SFI], Grant Number
15/JP-HDHL/3280) and MIUR to MV. We thank GenProbio srl for the financial
support of the Laboratory of Probiogenomics. DvS is a member of The APC
Microbiome Institute funded by SFI, through the Irish Government’s National
Development Plan (Grant Number SFI/12/RC/2273).
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
Authors’ contributions
SD and CF contributed to the acquisition of data. FT drafted the manuscript,
contributed to the acquisition of data, and revised the manuscript critically.
MV and DvS made substantial contributions to the conception, design, and
interpretation of data and revised the manuscript critically. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Author details
1Laboratory of Probiogenomics, Department of Chemistry, Life Sciences and
Environmental Sustainability, University of Parma, Parco Area delle Scienze
11/a, 43124 Parma, Italy. 2APC Microbiome Institute and School of
Microbiology, National University of Ireland, Cork, Ireland.
Received: 24 February 2017 Accepted: 25 May 2017
References
1.  Robson AA. Preventing diet induced disease: bioavailable nutrient-rich,
low-energy-dense diets. Nutr Health. 2009;20(2):135–66.
2.  Sonnenburg JL, Backhed F. Diet-microbiota interactions as moderators of
human metabolism. Nature. 2016;535(7610):56–64.
3.  David LA, Maurice CF, Carmody RN, Gootenberg DB, Button JE, Wolfe BE,
Ling AV, Devlin AS, Varma Y, Fischbach MA, et al. Diet rapidly and
reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2014;505(7484):
559–63.
4.  Backhed F, Ding H, Wang T, Hooper LV, Koh GY, Nagy A, Semenkovich CF,
Gordon JI. The gut microbiota as an environmental factor that regulates fat
storage. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101(44):15718–23.
5.  Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, Magrini V, Mardis ER, Gordon JI.
An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy
harvest. Nature. 2006;444(7122):1027–31.
6.  Ley RE, Turnbaugh PJ, Klein S, Gordon JI. Microbial ecology: human gut
microbes associated with obesity. Nature. 2006;444(7122):1022–3. 
7.  Tamboli CP, Neut C, Desreumaux P, Colombel JF. Dysbiosis in inflammatory
bowel disease. Gut. 2004;53(1):1–4.
8.  DuPont AW, DuPont HL. The intestinal microbiota and chronic disorders of
the gut. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;8(9):523–31.
9.  Burcelin R, Courtney M, Amar J. GM and metabolic diseases: from
pathogenesis to therapeutic perspective, in metabonomics and gut
microbiota in nutrition and disease. London: Springer; 2015.
10. Wang J, Tang H, Zhang C, Zhao Y, Derrien M, Rocher E, van-Hylckama Vlieg
JE, Strissel K, Zhao L, Obin M, et al. Modulation of gut microbiota during
probiotic-mediated attenuation of metabolic syndrome in high fat diet-fed
mice. Isme J. 2015;9(1):1–15.
11. Martin MA, Sela DA. Infant GM: developmental influences and health
outcomes, in Building Babies, eds Clancy K. B. H., Hinde K., Rutherford J. N.,
editors. (New York, NY: Springer; ). 2013:233–56. Available online at: [URL: "http://link.springer.com/book/10.1007%2F978-1-4614-4060-4"] http://
 link.springer.com/book/10.1007%2F978-1-4614-4060-4.
12. Turnbaugh PJ, Hamady M, Yatsunenko T, Cantarel BL, Duncan A, Ley RE,
Sogin ML, Jones WJ, Roe BA, Affourtit JP, et al. A core gut microbiome in
obese and lean twins. Nature. 2009;457(7228):480–4.
13. Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Arora T. Nutrition, the gut microbiome and the
metabolic syndrome. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2013;27(1):59–72.
14. Backhed F, Ley RE, Sonnenburg JL, Peterson DA, Gordon JI. Host-bacterial
mutualism in the human intestine. Science. 2005;307(5717):1915–20.
15. Cani PD, Everard A. Talking microbes: when gut bacteria interact with diet
and host organs. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2016;60(1):58–66.
16. Obesity and overweight [[URL: "http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/"] http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/
 en/]. Accessed 14 Feb 2017.
17. Zhang P, Wang R, Gao C, Jiang L, Lv X, Song Y, Li B. Prevalence of central
obesity among adults with normal BMI and its association with metabolic
diseases in Northeast China. PLoS One. 2016;11(7):e0160402.
18. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of childhood and adult
obesity in the United States, 2011-2012. JAMA. 2014;311(8):806–14.
19. Otto MC, Padhye NS, Bertoni AG, Jacobs Jr DR, Mozaffarian D. Everything in
moderation—dietary diversity and quality, central obesity and risk of
diabetes. PLoS One. 2015;10(10):e0141341.
20. Shi J, Wang Y, Cheng W, Shao H, Shi L. Direct health care costs associated
with obesity in Chinese population in 2011. J Diabetes Complications. 2017;
31(3):523-28.
21. Diabetes [[URL: "http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs312/en/"] http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs312/en/]
22. Chen Y, Copeland WK, Vedanthan R, Grant E, Lee JE, Gu D, Gupta PC,
Ramadas K, Inoue M, Tsugane S, et al. Association between body mass
index and cardiovascular disease mortality in east Asians and south Asians:
pooled analysis of prospective data from the Asia Cohort Consortium. BMJ.
2013;347:f5446.
23. De Pergola G, Silvestris F. Obesity as a major risk factor for cancer. J Obes.
2013;2013:291546.
24. Kobyliak N, Conte C, Cammarota G, Haley AP, Styriak I, Gaspar L, Fusek J,
Rodrigo L, Kruzliak P. Probiotics in prevention and treatment of obesity:
a critical view. Nutr Metab. 2016;13:14.
25. Khan MJ, Gerasimidis K, Edwards CA, Shaikh MG. Role of gut microbiota in
the aetiology of obesity: proposed mechanisms and review of the literature.
J Obes. 2016;2016:7353642. Accessed 14 Feb 2017.
26. Koropatkin NM, Cameron EA, Martens EC. How glycan metabolism shapes
the human gut microbiota. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012;10(5):323–35.
27. Tremaroli V, Backhed F. Functional interactions between the gut microbiota
and host metabolism. Nature. 2012;489(7415):242–9.
28. David Ríos-Covián, Patricia Ruas-Madiedo, Abelardo Margolles, Miguel
Gueimonde, Clara G. de los Reyes-Gavilán, and Nuria Salazar. Intestinal Short
Chain Fatty Acids and their Link with Diet and Human Health. Front
Microbiol. 2016;7:185.
29. Carmody RN, Gerber GK, Luevano Jr JM, Gatti DM, Somes L, Svenson KL,
Turnbaugh PJ. Diet dominates host genotype in shaping the murine gut
microbiota. Cell Host Microbe. 2015;17(1):72–84.
30. Le Chatelier E, Nielsen T, Qin JJ, Prifti E, Hildebrand F, Falony G,
Almeida M, Arumugam M, Batto JM, Kennedy S, et al. Richness of
human gut microbiome correlates with metabolic markers. Nature.
2013;500(7464):541.
31. Rodriguez-Hernandez H, Simental-Mendia LE, Rodriguez-Ramirez G, Reyes-
Romero MA. Obesity and inflammation: epidemiology, risk factors, and
markers of inflammation. Int J Endocrinol. 2013;2013:678159.
32. Popkin BM, Adair LS, Ng SW. Global nutrition transition and the pandemic
of obesity in developing countries. Nutr Rev. 2012;70(1):3–21.
Page 12
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 12 of 15
33. Slavin JL, Lloyd B. Health benefits of fruits and vegetables. Adv Nutr. 2012;
3(4):506–16.
34. Popkin BM. The nutrition transition and obesity in the developing world.
J Nutr. 2001;131(3):871S–3S.
35. Kearney J. Food consumption trends and drivers. Philos T R Soc B. 2010;
365(1554):2793–807.
36. Hariri N, Thibault L. High-fat diet-induced obesity in animal models. Nutr
Res Rev. 2010;23(2):270–99.
37. Krauss RM, Eckel RH, Howard B, Appel LJ, Daniels SR, Deckelbaum RJ,
Erdman Jr JW, Kris-Etherton P, Goldberg IJ, Kotchen TA, et al. AHA Dietary
Guidelines: revision 2000: A statement for healthcare professionals from the
Nutrition Committee of the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2000;
102(18):2284–99.
38. Cordain L, Eaton SB, Sebastian A, Mann N, Lindeberg S, Watkins BA, O'Keefe
JH, Brand-Miller J. Origins and evolution of the Western diet: health
implications for the 21st century. Am J Clin Nutr. 2005;81(2):341–54.
39. Siri-Tarino PW, Sun Q, Hu FB, Krauss RM. Saturated fatty acids and risk of
coronary heart disease: modulation by replacement nutrients. Curr
Atheroscler Rep. 2010;12(6):384–90.
40. Cappuccio FP. Cardiovascular and other effects of salt consumption. Kidney
Int Suppl. 2013;3(4):312–5.
41. Lattimer JM, Haub MD. Effects of dietary fiber and its components on
metabolic health. Nutrients. 2010;2(12):1266–89.
42. Kieffer DA, Martin RJ, Adams SH. Impact of dietary fibers on nutrient
management and detoxification organs: gut, liver, and kidneys. Adv Nutr.
2016;7(6):1111–21.
43. Verhoef SP, Meyer D, Westerterp KR. Effects of oligofructose on appetite
profile, glucagon-like peptide 1 and peptide YY3-36 concentrations and
energy intake. Br J Nutr. 2011;106(11):1757–62.
44. So PW, Yu WS, Kuo YT, Wasserfall C, Goldstone AP, Bell JD, Frost G. Impact
of resistant starch on body fat patterning and central appetite regulation.
PLoS One. 2007;2(12):e1309.
45. Eckburg PB, Bik EM, Bernstein CN, Purdom E, Dethlefsen L, Sargent M, Gill
SR, Nelson KE, Relman DA. Diversity of the human intestinal microbial flora.
Science. 2005;308(5728):1635–8.
46. Arpaia N, Campbell C, Fan X, Dikiy S, van der Veeken J, de Roos P, Liu H,
Cross JR, Pfeffer K, Coffer PJ, et al. Metabolites produced by commensal
bacteria promote peripheral regulatory T-cell generation. Nature. 2013;
504(7480):451–5.
47. Ze X, Le Mougen F, Duncan SH, Louis P, Flint HJ. Some are more equal than
others: the role of “keystone” species in the degradation of recalcitrant
substrates. Gut Microbes. 2013;4(3):236–40.
48. Louis P, Hold GL, Flint HJ. The gut microbiota, bacterial metabolites and
colorectal cancer. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2014;12(10):661–72.
49. Arumugam M, Raes J, Pelletier E, Le Paslier D, Yamada T, Mende DR,
Fernandes GR, Tap J, Bruls T, Batto JM, et al. Enterotypes of the human
gut microbiome. Nature. 2011;473(7346):174–80.
50. Wu GD, Chen J, Hoffmann C, Bittinger K, Chen YY, Keilbaugh SA, Bewtra M,
Knights D, Walters WA, Knight R, et al. Linking long-term dietary patterns
with gut microbial enterotypes. Science. 2011;334(6052):105–8.
51. Knights D, Ward TL, McKinlay CE, Miller H, Gonzalez A, McDonald D, Knight
R. Rethinking “enterotypes”. Cell Host Microbe. 2014;16(4):433–7.
52. Walker AW, Ince J, Duncan SH, Webster LM, Holtrop G, Ze X, Brown D,
Stares MD, Scott P, Bergerat A, et al. Dominant and diet-responsive groups
of bacteria within the human colonic microbiota. Isme J. 2011;5(2):220–30.
53. Waitzberg DL, Pereira CCA, Logullo L, Jacintho TM, Almeida D, da Silva MDT,
Torrinhas RSMD. Microbiota benefits after inulin and partially hydrolized
guar gum supplementation—a randomized clinical trial in constipated
women. Nutr Hosp. 2012;27(1):123–9.
54. Islam KBMS, Fukiya S, Hagio M, Fujii N, Ishizuka S, Ooka T, Ogura Y, Hayashi
T, Yokota A. Bile acid is a host factor that regulates the composition of the
cecal microbiota in rats. Gastroenterology. 2011;141(5):1773–81.
55. Russell WR, Gratz SW, Duncan SH, Holtrop G, Ince J, Scobbie L,
Duncan G, Johnstone AM, Lobley GE, Wallace RJ, et al. High-protein,
reduced-carbohydrate weight-loss diets promote metabolite profiles likely to
be detrimental to colonic health. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;93(5):1062–72.
56. Org E, Parks BW, Joo JWJ, Emert B, Schwartzman W, Kang EY, Mehrabian M,
Pan C, Knight R, Gunsalus R, et al. Genetic and environmental control of
host-gut microbiota interactions. Genome Res. 2015;25(10):1558–69.
57. Leamy LJ, Kelly SA, Nietfeldt J, Legge RM, Ma F, Hua K, Sinha R, Peterson
DA, Walter J, Benson AK, et al. Host genetics and diet, but not 
immunoglobulin A expression, converge to shape compositional features of
the gut microbiome in an advanced intercross population of mice. Genome
Biol. 2014;15(12):552.
58. Goodrich JK, Davenport ER, Beaumont M, Jackson MA, Knight R, Ober C,
Spector TD, Bell JT, Clark AG, Ley RE. Genetic determinants of the gut
microbiome in UK twins. Cell Host Microbe. 2016;19(5):731–43.
59. Bonder MJ, Kurilshikov A, Tigchelaar EF, Mujagic Z, Imhann F, Vila AV,
Deelen P, Vatanen T, Schirmer M, Smeekens SP, et al. The effect of host
genetics on the gut microbiome. Nat Genet. 2016;48(11):1407–12.
60. La Cava A, Matarese G. The weight of leptin in immunity. Nat Rev Immunol.
2004;4(5):371–9.
61. Blekhman R, Goodrich JK, Huang K, Sun Q, Bukowski R, Bell JT, Spector TD,
Keinan A, Ley RE, Gevers D, et al. Host genetic variation impacts microbiome
composition across human body sites. Genome Biol. 2015;16:191.
62. Ley RE, Backhed F, Turnbaugh P, Lozupone CA, Knight RD, Gordon JI.
Obesity alters gut microbial ecology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005;102(31):
11070–5.
63. Jeon JP, Shim SM, Nam HY, Ryu GM, Hong EJ, Kim HL, Han BG. Copy
number variation at leptin receptor gene locus associated with metabolic
traits and the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus. BMC Genomics. 2010;11:426.
doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-11-426"] 10.1186/1471-2164-11-426.
64. Park KS, Shin HD, Park BL, Cheong HS, Cho YM, Lee HK, Lee JY,
Lee JK, Oh B, Kimm K. Polymorphisms in the leptin receptor (LEPR) -
putative association with obesity and T2DM. J Hum Genet. 2006;51(2):
85–91.
65. Waldram A, Holmes E, Wang YL, Rantalainen M, Wilson ID, Tuohy KM,
McCartney AL, Gibson GR, Nicholson JK. Top-down systems biology
modeling of host metabotype-microbiome associations in obese rodents.
J Proteome Res. 2009;8(5):2361–75.
66. Hsu A, Aronoff DM, Phipps J, Goel D, Mancuso P. Leptin improves
pulmonary bacterial clearance and survival in ob/ob mice during
pneumococcal pneumonia. Clin Exp Immunol. 2007;150(2):332–9.
67. Curti ML, Jacob P, Borges MC, Rogero MM, Ferreira SR. Studies of
gene variants related to inflammation, oxidative stress, dyslipidemia,
and obesity: implications for a nutrigenetic approach. J Obes. 2011;
2011:497401.
68. Zhang CH, Zhang MH, Wang SY, Han RJ, Cao YF, Hua WY, Mao YJ, Zhang
XJ, Pang XY, Wei CC, et al. Interactions between gut microbiota, host
genetics and diet relevant to development of metabolic syndromes in
mice. Isme J. 2010;4(2):232–41.
69. Viparelli F, Cassese A, Doti N, Paturzo F, Marasco D, Dathan NA, Monti SM,
Basile G, Ungaro P, Sabatella M, et al. Targeting of PED/PEA-15 molecular
interaction with phospholipase D1 enhances insulin sensitivity in skeletal
muscle cells. J Biol Chem. 2008;283(31):21769–78.
70. Davenport ER, Cusanovich DA, Michelini K, Barreiro LB, Ober C, Gilad Y.
Genome-wide association studies of the human gut microbiota. PLoS One.
2015;10(11):e0140301.
71. Everard A, Belzer C, Geurts L, Ouwerkerk JP, Druart C, Bindels LB, Guiot Y,
Derrien M, Muccioli GG, Delzenne NM, et al. Cross-talk between Akkermansia
muciniphila and intestinal epithelium controls diet-induced obesity. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110(22):9066–71.
72. Rodriguez JM, Murphy K, Stanton C, Ross RP, Kober OI, Juge N, Avershina E,
Rudi K, Narbad A, Jenmalm MC, et al. The composition of the gut
microbiota throughout life, with an emphasis on early life. Microb Ecol
Health Dis. 2015;26:26050.
73. den Besten G, van Eunen K, Groen AK, Venema K, Reijngoud DJ, Bakker
BM. The role of short-chain fatty acids in the interplay between diet,
gut microbiota, and host energy metabolism. J Lipid Res. 2013;54(9):
2325–40.
74. Tilg H, Adolph TE. Influence of the human intestinal microbiome on obesity
and metabolic dysfunction. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2015;27(4):496–501.
75. Caesar R, Reigstad CS, Backhed HK, Reinhardt C, Ketonen M, Lunden GO,
Cani PD, Backhed F. Gut-derived lipopolysaccharide augments adipose
macrophage accumulation but is not essential for impaired glucose or
insulin tolerance in mice. Gut. 2012;61(12):1701–7.
76. Zuo HJ, Xie ZM, Zhang WW, Li YR, Wang W, Ding XB, Pei XF. Gut bacteria
alteration in obese people and its relationship with gene polymorphism.
World J Gastroenterol. 2011;17(8):1076–81.
77. Goodrich JK, Waters JL, Poole AC, Sutter JL, Koren O, Blekhman R, Beaumont
M, Van Treuren W, Knight R, Bell JT, et al. Human genetics shape the gut
microbiome. Cell. 2014;159(4):789–99.
Page 13
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 13 of 15
78. Conterno L, Fava F, Viola R, Tuohy KM. Obesity and the gut microbiota:
does up-regulating colonic fermentation protect against obesity and
metabolic disease? Genes Nutr. 2011;6(3):241–60.
79. Dao MC, Everard A, Aron-Wisnewsky J, Sokolovska N, Prifti E, Verger EO,
Kayser BD, Levenez F, Chilloux J, Hoyles L, et al. Akkermansia muciniphila
and improved metabolic health during a dietary intervention in obesity:
relationship with gut microbiome richness and ecology. Gut. 2016;65(3):426–36.
80. Chakraborti CK. Role of adiponectin and some other factors linking
type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity. World J Diabetes. 2015;6(15):
1296–308.
81. Haro C, Rangel-Zúñiga OA, Alcalá-Díaz JF, Gómez-Delgado F, Pérez-Martínez
P, Delgado-Lista J, Quintana-Navarro GM, Landa BB, Navas-Cortés JA, Tena-
Sempere M, Clemente JC, López-Miranda J, Pérez-Jiménez F, Camargo A.
Intestinal Microbiota Is Influenced by Gender and Body Mass Index. PLoS
One. 2016;11(5):e0154090. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0154090"] 10.1371/journal.pone.0154090.
82. Ignacio A, Fernandes MR, Rodrigues VA, Groppo FC, Cardoso AL, Avila-
Campos MJ, Nakano V. Correlation between body mass index and faecal
microbiota from children. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2016;22(3):258.e1-8. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2015.10.031"] 10.
 1016/j.cmi.2015.10.031.
83. Tims S, Derom C, Jonkers DM, Vlietinck R, Saris WH, Kleerebezem M, de Vos
WM, Zoetendal EG. Microbiota conservation and BMI signatures in adult
monozygotic twins. Isme J. 2013;7(4):707–17.
84. Walters WA, Xu Z, Knight R. Meta-analyses of human gut microbes
associated with obesity and IBD. Febs Letters. 2014;588(22):4223–33.
85. Million M, Angelakis E, Maraninchi M, Henry M, Giorgi R, Valero R,
Vialettes B, Raoult D. Correlation between body mass index and gut
concentrations of Lactobacillus reuteri, Bifidobacterium animalis,
Methanobrevibacter smithii and Escherichia coli.  Int J Obes (Lond).  2013;
37(11):1460–6.
86. Schwiertz A, Taras D, Schafer K, Beijer S, Bos NA, Donus C, Hardt PD.
Microbiota and SCFA in lean and overweight healthy subjects. Obesity.
2010;18(1):190–5.
87. Mar Rodríguez M, Pérez D, Javier Chaves F, Esteve E, Marin-Garcia P, Xifra G,
Vendrell J, Jové M, Pamplona R, Ricart W, Portero-Otin M, Chacón MR,
Fernández Real JM. Obesity changes the human gut mycobiome. Sci Rep.
2015;5:14600. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep14600"] 10.1038/srep14600.
88. Neumark-Sztainer D, Wall M, Guo J, Story M, Haines J, Eisenberg M. Obesity,
disordered eating, and eating disorders in a longitudinal study of
adolescents: how do dieters fare 5 years later? J Am Diet Assoc. 2006;
106(4):559–68.
89. Saarni SE, Rissanen A, Sarna S, Koskenvuo M, Kaprio J. Weight cycling of
athletes and subsequent weight gain in middleage. Int J Obes (Lond). 2006;
30(11):1639–44.
90. Thaiss CA, Zmora N, Levy M, Elinav E. The microbiome and innate immunity.
Nature. 2016;535(7610):65–74.
91. Mueller NT, Bakacs E, Combellick J, Grigoryan Z, Dominguez-Bello MG. The
infant microbiome development: mom matters. Trends Mol Med. 2015;21(2):
109–17.
92. Walker WA. The importance of appropriate initial bacterial colonization of
the intestine in newborn, child, and adult health. Pediatr Res. 2017. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/pr.2017.111"] 10.
 1038/pr.2017.111.
93. Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, Ganu R, Petrosino J, Versalovic J. The
placenta harbors a unique microbiome. Sci Transl Med. 2014;6(237):
237ra265.
94. Cao B, Stout MJ, Lee I, Mysorekar IU. Placental microbiome and its role in
preterm birth. NeoReviews. 2014;15(12):e537–45.
95. Hill CJ, Lynch DB, Murphy K, Ulaszewska M, Jeffery IB, O'Shea CA, Watkins C,
Dempsey E, Mattivi F, Touhy K, et al. Evolution of gut microbiota composition
from birth to 24 weeks in the INFANTMET Cohort. Microbiome. 2017;5(1):4.
96. Turroni F, Ribbera A, Foroni E, van Sinderen D, Ventura M. Human gut
microbiota and bifidobacteria: from composition to functionality. Antonie
Van Leeuwenhoek. 2008;94(1):35–50.
97. Collado MC, Laitinen K, Salminen S, Isolauri E. Maternal weight and
excessive weight gain during pregnancy modify the immunomodulatory
potential of breast milk. Pediatr Res. 2012;72(1):77–85.
98. Galley JD, Bailey M, Kamp Dush C, Schoppe-Sullivan S, Christian LM.
Maternal obesity is associated with alterations in the gut microbiome in
toddlers. PLoS One. 2014;9(11):e113026. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0113026"] 10.1371/journal.pone.0113026.
99. Kozyrskyj AL, Kalu R, Koleva PT, Bridgman SL. Fetal programming of
overweight through the microbiome: boys are disproportionately affected.
J Dev Orig Hlth Dis. 2016;7(1):25–34. 
100. Lm T, Or T. Pre and post-natal risk and determination of factors for child
obesity. J Med Life. 2016;9(4):386–91.
101. Casazza K, Hanks LJ, Fields DA. The relationship between bioactive
components in breast milk and bone mass in infants. BoneKEy reports.
2014;3:577.
102. Martin R, Jimenez E, Heilig H, Fernandez L, Marin ML, Zoetendal EG,
Rodriguez JM. Isolation of bifidobacteria from breast milk and assessment
of the bifidobacterial population by PCR-denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis and quantitative real-time PCR. Appl Environ Microbiol.
2009;75(4):965–9.
103. Milani C, Mancabelli L, Lugli GA, Duranti S, Turroni F, Ferrario C, Mangifesta
M, Viappiani A, Ferretti P, Gorfer V, Tett A, Segata N, van Sinderen D,
Ventura M. Exploring Vertical Transmission of Bifidobacteria from Mother to
Child. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015;81(20):7078-87.
104. Benito D, Lozano C, Jiménez E, Albújar M, Gómez A, Rodríguez JM,
Torres C. Characterization of Staphylococcus aureus strains isolated from
faeces of healthy neonates and potential mother-to-infant microbial
transmission through breastfeeding. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2015;91(3).
doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/femsec/fiv007"] 10.1093/femsec/fiv007.
105. Hunt KM, Foster JA, Forney LJ, Schutte UM, Beck DL, Abdo Z, Fox LK,
Williams JE, McGuire MK, McGuire MA. Characterization of the diversity and
temporal stability of bacterial communities in human milk. PLoS One. 2011;
6(6):e21313.
106. Khodayar-Pardo P, Mira-Pascual L, Collado MC, Martinez-Costa C. Impact of
lactation stage, gestational age and mode of delivery on breast milk
microbiota. J Perinatol. 2014;34(8):599–605.
107. Kalliomaki M, Collado MC, Salminen S, Isolauri E. Early differences in fecal
microbiota composition in children may predict overweight. Am J Clin Nutr.
2008;87(3):534–8.
108. Cox LM, Blaser MJ. Antibiotics in early life and obesity. Nat Rev Endocrinol.
2015;11(3):182–90.
109. Forrest CB, Block JP, Bailey LC. Antibiotics, infections, and childhood obesity.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(1):2–3.
110. Scott FI, Mamtani R. Antibiotics and obesity—a burgeoning or thinning
argument? JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(2):118–20.
111. Zeissig S, Blumberg RS. Life at the beginning: perturbation of the
microbiota by antibiotics in early life and its role in health and disease. Nat
Immunol. 2014;15(4):307–10.
112. Blaut M, Clavel T. Metabolic diversity of the intestinal microbiota:
implications for health and disease. J Nutr. 2007;137(3 Suppl 2):751S-5S.
113. Mueller NT, Whyatt R, Hoepner L, Oberfield S, Dominguez-Bello MG,
Widen EM, Hassoun A, Perera F, Rundle A. Prenatal exposure to
antibiotics, cesarean section and risk of childhood obesity. Int J Obes
(Lond).  2015;39(4):665–70.
114. Lemas DJ, Yee S, Cacho N, Miller D, Cardel M, Gurka M, Janicke D,
Shenkman E. Exploring the contribution of maternal antibiotics and
breastfeeding to development of the infant microbiome and pediatric
obesity. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2016;21(6):406–9.
115. Gibson GR, Roberfroid MB. Dietary modulation of the human colonic
microbiota: introducing the concept of prebiotics. J Nutr. 1995;125(6):
1401–12.
116. Gibson GR, Probert HM, Loo JV, Rastall RA, Roberfroid MB. Dietary
modulation of the human colonic microbiota: updating the concept of
prebiotics. Nutr Res Rev. 2004;17(2):259–75.
117. Delmee E, Cani PD, Gual G, Knauf C, Burcelin R, Maton N, Delzenne
NM. Relation between colonic proglucagon expression and metabolic
response to oligofructose in high fat diet-fed mice. Life Sci. 2006;79(10):
1007–13.
118. Dewulf EM, Cani PD, Neyrinck AM, Possemiers S, Van Holle A, Muccioli GG,
Deldicque L, Bindels LB, Pachikian BD, Sohet FM, et al. Inulin-type fructans
with prebiotic properties counteract GPR43 overexpression and PPAR
gamma-related adipogenesis in the white adipose tissue of high-fat diet-fed
mice. J Nutr Biochem. 2011;22(8):712–22.
119. FAO/WHO JFWEC. Evaluation of health and nutritional properties of
probiotics in food including powder milk with live lactic acid bacteria. 2001.
120. Hill C, Guarner F, Reid G, Gibson GR, Merenstein DJ, Pot B, Morelli L, Canani
RB, Flint HJ, Salminen S, et al. The International Scientific Association for
Probiotics and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate
use of the term probiotic. Nat Rev Gastro Hepat. 2014;11(8):506–14.
121. Rowland I, Capurso L, Collins K, Cummings J, Delzenne N, Goulet O,
Guarner F, Marteau P, Meier R. Current level of consensus on probiotic
Page 14
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 14 of 15
science—report of an expert meeting—London, 23 November 2009.
Gut Microbes. 2010;1(6):436–9.
122. Sánchez B, Delgado S, Blanco-Míguez A, Lourenço A, Gueimonde M,
Margolles A. Probiotics, gut microbiota, and their influence on host health
and disease. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2017;61(1). doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201600240"] 10.1002/mnfr.201600240.
123. Turroni F, Ventura M, Butto LF, Duranti S, O'Toole PW, Motherway MO, van
Sinderen D. Molecular dialogue between the human gut microbiota and
the host: a Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium perspective. Cell Mol Life Sci.
2014;71(2):183–203.
124. O'Leary OF, Felice D, Galimberti S, Savignac HM, Bravo JA, Crowley T, El
Yacoubi M, Vaugeois JM, Gassmann M, Bettler B, et al. GABAB(1) receptor
subunit isoforms differentially regulate stress resilience. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2014;111(42):15232–7.
125. Million M, Angelakis E, Paul M, Armougom F, Leibovici L, Raoult D.
Comparative meta-analysis of the effect of Lactobacillus species on
weight gain in humans and animals. Microb Pathogenesis. 2012;53(2):
100–8.
126. Rodes L, Khan A, Paul A, Coussa-Charley M, Marinescu D, Tomaro-
Duchesneau C, Shao W, Kahouli I, Prakash S. Effect of probiotics
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium on gut-derived lipopolysaccharides
and inflammatory cytokines: an in vitro study using a human colonic
microbiota model. J Microbiol Biotechn. 2013;23(4):518–26.
127. Rocha CS, Lakhdari O, Blottiere HM, Blugeon S, Sokol H, Bermudez-Humaran
LG, Azevedo V, Miyoshi A, Dore J, Langella P, et al. Anti-inflammatory
properties of dairy lactobacilli. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2012;18(4):657–66.
128. Fåk F, Bäckhed F. Lactobacillus reuteri prevents diet-induced obesity, but
not atherosclerosis, in a strain dependent fashion in Apoe-/- mice. PLoS
One. 2012;7(10):e46837. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0046837"] 10.1371/journal.pone.0046837.
129. Diaz-Ropero MP, Martin R, Sierra S, Lara-Villoslada F, Rodriguez JM, Xaus J,
Olivares M. Two Lactobacillus strains, isolated from breast milk, differently
modulate the immune response. J Appl Microbiol. 2007;102(2):337–43.
130. Kang JH, Yun SI, Park HO. Effects of Lactobacillus gasseri BNR17 on body
weight and adipose tissue mass in diet-induced overweight rats.
J Microbiol. 2010;48(5):712–4.
131. Jung SP, Lee KM, Kang JH, Yun SI, Park HO, Moon Y, Kim JY. Effect of
Lactobacillus gasseri BNR17 on overweight and obese adults: a randomized,
double-blind clinical trial. Korean J Fam Med. 2013;34(2):80–9.
132. An HM, Park SY, Lee DK, Kim JR, Cha MK, Lee SW, Lim HT, Kim KJ, Ha NJ.
Antiobesity and lipid-lowering effects of Bifidobacterium spp. in high fat
diet-induced obese rats. Lipids Health Dis. 2011;10:116.
133. Chen J, Wang R, Li XF, Wang RL. Bifidobacterium adolescentis
supplementation ameliorates visceral fat accumulation and insulin sensitivity
in an experimental model of the metabolic syndrome. Br J Nutr. 2012;
107(10):1429–34.
134. Cani PD, Possemiers S, Van de Wiele T, Guiot Y, Everard A, Rottier O,
Geurts L, Naslain D, Neyrinck A, Lambert DM, et al. Changes in gut
microbiota control inflammation in obese mice through a mechanism
involving GLP-2-driven improvement of gut permeability. Gut. 2009;
58(8):1091–103.
135. Joyce SA, MacSharry J, Casey PG, Kinsella M, Murphy EF, Shanahan F, Hill C,
Gahan CG. Regulation of host weight gain and lipid metabolism by
bacterial bile acid modification in the gut. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;
111(20):7421–6.
136. Frazier TH, DiBaise JK, McClain CJ. Gut microbiota, intestinal permeability,
obesity-induced inflammation, and liver injury. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr.
2011;35(5 Suppl):14S–20S.
137. Zhang Z, Zhou Z, Li Y, Zhou L, Ding Q, Xu L. Isolated exopolysaccharides
from Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG alleviated adipogenesis mediated by TLR2
in mice. Sci Rep. 2016;6:36083.
138. Xu H, Barnes GT, Yang Q, Tan G, Yang D, Chou CJ, Sole J, Nichols A, Ross JS,
Tartaglia LA, et al. Chronic inflammation in fat plays a crucial role in the
development of obesity-related insulin resistance. J Clin Invest. 2003;112(12):
1821–30.
139. Park MK, Ngo V, Kwon YM, Lee YT, Yoo S, Cho YH, Hong SM, Hwang HS,
Ko EJ, Jung YJ, et al. Lactobacillus plantarum DK119 as a probiotic confers
protection against influenza virus by modulating innate immunity. PLoS
One. 2013;8(10):e75368.
140. Park S, Ji Y, Jung HY, Park H, Kang J, Choi SH, Shin H, Hyun CK, Kim KT,
Holzapfel WH. Lactobacillus plantarum HAC01 regulates gut microbiota
and adipose tissue accumulation in a diet-induced obesity murine model.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2017;101(4):1605–14. 
141. Kim SW, Park KY, Kim B, Kim E, Hyun CK. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG
improves insulin sensitivity and reduces adiposity in high-fat diet-fed mice
through enhancement of adiponectin production. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2013;431(2):258–63.
142. Dardmeh F, Nielsen HI, Alipour H, Kjaergaard B, Brandsborg E, Gazerani P.
Potential nociceptive regulatory effect of probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus
PB01 (DSM 14870) on mechanical sensitivity in diet-induced obesity model.
Pain Res Manag. 2016;2016:5080438.
143. Plaza-Diaz J, Gomez-Llorente C, Abadia-Molina F, Saez-Lara MJ, Campana-
Martin L, Munoz-Quezada S, Romero F, Gil A, Fontana L. Effects of
Lactobacillus paracasei CNCM I-4034, Bifidobacterium breve CNCM I-4035 and
Lactobacillus rhamnosus CNCM I-4036 on hepatic steatosis in Zucker rats.
PLoS One. 2014;9(5):e98401.
144. Savcheniuk O, Kobyliak N, Kondro M, Virchenko O, Falalyeyeva T, Beregova
T. Short-term periodic consumption of multiprobiotic from childhood
improves insulin sensitivity, prevents development of non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease and adiposity in adult rats with glutamate-induced obesity.
BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014;14:247.
145. Li Z, Jin H, Oh SY, Ji GE. Anti-obese effects of two Lactobacilli and two
Bifidobacteria on ICR mice fed on a high fat diet. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2016;480(2):222–7.
146. Gomes AC, de Sousa RG, Botelho PB, Gomes TL, Prada PO, Mota JF. The
additional effects of a probiotic mix on abdominal adiposity and
antioxidant status: a double-blind, randomized trial. Obesity (Silver Spring).
2017;25(1):30–8.
147. Thomas C, Gioiello A, Noriega L, Strehle A, Oury J, Rizzo G, Macchiarulo A,
Yamamoto H, Mataki C, Pruzanski M, et al. TGR5-mediated bile acid sensing
controls glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab. 2009;10(3):167–77.
148. Watanabe M, Houten SM, Mataki C, Christoffolete MA, Kim BW, Sato H,
Messaddeq N, Harney JW, Ezaki O, Kodama T, et al. Bile acids induce energy
expenditure by promoting intracellular thyroid hormone activation. Nature.
2006;439(7075):484–9.
149. Joyce SA, Shanahan F, Hill C, Gahan CG. Bacterial bile salt hydrolase in host
metabolism: Potential for influencing gastrointestinal microbe-host crosstalk.
Gut Microbes. 2014;5(5):669–74.
150. Begley M, Hill C, Gahan CG. Bile salt hydrolase activity in probiotics. Appl
Environ Microbiol. 2006;72(3):1729–38.
151. Zhao X, Higashikawa F, Noda M, Kawamura Y, Matoba Y, Kumagai T,
Sugiyama M. The obesity and fatty liver are reduced by plant-derived
Pediococcus pentosaceus LP28 in high fat diet-induced obese mice. PLoS
One. 2012;7(2):e30696.
152. Everard A, Matamoros S, Geurts L, Delzenne NM, Cani PD. Saccharomyces
boulardii administration changes gut microbiota and reduces hepatic
steatosis, low-grade inflammation, and fat mass in obese and type 2
diabetic db/db mice. MBio. 2014;5(3):e01011–01014.
153. Gauffin Cano P, Santacruz A, Moya A, Sanz Y. Bacteroides uniformis CECT
7771 ameliorates metabolic and immunological dysfunction in mice with
high-fat-diet induced obesity. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41079.
154. Derrien M, Vaughan EE, Plugge CM, de Vos WM. Akkermansia muciniphila
gen. nov., sp. nov., a human intestinal mucin-degrading bacterium. Int J
Syst Evol Microbiol. 2004;54(Pt 5):1469–76.
155. Everard A, Lazarevic V, Derrien M, Girard M, Muccioli GG, Neyrinck AM,
Possemiers S, Van Holle A, Francois P, de Vos WM, et al. Responses of gut
microbiota and glucose and lipid metabolism to prebiotics in genetic obese
and diet-induced leptin-resistant mice. Diabetes. 2011;60(11):2775–86.
156. Hansen CH, Krych L, Nielsen DS, Vogensen FK, Hansen LH, Sorensen SJ,
Buschard K, Hansen AK. Early life treatment with vancomycin propagates
Akkermansia muciniphila and reduces diabetes incidence in the NOD
mouse. Diabetologia. 2012;55(8):2285–94.
157. Schneeberger M, Everard A, Gomez-Valades AG, Matamoros S, Ramirez S,
Delzenne NM, Gomis R, Claret M, Cani PD. Akkermansia muciniphila inversely
correlates with the onset of inflammation, altered adipose tissue metabolism
and metabolic disorders during obesity in mice. Sci Rep. 2015;5:16643.
158. Plovier H, Everard A, Druart C, Depommier C, Van Hul M, Geurts L, Chilloux
J, Ottman N, Duparc T, Lichtenstein L, et al. A purified membrane protein
from Akkermansia muciniphila or the pasteurized bacterium improves
metabolism in obese and diabetic mice. Nat Med. 2017;23(1):107–13.
159. Higashikawa F, Noda M, Awaya T, Danshiitsoodol N, Matoba Y, Kumagai T,
Sugiyama M. Antiobesity effect of Pediococcus pentosaceus LP28 on
overweight subjects: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
trial. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2016;70(5):582–7.
Page 15
Duranti et al. Genes & Nutrition (2017) 12:18  Page 15 of 15
160. Fernandez-Murga ML, Sanz Y. Safety Assessment of Bacteroides uniformis
CECT 7771 Isolated from Stools of Healthy Breast-Fed Infants. PLoS One.
2016;11(1):e0145503.
161. Davis LM, Martinez I, Walter J, Goin C, Hutkins RW. Barcoded
pyrosequencing reveals that consumption of galactooligosaccharides
results in a highly specific bifidogenic response in humans. PLoS One.
2011;6(9):e25200.
162. Cani PD, Lecourt E, Dewulf EM, Sohet FM, Pachikian BD, Naslain D, De
Backer F, Neyrinck AM, Delzenne NM. Gut microbiota fermentation of
prebiotics increases satietogenic and incretin gut peptide production with
consequences for appetite sensation and glucose response after a meal.
Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;90(5):1236–43.
163. Bays HE, Evans JL, Maki KC, Evans M, Maquet V, Cooper R, Anderson JW.
Chitin-glucan fiber effects on oxidized low-density lipoprotein: a
randomized controlled trial. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2013;67(1):2–7.
164. Dewulf EM, Cani PD, Claus SP, Fuentes S, Puylaert PG, Neyrinck AM, Bindels
LB, de Vos WM, Gibson GR, Thissen JP, et al. Insight into the prebiotic
concept: lessons from an exploratory, double blind intervention study with
inulin-type fructans in obese women. Gut. 2013;62(8):1112–21.
165. Dehghan P, Gargari BP, Jafar-Abadi MA, Aliasgharzadeh A. Inulin controls
inflammation and metabolic endotoxemia in women with type 2 diabetes
mellitus: a randomized-controlled clinical trial. Int J Food Sci Nutr. 2014;
65(1):117–23.
166. Salazar N, Dewulf EM, Neyrinck AM, Bindels LB, Cani PD, Mahillon J, de Vos
WM, Thissen JP, Gueimonde M, de Los Reyes-Gavilan CG, et al. Inulin-type
fructans modulate intestinal Bifidobacterium species populations and
decrease fecal short-chain fatty acids in obese women. Clin Nutr. 2015;34(3):
501–7.
167. Cani PD, Daubioul CA, Reusens B, Remacle C, Catillon G, Delzenne NM.
Involvement of endogenous glucagon-like peptide-1(7-36) amide on
glycaemia-lowering effect of oligofructose in streptozotocin-treated rats.
J Endocrinol. 2005;185(3):457–65.
168. Parnell JA, Reimer RA. Prebiotic fibres dose-dependently increase satiety
hormones and alter Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes in lean and obese
JCR:LA-cp rats. Br J Nutr. 2012;107(4):601–13.
169. Cani PD, Neyrinck AM, Maton N, Delzenne NM. Oligofructose promotes
satiety in rats fed a high-fat diet: involvement of glucagon-like Peptide-1.
Obes Res. 2005;13(6):1000–7.
170. Parnell JA, Reimer RA. Weight loss during oligofructose supplementation is
associated with decreased ghrelin and increased peptide YY in overweight
and obese adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;89(6):1751–9.
171. Cani PD, Everard A, Duparc T. Gut microbiota, enteroendocrine functions
and metabolism. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2013;13(6):935–40.
172. Bodnaruc AM, Prud'homme D, Blanchet R, Giroux I. Nutritional modulation
of endogenous glucagon-like peptide-1 secretion: a review. Nutr Metab.
2016;13:92.
173. Arora T, Loo RL, Anastasovska J, Gibson GR, Tuohy KM, Sharma RK, Swann
JR, Deaville ER, Sleeth ML, Thomas EL, et al. Differential effects of two
fermentable carbohydrates on central appetite regulation and body
composition. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43263.
174. Parnell JA, Raman M, Rioux KP, Reimer RA. The potential role of prebiotic
fibre for treatment and management of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
and associated obesity and insulin resistance. Liver Int. 2012;32(5):701–11.
175. Parnell JA, Reimer RA. Effect of prebiotic fibre supplementation on hepatic
gene expression and serum lipids: a dose-response study in JCR:LA-cp rats.
Br J Nutr. 2010;103(11):1577–84.
176. Puertollano E, Kolida S, Yaqoob P. Biological significance of short-chain fatty
acid metabolism by the intestinal microbiome. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab
Care. 2014;17(2):139–44.
177. Daubioul C, Rousseau N, Demeure R, Gallez B, Taper H, Declerck B, Delzenne
N. Dietary fructans, but not cellulose, decrease triglyceride accumulation in
the liver of obese Zucker fa/fa rats. J Nutr. 2002;132(5):967–73. 
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and we will help you at every step:
• We accept pre-submission inquiries
• Our selector tool helps you to ﬁnd the most relevant journal
• We provide round the clock customer support
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• Inclusion in PubMed and all major indexing services
• Maximum visibility for your research
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
