BOOKMARKS:
A1 The in vivo cell kinetics in breast carcinogenesis
A2 Rescue of HER-2-positive breast carcinoma cells from dormancy by growth factors produced during wound healing
A3 Asynchronous LOH analysis of ductal carcinoma in situ from patients who subsequently developed invasive ductal carcinoma
A4 Phagocytic activity of monocytes in patients with breast cancer at different clinical stages
A5 The CC chemokine RANTES as a potential contributor to breast cancer progression
A6 The relevance of translational research for radiotherapy in breast cancer
A7 Monocyte phagocytic function in patients with breast cancer during therapy
A8 Spontaneous apoptosis of circulating T-lymphocytes and its correlation to their prolactin receptor expression and prolactin plasma levels in patients with breast cancer
A9 Mutation detection in familial and sporadic breast cancers by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC)
A10 Specific immunotherapy of MUC1-positive adenocarcinomas with a recombinant vaccinia virus expressing MUC1 and IL-2
A11 Novel morphoregulatory functions for the adhesion receptor Ep-CAM in the mammary epithelium
A12 Transcriptional regulation of apoptosis in mouse mammary gland
A13 Association of the Epstein–Barr virus with breast cancer: in vivo and in vitro studies
A14 Bovine leukemia virus in human breast tissues
A15 Restored expression of Fhit protein in Fhit-minus breast cancer cells
A16 Identification of HER2-positive breast carcinomas as a particular subset with peculiar clinical behaviours
A17 Prevention of thymic atrophy in mammary tumor bearers by IFN-γ
A18 Immunotoxins: experimental design
A19 Three-dimensional ultrasound-guided biopsy of breast lesion: a new diagnostic support in the preoperative diagnosis
A20 Genetic modifiers of cancer risks conferred by BRCA1 and BRCA2
A21 A novel sodium phenylacetate-dextran derivative ester inhibits the growth and angiogenesis of MCF-7ras breast cancer xenografts
A22 Nongenomic effects of estrogens on signal transduction pathways in estrogen-sensitive carcinoma cell lines
A23 Prognosis and treatment of locally recurrent breast cancer
A24 Telomerase activity and bcl2 expression in human breast cancer
A25 Protection against growth of MUC1/sec transfected mammary tumor cells is mediated by an effector cell with perforin-dependent cytotoxicity
A26 Regulation of episialin/MUC1 expression in breast carcinomas: a complex interplay between stimulatory and inhibitory factors
A27 Characterization of a hormonally induced reverse transcriptase (RT) from the human breast cancer cell line T47D: a possible involvement in human breast cancer
A28 Antitumor potential of bisphosphonates
A29 Transcriptional regulation through the estrogen receptor (ER)-α and splice variants of ER-β via classical and nonclassical signal transduction pathways
A30 Late radiation sequelae in women after breastconserving cancer therapy: effects of hyperbaric oxygen therapy
A31 Sentinel lymph node biopsies in breast cancer
A32 Organochlorines and breast cancer: effect of exposure to dieldrin on risk and survival
A33 Fhit loss in familial breast cancer: is loss of DNA repair function linked to alterations at chromosome fragile sites?
A34 ErbB family of receptors in breast cancer
A35 Effect of anthracyclin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy on disseminated tumor cells in breast cancer patients: an immunocytologic and molecular approach
A36 Cloning of novel mammary tumor progression and metastasis genes
A37 The association between cyclo-oxygenase-2 expression and cell proliferation and angiogenesis in human breast cancer
A38 Acidification-induced sensitization to thermoradiotherapy in breast cancer
A39 A novel phenylacetate-dextran derivative (NaPaC) inhibits breast cancer cell proliferation and modifies their interactions with endothelial cells
A40 Structural features for peptides binding the class I molecules
A41 The standardized mistletoe preparation Lektinol has antitumoral potencies
A42 High-risk breast cancer patients: comparison of lymphocyte phenotypes and function in vitro
A43 The role of subareolar methylene blue in identifying the sentinel node in patients with invasive breast cancer
A44 High-dose chemotherapy with peripheral blood progenitor cell support in breast cancer: WSG AM01 and MM01
A45 Human estrogen receptor-α (ER-α) transactivation by selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) on VIT regulatory region in ER-α-negative breast cancer cell line Evsa-T transiently transfected by ER-α
A46 MMP-9 production by T cells from mammary tumor bearers is upregulated by tumor-derived VEGF
A47 A retrovirus similar to MMTV associated with human breast cancer
A48 Effect of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) on transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) regulation of sialomucin complex/Muc4
A49 Apoptosis-related factors in nonpalpable breast tumors: an immunohistochemical study. Correlation with the mammographic image
A50 C-erbB-2 overexpression in primary breast cancer: relationship to clinical and histopathological parameters of patients with breast cancer
A51 Whole-body hyperthermia in the treatment of breast cancer
A52 Identification and refinement of two regions on chromosomal arm 15q involved in breast cancer progression
A53 Role of stromelysin-3 in mammary tumor progression
A54 High-dose chemotherapy in breast cancer: Dutch randomized studies
A55 Novel liposomal vectors for an enhanced gene transfer in vitro
A56 Pathway pathology: the wnt and erbB mammary tumors
A57 CD31 expression by cells of extensive ductal in situ and invasive carcinomas of the breast
A58 Neuroendocrine breast carcinomas of aged women may express apocrine differentiation markers
A59 Constitutional genomic instability of 9p23-24 in BRCA2 mutation carrier
A60 Heterocyclic amines (HCAS) and risk of breast cancer
A61 Control of apoptosis in breast by growth factors and extracellular matrix: targets for therapeutic intervention
A62 Normoand hyperbaric oxygenation of tumors: from bench to bedside
A63 Serological Her2/neu-determination in patients receiving Herceptin®
A64 Downregulation of macrophage IL-12 production by tumor-derived IL-11
A65 Chromosomal instability and cancer predisposition: insights from studies on the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2
A66 Herceptin clinical trials: past, present and future
A67 Radioprotective and tumor antiangiogenic effect of the novel synthetic superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimetic compounds
A68 Ultrasound-guided pO2 measurement in breast cancer patients before and after hyperthermia treatment
A69 Haplotype analysis in German families with recurrent BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations
A70 On-site audits of the two clinical trials reported from South Africa involving high-dose chemotherapy (HDC) therapy for breast cancer
A71 Diminished milk fat secretion and premature mammary gland involution in episialin/MUC1 transgenic mice
A72 Patterns of cytokines and lymphocyte subsets in patients with breast and prostate cancer treated with a standardized mistletoe extract preparation
A73 Design and profile of low-molecular-weight receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors for antiangiogenic therapy
A74 The mechanism of tamoxifen in breast cancer prevention
A75 CD95 ligand expression in dedifferentiated breast cancer
A76 CD95 ligand expression mediates immune escape in breast cancer
A77 Resistance to CD95-mediated apoptosis in breast cancer is not due to somatic mutation of the CD95 gene
Page 1
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
Meeting abstracts
23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer
Research
Düsseldorf, Germany
13–16 June 2001
Received: 10 May 2001
Published: 29 May 2001 
Breast Cancer Res 2001, 3 (suppl 1):S1–S24
© 2001 BioMed Central Ltd
(Print ISSN 1465-5411; Online ISSN 1465-542X)
A1
The in vivo cell kinetics in breast carcinogenesis
NJ Agnantis, SA Kamina, PS Zagorianakou, A Demou,
A Katsaraki, P Kanavaros*, M Bai
Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Ioannina,
Ioannina, Greece; *Department of Histology, Medical School,
University of Thessalia, Larisa, Greece
Background: Disruption of the balance between apoptosis and pro-
liferation is considered to be an important factor in the development
and progression of tumor. In this study we determined the in vivo cell
kinetics along the spectrum of apparently normal epithelium, hyper-
plasia, preinvasive lesions and invasive carcinoma, in breast tissues
affected by fibrocystic changes in which preinvasive and/or invasive
lesions developed, as a model of breast carcinogenesis.
Materials and method: A total of 32 areas of apparently normal
epithelium and 135 ductal proliferative and neoplastic lesions were
studied. More than one epithelial lesion per case was analyzed.
The apoptotic index (AI) and the proliferative index (PI) were
expressed as the percentage of TUNEL (TdT-mediated dUTP-nick
end-labelling) and Ki-67 positive cells, respectively. The prolifera-
tive/apoptotic index (P/A) was calculated for each case.
Results: Statistical analysis demonstrated significant differences
among the tissue groups for both indices (P<0.0001). The Als
and PIs were significantly higher in hyperplasia than in apparently
normal epithelium (P=0.04 and P=0.0005, respectively), in atypi-
cal hyperplasia than in hyperplasia (P=0.01 and P=0.04, respec-
tively) and in invasive carcinoma than in in situ carcinoma
(P=0.0001 and P<0.0001, respectively). The two indices were
similar in atypical hyperplasia and in in situ carcinoma. The P/A
index increased significantly from normal epithelium to hyperplasia
(P=0.01) and from preinvasive lesions to invasive carcinoma
(P=0.04),  whereas it was decreased (NS) from hyperplasia to
preinvasive lesions. A strong positive correlation between the Als
and the Pls was found (r=0.83; P<0.0001).
Conclusion: These findings suggest accelerating cell turnover
along the continuum of breast carcinogenesis. Atypical hyper-
plasias and in situ carcinomas might be kinetically similar lesions.
In the transition from normal epithelium to hyperplasia and from
preinvasive lesions to invasive carcinoma, the net growth of epithe-
lial cells results from a growth imbalance in favour of proliferation.
In the transition from hyperplasia to preinvasive lesions there is an
imbalance in favour of apoptosis. 
A2
Rescue of HER-2-positive breast carcinoma cells
from dormancy by growth factors produced during
wound healing
R Agresti, E Tagliabue, C Ghirelli, D Morelli, R Giovanazzi,
G Somenzi, M Campiglio, M Greco, A Balsari, S Menard
Molecular Targeting Unit and General Surgery, Breast Unit, National
Cancer Institute, Milan, Italy
Background: Clinical and experimental data have raised the possi-
bility that surgical removal of the primary tumor promotes the
growth of metastatic lesions.
Purpose: This study was undertaken to determine the effect of
wound healing drainages and postsurgical sera obtained from
breast carcinoma (BC) patients on proliferation of dormant BC
cells and to assess the role of HER2 oncoprotein in this
proliferation.
Method: Proliferation of dormant BC cells was evaluated in vitro by
SRB colorimetric assay. Growth factors were identified by inhibi-
tion with specific antibodies and displacement of 125I-EGF from its
receptor. Cellular damage was measured by creatine phospho-
kinase level. The role of HER2 was analyzed by removal of HER2
from the membrane and inhibition by the anti-HER2 monoclonal
antibody herceptin.
Results: Healing wound drainages and postsurgical sera from BC
patients stimulated the in vitro growth of BC cells. Removal of the
HER2 oncoprotein from BC cell membrane led to a dramatic
decrease in the induced proliferation. Drainage-induced prolifera-
tion was around 50% inhibited by antibodies directed against
EGF-like factors, including HB-EGF and TGF-α. Levels of these
growth factors in postsurgical sera, as well as the level of drainage-
induced proliferation, were directly correlated with the entity of
surgery (r=0.8, P=0.0007 and r=0.64, P=0.009, respectively).
Treatment of the tumor cells with herceptin, abolished the patients’
drainage-induced proliferation when added to cultures before the
growth stimulus.
Conclusion: HER2 overexpression by BC cells plays a major role
in the postsurgery rescue of metastatic BC cells from dormancy.
Herceptin appears to inhibit this growth induction. A prospective
randomized clinical trial of perioperative treatment with herceptin of
BC patients is starting.
Page 2
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
A3
Asynchronous LOH analysis of ductal carcinoma
in situ from patients who subsequently developed
invasive ductal carcinoma
M Amari, T Moriya*, Y Harada, T Ishida, K Ohnuki, N Ohuchi
Division of Surgical Oncology, Tohoku University School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan; *Department of Pathology, Tohoku University Hospital,
Sendai, Japan
Management of women with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is
currently a major concern. Biological characteristics in the light of
progression from DCIS to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) remain
unknown. Our previous study [1] investigating synchronous lesions
demonstrated higher LOH frequencies in parallel with the tumor
progression from atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) to DCIS and
IDC [1]. We report here an asynchronous LOH analysis of DCIS
from patients who subsequently developed IDC.
We collected 88 biopsy specimens, originally diagnosed benign,
from the patients who subsequently developed IDC in the ipsilat-
eral breast. Seven asynchronous lesions of initial biopsy (re-evalua-
tion was DCIS) and the respective IDC were subjected to LOH
analysis in this study. Thirteen microsatellite markers, which were
mapped to and/or very close to the tumor suppressor genes or
regions with frequent LOH in breast cancer, were used.
LOHs were observed in parallel with the tumor progression from
DCIS to IDC in all cases except for one that developed IDC in
another quadrant. The six patients developed IDC near the initial
biopsy, and presented similar or identical histopathologic features.
LOH analysis of biopsy specimens from patients who subsequently
developed IDC demonstrated acquisition of genetic change at an
earlier stage, as the same allele at the same genomic locus was
lost in DCIS.
Our results suggest that genetic alternations accumulate during
cancer progression from DCIS to IDC, and DCIS presents a high
risk of developing invasive transformation.
Reference
1. Amari et al. Oncol Rep 1999, 6:1277.
A4
Phagocytic activity of monocytes in patients with
breast cancer at different clinical stages
NN Arsenijevic, D Baskic, LD Acimovic*
Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, and *Clinic for Surgery,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Kragujevac, Yugoslavia
The investigation was designed to evaluate numerical and func-
tional properties of peripheral blood monocytes (PBMo) in patients
with breast cancer at different clinical stages. Monocyte phagocy-
tosis test was performed in 19 patients with benign breast tumor,
29 patients with breast cancer and 10 healthy subjects. Cancer
patients were divided into three groups on the basis of the clinical
stage of disease: groupA, patients with localized disease;
groupB, patients with regional lymph node metastasis; and
groupC, patients with distant metastasis. Patients with advanced
disease (group C) showed an increase in neutrophils, but no differ-
ences in the total count of leukocytes and absolute number of
lymphocytes as compared with healthy individuals, patients with
benign breast tumor or patients with lower stage. However, the
mean number of monocytes decreased in patients with benign
disease and further decreased in cancer patients, reaching the sig-
nificantly lowest value in patients with distant metastasis. Phago-
cytic activity of PBMo was found to be significantly lower in
patients with benign tumor, and it became further reduced in the 
cancer group, related to the clinical stage. Thus, we noted a sixfold
decrease in the capacity of phagocytosis, fourfold decrease in per-
centage of phagocytosis and twofold decrease in phagocytic index
in patients with advanced stage (groupC).  The alterations in
number and function of PBMo in patients with benign and malig-
nant breast tumor were observed in close association with clinical
stage of disease, and thus they could be considered as indicators
of tumor progression. However, further studies are required to
determine whether monocyte dysfunction could provide additional
prognostic information in the case of breast cancer diagnosis and
therapy.
A5
The CC chemokine RANTES as a potential
contributor to breast cancer progression
E Azenshtein, G Luboshits, S Shina, E Neumark, N Vigler*,
S Chaitchik†, I Keydar, A Ben-Baruch
Department of Cell Research and Immunology, George S Wise
Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv University; *Department of Oncology,
Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center; †Department of Oncology, Sackler
Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel
In breast carcinoma, high levels of tumor-associated macrophages
are correlated with lymph node metastases and clinical aggressive-
ness. Potential candidates that may support the recruitment of
monocytes from the circulation into breast tumors are the members
of the CC subfamily of chemokines. In the present study we evalu-
ated the expression of the CC chemokine RANTES in sections of
breast cancer patients diagnosed in different stages of disease.
Our results indicate that high incidence and intensity of RANTES
expression were directly correlated with a more advanced disease,
suggesting that the chemokine may be involved in breast cancer
progression.
Analyses performed by using the T47D and MCF-7 human breast
adenocarcinoma cells indicated that RANTES expression is tightly
regulated by cytokines. Furthermore, the results of our study indi-
cate that T47D-derived RANTES partially contributes to monocyte
migration, and suggest that in vivo this chemokine may be involved
in inducing monocyte infiltration to breast tumor sites. In the
present study we further characterized the paracrine and autocrine
mechanisms by which RANTES may support breast cancer pro-
gression. The results suggest that RANTES may be involved in a
complex process, in which a crosstalk between infiltrating mono-
cytes and the tumor cells may affect tumor progression.
A6
The relevance of translational research for
radiotherapy in breast cancer
H Bartelink
Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Ziekenhuis, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
In several EORTC trials the role of radiotherapy in breast cancer
has been examined. It has been shown that patients with DCIS
radiotherapy have a reduced risk of both invasive and noninvasive
ductal cancer recurrences. For patients with early breast cancer
we demonstrated that a boost of 16Gy reduces the risk of recur-
rence in the breast by nearly a factor of 2, and is especially
clinically relevant for patients younger than 50years. In locally
advanced breast cancer patients, a similar reduction in the local
recurrence rate was seen when chemotherapy or hormontherapy
was added to radiotherapy.
Page 3
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
Despite these achievements, we are not able to select enough
patients with the need for radiotherapy, and the required dose in
this patient population. New techniques, such as comparative
genomic hybridization assay, DNA microarrays, functional DNA
screens and functional yeast assays, may guide us more pre-
cisely toward the optimal treatment strategy in individual patients.
Furthermore, these research lines offer the possibility to investi-
gate the mechanism of action, and therefore lead to the develop-
ment of new drugs that will potentiate the cell-killing effect of
radiotherapy. This lecture focuses on the integration of these new
techniques in relation to the obtained results from the above-
mentioned clinical trials.
A7
Monocyte phagocytic function in patients with
breast cancer during therapy
D Baskic, NN Arsenijevic, LD Acimovic*
Institute of Microbiology and Immunology; and *Clinic for Surgery,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Kragujevac, Yugoslavia
The present study was designed to elucidate phagocytic function
of peripheral blood monocytes in patients with breast cancer
during surgery and chemotherapy. Absolute and relative number
of peripheral blood leukocytes and monocyte phagocytic function
(percentage of phagocytosis [PP],  phagocytic index [PI] and
capacity of phagocytosis [CP]) were determined in 29 patients
with breast cancer and 10 healthy individuals. These parameters
were determined at the time of diagnosis, following surgery and
after chemotherapy. The total count of circulating leukocytes, and
absolute and relative counts of polymorphonuclears and lympho-
cytes were not significantly different between investigated groups,
before and after therapy. The mean number of monocytes was sig-
nificantly lower in cancer patients at diagnosis, but increased fol-
lowing surgery reaching the control value. There were no
significant postchemotherapy changes in the number of mono-
cytes. PP, PI and CP were decreased at the time of diagnosis. PP
and CP recovered to normal values following surgery, but PI
remained decreased. Following chemotherapy PP and CP
remained stable, whereas PI further decreased reaching the
values significantly lower than those found before the start of
chemotherapy. However, 3 months after last cycle of chemother-
apy, all tested parameters returned to normal values. These results
showed that phagocytic activity of cancer patients’ monocytes,
decreased at diagnosis, returned within the normal range after
surgical therapy. However, we need time to determine whether
the alteration in PBMo phagocytic activity may provide additional
prognostic information when monitoring surgically treated breast
cancer patients.
A8
Spontaneous apoptosis of circulating
T-lymphocytes and its correlation to their
prolactin receptor expression and prolactin
plasma levels in patients with breast cancer
T Bauernhofer, U Friebe-Hoffmann, T Hoffmann, G Dworacki,
B Vonderhaar, TL Whiteside
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia; and
National Cancer Institute, NHI, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
We have previously shown that a higher percentage of circulat-
ing CD3+ Tlymphocytes undergo spontaneous apoptosis in
cancer patients as compared with normal controls. Prolactin 
(PRL) has been reported to inhibit apoptosis in various cell
types, including a Nb2 rat lymphoma cell line. In addition, there
is evidence that the human PRL-antagonist hPRL-G129R
induces apoptosis in breast cancer cell lines. We investigated a
possible relationship between prolactin receptor (PRL-R)
expression and apoptosis of CD3+ Tlymphocytes, as well as
PRL plasma levels, in patients with breast cancer. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells of patients (n = 11) and sex-matched
normal controls (n = 12) were stained with AnnexinV, anti-Fas
mAb (CD95),  mouse antihuman PRL-R mAb B6.2, anti-CD3
mAb and respective isotype control mAbs. Multicolor flow
cytometry was used to compare expression of these markers on
T cell. In patients, 37± 19% (median± SD) of CD3+ cells bound
AnnexinV, marking early apoptosis of Tlymphocytes compared
with 17± 10% in controls (P < 0.004).  Furthermore, 82± 15%
of the CD3+ Tcells were Fas+ in patients, compared with
51± 9% in controls (P < 0.0001). All CD3+ T lymphocytes were
positive for PRL-R expression in breast cancer patients, as well
as in normal control individuals. The mean fluorescence intensity
of PRL-R on Tlymphocytes of breast cancer patients was
106–172 (median 119) compared with 87–176 (median 123),
suggesting no difference in PRL-R expression on T lymphocytes
in patients versus controls. PRL plasma levels were comparable
in patients and normal controls (4.8± 3.4ng/ml versus
9.8± 4.6ng/ml).  In concordance with these findings, PRL was
not able to inhibit the onset of apoptosis of Jurkat cells, a thymic
lymphoma cell line, incubated with Fas cross-linking CH-11
mAb. These results indicate that PRL/PRL-R might not be
involved in modulating Fas/Fas ligand interactions, which are, in
part, responsible for apoptosis of Tlymphocytes, leading to
excessive turnover of Tcells in the circulation of patients with
breast cancer.
A9
Mutation detection in familial and sporadic breast
cancers by denaturing high-performance liquid
chromatography (DHPLC)
B Betz, D Larbig, TO Goecke, C Nestle-Krämling, HG Bender,
D Niederacher
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Heinrich-Heine-University,
Düsseldorf, Germany
Objective: Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography
(DHPLC) is a recently developed method for detection of mutation
that is gaining importance as a screening method for analyzing
familial breast cancers, as well as heterogeneous tumor material.
Method: DHPLC was established for mutation detection in
BRCA1/2 diagnostic, using more than 200 different positive con-
trols. Up until now, 64 DNA samples from patients with familial
background for breast cancer (BC) were analyzed by DHPLC for
BRCA1/2 mutations. An additional 136 sporadic BC were exam-
ined for p53 mutations, analyzing exons 5–8by DHPLC. Positive
results were confirmed by direct DNA sequencing.
Results: The analysis of 64 DNA samples from patients with famil-
ial background for BC revealed several mutations and unclassified
variants (UVs).  Twenty-three different p53 mutations could be
detected in 138 sporadic BC. Dilution of mutant DNA by wild-type
DNA revealed the high sensitivity of this method: 5% mutant DNA
is sufficient to achieve a positive DHPLC result. However, confirm-
ing a positive DHPLC result by DNA sequencing is difficult in het-
erogeneous tumor material.
Conclusion: DHPLC is a reliable, high-throughput technique for
detection of mutation in familial breast cancers, as well as in het-
erogeneous tumor material.
Page 4
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
A10
Specific immunotherapy of MUC1-positive
adenocarcinomas with a recombinant vaccinia
virus expressing MUC1 and IL-2
N Bizouarne, P Squiban, B Acres, JM Balloul, MA Ohresser,
R Figlin*, A Belldegrun*, R Herrman†, C Rochlitz†
TRANSGENE SA, Strasbourg, France; *UCLA School of Medicine,
USA; †Kantonspital, Basel, Switzerland
Current therapies for most types of cancer focus on either surgical
or radiotherapeutic eradication of the primary tumor as the best
opportunity for cure. Therapy of disseminated disease has focused
on chemotherapy, but, with the exception of certain rarer types of
tumors, few patients are cured by chemotherapy, and even improve-
ments in survival have been difficult to demonstrate. TRANSGENE’s
current approaches to oncology focus on the stimulation of the
body’s own immune system to induce rejection of tumors. One of
these approaches is antigen-specific therapy. The first product can-
didate for antigen-specific therapy expresses the tumor-associated
MUC1 antigen, stimulating a cellular immune response that may be
useful in treating breast cancer and various epithelial cancers, such
as lung, pancreatic and ovarian cancers. The product developed is
a recombinant vaccinia virus containing sequences that code for
human MUC-1 antigen and interleukin-2. A phaseI trial in nine
women with breast cancer was performed, in which the potential
product was well tolerated without serious side effects, and MUC1-
specific immune responses were observed. PhaseII trials in breast
and in prostate cancer began during the second quarter of 1998. A
phaseI trial in lung cancer patients is also in progress. During the
same period, a second-generation product was developed. The
new construct has been put into a highly attenuated vaccinia virus
(modified virus Ankara), the safety of which was tested in a clinical
trial in MUC1-positive cancer patients. Based on these results,
phase II studies are in preparation to assess the clinical efficacy of
this product in different populations of patients whose tumors
express the MUC-1 tumor antigen.
A11
Novel morphoregulatory functions for the
adhesion receptor Ep-CAM in the mammary
epithelium
M Blazar, V Cirulli*, F Prins, SV Litvinov
Department of Pathology and Division of Laboratory Animals, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands; *The Whittier
Institute for Diabetes, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA
Ep-CAM, an epithelial cell–cell adhesion receptor, is often over-
expressed in association with proliferation and remodeling in epithe-
lial tissues. Development of the mouse mammary gland during
pregnancy is associated with a progressive upregulation of Ep-
CAM expression, eventually reaching very high levels at day 16 of
pregnancy. This phenomenon is paralleled by a concomitant
branching of the mammary ductal tree and a sustained epithelial cell
proliferation. Using a MMTV-LTR/Ep-CAM transgenic mouse model,
we demonstrate that forced expression of Ep-CAM in the mammary
epithelium leads to an induction of budding and secondary branch-
ing of the glandular tree in virgin females. Interestingly, a complete
cycle of gestation in the Ep-CAM transgenic mice results in extreme
ductal hyperplasia/ductectasia and lobular hypoplasia, in combina-
tion with partially decreased differentiation of both ductal and alveo-
lar (lobular) epithelial cells. Surprisingly, mammary gland involution
is affected because of a decreased frequency of apoptotic figures 
and increased rate of cell proliferation. These results support novel
morphoregulatory functions for the adhesion receptor Ep-CAM in
epithelial tissue development and homeostasis.
A12
Transcriptional regulation of apoptosis in mouse
mammary gland
MP Boland, EA Kritikou, RS Chapman*, JL Heeley,
RWE Clarkson, CJ Watson
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK;
*CRC Institute for Cancer Studies, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK
Postlactational regression of the mammary gland is characterized by
extensive apoptosis of the epithelial compartment. Involution occurs
in two phases: an early reversible phase and a later phase accom-
panied by breakdown of the extracellular matrix and remodeling of
the gland. We have used both knockout mice and a cell-culture
model to identify the transcription factors that regulate the early
phase of involution. Conditional deletion of Stat3 results in dimin-
ished apoptosis and delayed involution, whereas, in contrast, loss of
IRF-1, a downstream target of Stat1, accelerates the first phase of
involution. We have begun to analyze in more detail the molecular
events associated with the activation of these transcription factors.
Downstream targets have not been identified, although IGFBP-5
may be an indirect target of both Stat3 and IRF-1. In the absence of
Stat3, elevated levels of p21, p53 and Stat1 are observed. Using a
mammary epithelial cell culture model, KIM-2, and inducible activa-
tion of Stat3 and Stat5, we have shown that dimerization of Stat3
alone is sufficient to induce apoptosis of KIM-2 cells. Furthermore,
apoptosis can be significantly increased by blocking a survival
pathway. In contrast, dimerization of Stat5 provides a differentiation
signal and, subsequently, a survival signal for differentiated KIM-2
cells. Interplay between Stat3 and Stat5, identification of down-
stream targets, and crosstalk with other pathways is now being
investigated.
A13
Association of the Epstein–Barr virus with breast
cancer: in vivo and in vitro studies
M Bonnet-Duqeynoy, H Arbach, K Takada*, I Joab
INSERM 99-32, Hôpital Saint Louis, Paris, France; *Institute for
Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) may be a cofactor in the development of
different malignancies, including several types of carcinomas. We
demonstrated the presence of EBV in human breast cancers. We
detected the EBV genome by PCR in 51% of the tumor biopsies. In
90% of the cases studied, the virus was not detected in healthy
tissue. The presence of the EBV genome in breast tumors was con-
firmed by Southern-blot analysis. The EBV latent protein EBNA-1
was observed in a fraction (5–30%) of tumor epithelial cells.
Expression of the EBV genes BNLF1 and BARF0 will be reported.
A statistical relationship was established between the presence of
EBV and several poor prognostic factors. EBV may be a cofactor
in the development of a subset of breast cancers.
Latently EBV infected breast undifferentiated human epithelial cell
line, MDA-MB-231, was obtained and injected into nude mice.
Tumors were obtained in which EBV persists. The persistence of EBV
in nude mice tumors, in the absence of any selection, suggests that
mammary epithelial cells could be a natural host for EBV. These
models will be used for the elaboration of specific therapeutic targets.
Page 5
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
Normal breast mammary epithelial cells are now being infected by
EBV in order to investigate the oncogenic potential of EBV in those
epithelial cells.
A14
Bovine leukemia virus in human breast tissues
GC Buehring, KY Choi, HM Jensen*
University of California, Berkeley; *University of California, Davis,
California, USA
Bovine leukemia virus (BLV) is an oncogenic retrovirus that com-
monly infects cattle and causes a B cell leukemia/lymphoma in ‰
of 1% of infected cattle. BLV is present in much of marketed beef
and dairy products, and breast cancer incidence is greatest in
countries with high consumption of bovine foodstuffs. We were
therefore interested in determining whether humans were infected
with BLV, and whether it might play a role in breast cancer. In pre-
vious studies we found that many humans had antibodies to BLV
envelope glycoprotein (gp51) and capsid protein (p24), suggest-
ing humans might possibly be infected with BLV. We used
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ PCR (IS-PCR) to detect
viral protein and proviral DNA, respectively, as signs of infection in
surgically excised human breast tissue sections. IHC utilized a
monoclonal antibody to the BLV p24 capsid protein. IS-PCR uti-
lized primers from the tax region of the BLV genome to amplify a
product with directly incorporated digoxigenin-11dUTP tags, which
were then detected with a peroxidase-conjugated antibody to
digoxigenin. The majority of the breast tissues had evidence of BLV
proviral genome and four out of 27 were positive for BLV capsid
protein. We are working to accumulate data on enough samples to
determine whether infection of breast tissue is associated with the
pathologic classification of the tissue. This research was sup-
ported by funds from the California Breast Cancer Research
Program.
A15
Restored expression of Fhit protein in Fhit-minus
breast cancer cells
M Campiglio, C Olgiati, P Aiello, CM Croce*, S Ménard
Molecular Targeting Unit, Department of Experimental Oncology,
Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy; *Kimmel Cancer Institute
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, USA
The gene FHIT, encompassing the FRA3B fragile site, is located in
a region of chromosome 3p14.2 that is often deleted in several
types of epithelial cancers and, therefore, it has been investigated
as a candidate tumor suppressor. In breast cancer inactivation of
FHIT occurred in 70% of the patients, and it is caused by both
alterations in the regulation of Fhit expression and by deletions of
the gene. Moreover, analysis of 500 cases of breast carcinomas
with 20 years of follow up demonstrated that loss of Fhit protein is
associated with high proliferative, large and undifferentiated
tumors, even though Fhit is not a prognostic factor. In order to elu-
cidate the possible role of FHIT as a tumor suppressor in breast
cancer and to identify its mechanisms, Fhit protein-negative breast
cancer cell lines lacking endogenous protein expression were
stable transfected with FHIT cDNA. Stable transfectant clones
showed no alteration in cell morphology and in in vitro anchorage-
dependent and independent proliferation. A significant delay in the
tumor growth in nude mice was observed for some Fhit-positive
clones; in an additional case the outgrowing of the tumor was due
to loss of Fhit expression in vivo. Interestingly, some Fhit-positive 
clones are able to develop tumors in vivo despite high stable Fhit
expression, prompting us to investigate the different mechanisms
between the two types of Fhit-expressing clones.
Supported by AIRC.
A16
Identification of HER2-positive breast carcinomas
as a particular subset with peculiar clinical
behaviours
P Casalini, S Ménard, A Balsari, E Tagliabue, M Campiglio,
R Bufalino, N Cascinelli
Istituto Nazionale Tumori and *Institute of Pathology, University of
Medicine, Milan, Italy
A large series of 2000 primary breast carcinomas was analyzed for
HER2 overexpression, and its prognostic potential. A subset analy-
sis, considering HER2-positive tumors as an independent subset
of breast carcinomas, was conducted. In our series, HER2 positiv-
ity was not associated with nodal status, unless the number of infil-
trated nodes was considered, whereas it was strongly associated
with large tumors (P>10–4), grade III tumors (P>10–4), lymphoid
infiltration (P>10–4) and absence of hormone receptor expression
(P>10–4). HER2 overexpression was a strong prognostic indicator
in N+ patients (P<10–7), whereas its prognostic impact was weak
and not statistically significant in the N– patients. Analysis of the
hazard ratio of relapse in relation to time from surgery indicate that
the poor prognosis associated with HER2-positivity in N+ patients
was found to be due to a peak of relapses in the first 3–4 years
from surgery. Multivariate analysis of different prognostic factors in
HER2+ and HER2– subsets indicated that grade is the most impor-
tant factor, followed by nodal status, lymphoid infiltration and tumor
size in HER2-negative breast carcinomas, whereas nodal status
was the most important prognostic factor, with tumor size showing
only borderline significance, in the HER2-positive group. Together,
the results indicate that HER2-positive breast carcinomas repre-
sent a particular subset of tumors with peculiar clinical and patho-
logical behaviours. Thus, conclusions drawn from clinical trials,
which serve as the basis for clinical management of breast carcino-
mas, might not always be valid for this low-frequency subset.
Supported by AIRC.
A17
Prevention of thymic atrophy in mammary tumor
bearers by IFN-γ
V Charyulu, B Adkins*, D Lobo*, DM Lopez*
Florida Atlantic University, Department of Health Sciences, Boca
Raton; *Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of
Miami School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA
Development of the in vivo transplantable D1-DMBA-3 mammary
tumors results in an alteration of several cytokines in the host, and
IFN-γ is one of the most severely downregulated. Notably, the thy-
muses of these mice display a profound atrophy that is associated
with a severe depletion of CD4+8+ thymocytes. Investigations into
the possible mechanisms that lead to this thymic atrophy revealed
that the levels of proliferation assessed by in vivo labeling with
5′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) were similar in control and tumor-
bearing mice. However, our studies implicated a modest increase in
apoptosis, coupled with an arrest at the triple negative stage of dif-
ferentiation in the thymic hypocellularity in tumor bearers. We have
transfected the DA-3 mammary tumor cell line, derived in vitro from
the in vivo D1-DMBA tumors, with the IFN-γ gene and showed the
Page 6
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
production of high levels of IFN-γ protein by the transfected cells.
Inoculation of hosts with IFN-γ transfected cells 4 days prior to chal-
lenge with the D1-DMBA-3 tumor resulted in a blockage of the
thymus involution in these mice. In contrast, using in the same pro-
tocol untransfected DA-3 cells, the progressive atrophy observed in
animals with D1-DMBA-3 tumors was observed. These results
suggest that the lack of IFN-γ may be an important factor in the
thymic atrophy that occurs during mammary tumorigenesis.
A18
Immunotoxins: experimental design
P Dall, W Wels*
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Düsseldorf University
Medical Center, Düsseldorf; *Georg-Speyer-Haus
(Chemotherapeutical Research Institute), Frankfurt, Germany
One of the major goals of tumor immunotherapy is to overcome
immune escape and tumor anergy mechanisms. The identification of
(relatively) tumor-specific epitopes is more important for adoptive
immunotherapy strategies than their immunogenicity. In the immuno-
cellular approach, D44v-epitope-specific T-cells were cloned intro-
ducing a fusion gene encoding the single chain Fv-fragment of
CD44v-specific mAb and the zeta-chain of the TCR complex. MHC-
independent retargeted cytotoxicity could be shown toward antigen-
expressing tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. In a humoral approach, the
fusion gene for a Her2neu-specific scFv and a bacterial toxin was
expressed in E coli. After purification the fusion toxin showed signifi-
cant activity in animal experiments using Her2-neu-expressing tumors.
Meanwhile, the first six patients suffering from Her2-neu-expressing
cancers have been treated topically so far. No significant systemic or
local side effects could be detected. Four out of six patients had a
local PR/CR. Further clinical studies are warranted and ongoing.
A19
Three-dimensional ultrasound-guided biopsy of
breast lesion: a new diagnostic support in the
preoperative diagnosis
L Delle Chiaie, S Schindelmann, I Heinich, V Heilmann,
G Helms, R Terinde
University Clinic, Ulm, Germany
A safe and precise preoperative histologic diagnosis is the goal in
the modern treatment of breast cancer, to optimize the surgical
radicality and to reduce unnecessary mutilation without increasing
the risk of residual cancer and later recidives and to optimize the
degree of surgical radicality. Ultrasound-guided procedures are
useful in biopsying US-detectable breast lesions. In recent years
many bioptic procedures have been developed; each shows
advantages and disadvantages, but until now none has been
defined as the optimal one.
The aim of our study was to improve and to optimize the reliability
of the high-speed breast core biopsy, using three-dimensional
ultrasound guidance.
From September 2000 to March 2001, we performed 57 high-
speed breast core biopsies (Bard Instrument) under 3D US guid-
ance (three dimensional representation of the needle in the lesion):
13 lesions had a diameter >2cm and 44 had a diameter ≤2cm; in
13 of the latter the diameter was ≤1cm. From each tumor we
obtained only 2 to 3 bioptic cores (in at least one core we demon-
strated the presence of the needle central or marginally in the lesion).
All of the patients underwent breast operation after the bioptic his-
tologic diagnosis (at biopsy approximately 90% had breast cancer, 
and approximately 10% did not have malignant lesions). The diag-
nosis of malignancy or benignancy was confirmed in 97% of cases
(55/57);  two false-negative bioptic results indicated hyperplasy
and suspected adenosis, but the successive postoperative diagno-
sis showed clear malignancy.
With 3D US support we were able to reduce the number of biop-
sies for each lesion (two to three) without reduction of the histologic
results, also reducing the costs and the possible complications
(haematomas, infections and malignant cell spreading).
A20
Genetic modifiers of cancer risks conferred by
BRCA1 and BRCA2
P Devilee
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands
Approximately 15% of all breast cancer patients have a positive
family history of the disease. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are two genes
that explain major proportions of families with multiple cases of early-
onset breast and/or ovarian cancer. Despite the high risks of breast
and ovarian cancer conferred by deleterious BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutations, a strong variability in phenotype has been observed
among families segregating the same mutation. This can range from
early-onset breast cancer and ovarian cancer, to late-onset breast
cancer without ovarian cancer. Even within a single pedigree, ages
of onset of cancer can vary substantially. These observations support
the idea that disease outcome in carriers is codetermined by other
factors. Different risk estimates for BRCA mutations, depending on
the type of population studied, also attest to this point. Risk esti-
mates derived from families with multiple cases of early-onset breast
cancer, used for linkage analysis to detect BRCA1 and BRCA2,
came out substantially higher than those from population-based
studies, and risks also appear to differ between populations.
Both genetic and environmental factors are thought to interact with
BRCA1 and BRCA2. The influence of nongenetic factors is demon-
strated by the finding that even identical carrier twins may differ in
disease history. Simple chance may determine age of onset, because
multiple genetic mutations are required for full tumorigenesis. Thus far
we are not even sure whether modifiers of BRCA-conferred risk actu-
ally exist, but some suggestive associations have been reported,
which will require independent confirmation. Rare alleles at HRAS1
were found to increase risk of ovarian cancer in BRCA1 carriers,
whereas breast cancer risk has been found to be modified by rare
alleles at the androgen receptor. Among Ashkenazi Jewish women, a
polymorphism in the 5′UTR of the RAD51 gene increased risk of
breast cancer fourfold, but only in carriers of the BRCA2-6174delT.
A21
A novel sodium phenylacetate-dextran derivative
ester inhibits the growth and angiogenesis of
MCF-7ras breast cancer xenografts
M Di Benedetto, D Briane, O Oudar, O Sainte Catherine,
J Jozefonvicz*, M Kraemer, M Crépin
UPRES 2360, Equipe d’Oncologie cellulaire et moléculaire des
tumeurs SMBH, Université Paris, Bobigny, France; *Laboratoire de
Recherches sur les Macromolécules (LRM), Institut Galilée,
Université Paris, Villetaneuse, France
We previously showed that sodium phenylacetate (NaPa) and car-
boxymethyl benzylamide dextran (CMDB) are both able to block the
tumor growth of the breast cancer cell line MCF-7ras in athymic
mice. In this study, we studied the effect of a new molecule: a CMDB
Page 7
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
esterified by phenylacetic acid (NaPaC). In vitro, NaPaC can inhibit
threefold to fourfold more MCF-7ras proliferation than NaPa alone.
Furthermore, we showed that the antiproliferative activity of NaPaC
was dependent on phenylacetate substitution. In vivo studies
showed that a very low dose of NaPaC (15mg/kg) inhibited the
MCF-7ras tumor growth of 60% without animal toxicity. The inhibi-
tion of tumor growth was concomitant with a reduction in angiogene-
sis and an increase in necrosis. Moreover, we demonstrated that
NaPaC inhibited the paracrine mitogenic effect of MCF-7ras condi-
tioned medium (CM) on fibroblasts and endothelial cells proliferation.
A22
Nongenomic effects of estrogens on signal
transduction pathways in estrogen-sensitive
carcinoma cell lines
S Djahansouzi, D Niederacher, B Hanstein, P Dall, HG Bender
University Hospital Düsseldorf, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Düsseldorf, Germany
Research thus far has concentrated mainly on the classical steroid
hormone (SH) receptors and on the underlying mechanisms of
antihormone interactions with these receptors. This is mainly
because, in the conventional view, estrogen (E) and progesterone
produce most of their effects through interaction with
cellular/nuclear receptors with subsequent alteration of the gene-
regulating machinery. However, emerging data suggest that these
lipophilic hormones are also able to produce rapid effects within
several seconds, which cannot be adequately explained through
the classical mechanism. Further investigation has recently led to
the discovery of membrane-bound forms of E-receptors, which are
coupled to cytosolic signal transduction proteins. These rapid
responses have been observed in several tissues such as myome-
trial cells, neurons, endothelium, osteoblasts, granulosa cells and
some breast cancer cell lines. The binding of E to these cell-
surface forms of E-receptors is thought to activate several second
messenger systems via the activation of G-proteins, resulting in the
activation of different protein kinases. One such kinase is the
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase, which may serve as a
stimulus for cell proliferation.
We report preliminary results showing the functional existence of
such receptors in the human breast carcinoma cell line MCF-7.
Using spectrofluorometry to measure the intracellular calcium con-
centration, evidence has been collected that the addition of E to
these cells causes a rapid rise in the intracellular calcium concen-
tration. This mechanism may prove to be an important initial signal-
ing pathway, leading to the activation of specific protein kinases
and subsequent proliferation.
A23
Prognosis and treatment of locally recurrent
breast cancer
J Dunst
Martin-Luther-University, Department of Radiotherapy, Halle, Germany
Even in case of adequate curative treatment of the primary tumor,
approximately 10–20% of all patients will develop a locoregional
recurrence in the course of disease. At the time of diagnosis of the
recurrence, one-third of patients already has distant metastases.
The 5-year survival for patients without metastases is approximately
40%. Prognostic factors are the initial lymph-node status and the
disease-free interval. Whether in-breast recurrences (IBTR) carry a
better prognosis than chest-wall recurrences after mastectomy is 
not definitively clear; the better survival after IBTR might be due to
a selection bias for breast preservation.
A major goal of treatment for locoregionally recurrent breast cancer
is to achieve local control at the recurrent site. This includes
surgery and/or radiotherapy. For local control, the patterns of local
spread (scar or outside scar, multifocality, size, site) are important.
In irresectable lesions, the addition of hyperthermia to radiotherapy
yields improved local control. Encouraging local control rates have
also been reported from some phase II studies with concurrent
radiochemotherapy. In general, patients with local control at the
recurrent site have a significantly better long-term prognosis as
compared with patients with re-recurrence.
Local recurrence is often associated with subsequent occurrence
of distant metastases. Prophylactic (‘adjuvant’) systemic treatment
is theoretically justified, but its impact on prognosis is unclear. Hor-
monal treatment is recommended if the recurrence is positive for
ER/PR receptors. The use of chemotherapy is currently being
investigated in several multicentre studies.
A24
Telomerase activity and bcl2 expression in human
breast cancer
AE Elkak, K Kirkpatrick, L Mears, C Wells, M Ghilchick,
K Mokbel
The Breast Cancer Centre, St George’s Hospital, London, UK
Background: Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein that synthesizes
telomers and plays an important role in cellular immortalization.
Bcl2 gene encodes for a mitochondrial protein that is thought to
prevent apoptosis of normal cells. We previously reported telo-
merase activity in 74% of human invasive breast cancers, and
detected a significant association between telomerase activity and
prognostic parameters such as nodal status, tumour size and cellu-
lar proliferation. We hypothesized that telomerase reactivation in
human breast cancer was associated with reduced immunohisto-
chemical expression of bcl2.
Materials and method: Bcl2 immunohistochemical expression was
determined in 25 infiltrating breast carcinomas with known telo-
merase activity (17 telomerase-positive and 8 telomerase-negative).
The percentage of strongly and moderately stained tumour cells for
bcl2 was determined by a breast pathologist who was blinded to
telomerase data. Fisher’s exact test was used to examine the asso-
ciation between telomerase activity and bcl2 expression.
Results: The median percentage of strongly stained tumour cells
was 50% for telomerase-positive tumours (range 0–100%) and
45% for telomerase-negative tumours (range 0–100%).  Twelve
(70%) out of 17 telomerase-positive tumours expressed strong or
moderate bcl2 staining in more than 50% of tumour cells, compared
with six (75%) out of eight telomerase-negative tumours (P=1.0).
Conclusion: Telomerase reactivation appears to be independent
of bcl2 protein expression in human breast cancer.
A25
Protection against growth of MUC1/sec transfected
mammary tumor cells is mediated by an effector
cell with perforin-dependent cytotoxicity
T Fu, L Herbert, I Keydar*, DM Lopez
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami School
of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA; *Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel
We have previously found that DA-3 mammary tumor cells trans-
fected with the secreted form of the MUC1-gene (DA-3/sec)
resulted in no tumor growth, whereas transfection with the
Page 8
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
neomycin vector alone (DA-3/neo) or with the transmembrane form
of MUC-1 (DA-3/TM) did not change the growth characteristics of
the DA-3 cells. Implantation of the DA-3/sec in nude mice resulted
in tumor development, indicating that the immune response is a
major cause of the lack of growth of these cells in immunologically
intact mice. In vitro activated spleen cells from DA-3/sec-injected
mice showed strong cytotoxicity against DA-3/sec, but not to
DA-3, DA-3/neo or DA-3/TM cells. This cytotoxicity was clearly
neutralized by in vivo administration of anti-CD3 monoclonal anti-
body, but not by anti-CD4 or anti-CD8 antibodies. Analysis of the
mechanism of killing of the effector cells revealed that anti-Fas anti-
body did not affect the reaction. Furthermore, FasL-transfected
EL-4 cells were not able to kill the DA-3 cells. In contrast, con-
canomycin A, a perforin-specific inhibitor, greatly reduced the cyto-
toxicity of spleen cells from DA-3/sec-injected mice. These data
suggest that a cell with a phenotype compatible to that of a NK
Tcell, may be responsible, at least in part, for the protection
against the growth of DA-3/sec cells in immunocompetent mice.
A26
Regulation of episialin/MUC1 expression in
breast carcinomas: a complex interplay between
stimulatory and inhibitory factors
I Gaemers, H Volders, J Hilkens
Division of Tumor Biology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
Episialin/MUC-1 is an epithelial mucin-like transmembrane glyco-
protein, which is highly overexpressed in a majority of human carci-
nomas, in particular breast and ovarian carcinomas. We and others
have shown that this overexpression results in reduced adhesion
and a higher metastatic potential of the tumor cells [1]. The overex-
pression of episialin originates mainly at the transcriptional level
(10-fold or more increased levels of episialin mRNA are found in
breast tumor specimens and breast carcinoma cell lines [2,3]).
Consequently, information on the regulation of the episialin pro-
moter may provide a clue to the regulation of metastasis. Examina-
tion of the episialin promoter revealed several putative regulatory
elements.
(1) We have shown that the episialin promoter is positively regulated
by STATs (signal transducers and activators of transcription) in
T47D breast and other carcinoma cell lines, using several estab-
lished inducers of episialin expression (eg IFN-γ and IL-6) as STAT-
activating ligands [3]. IL-6 (an activator of STAT3) can stimulate the
episialin promoter, and binding of STAT3 to the STAT element in the
episialin promoter is observed in bandshift assays [3]. The possible
involvement of STATs in tumor progression (eg via episialin expres-
sion) is also indicated by the increased levels of activated STAT3
that are found in breast carcinoma cell lines with a high episialin
expression [4]. Similar results are found in vivo, where constitutive
activation of STAT1 and/or STAT3 is found in breast tumors [5].
(2) Glucocorticoids also can stimulate episialin expression in T47D
cells through binding of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) to GRE
half sites present in the episialin promoter [4].
(3) In addition, we report that glucocorticoids can attenuate the
effect of IL-6/STAT3, using reporter, bandshift and FACS assays
[4].  The effect of glucocorticoids on STAT3-mediated episialin
expression occurs both through direct interactions between
STAT3 and GR, as well as via indirect pathways. Conversely, addi-
tion of IL-6 can augment GR-mediated episialin expression [4].
(4) We have also identified a 200-bp sequence fragment far
upstream in the episialin promoter that may bind a negative regula-
tor of episialin expression. The identity and exact binding sequence
of this putative inhibitor has not yet been determined. 
We conclude that the expression of episialin/MUC1 is determined
by a balance between positive and negative regulators, which is
distorted in tumors, leading to a higher episialin expression and
thus a more aggressive tumor type.
References
1. Hilkens et al: Cancer Lett, 1995.
2. Ligtenberg et al: J Biol Chem, 1990.
3. Gaemers et al: J Biol Chem, 2001.
4. Gaemers et al: (in preparation).
5. Watson, Miller: Br J Cancer, 1995.
A27
Characterization of a hormonally induced reverse
transcriptase (RT) from the human breast cancer
cell line T47D: a possible involvement in human
breast cancer
M Golan, A Hizi*, I Keydar†, I Tsarfaty
Department of Human Microbiology and *Department of Cell Biology
and Histology, Sackler School of Medicine; †Department of Cell
Research and Immunology, George S Weis Faculty of Life Science,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
Since the discovery of the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV),
which was shown to be involved in mouse mammary carcinoma,
there has been an attempt to discover similar viruses associated
with human breast cancer. We have already shown that the human
mammary carcinoma cell line T47D releases retrovirus-like parti-
cles in response to steroid treatment.
An RT transcript from T47D cells was isolated, using RT-PCR with
primers based on the published T47D endogenous retroviral pol
sequences. The PCR product encodes a 372-amino-acid long
protein. The new T47D RT is almost identical to both previously
described RTs from T47D cells, as well as to the enzymatically
active RT from human bone marrow cells (95 and 97% identity,
respectively). The DNA product was cloned into a bacterial expres-
sion system. A 42-kDa RT-related fragment was expressed, puri-
fied, and used to immunize rabbits. The antibodies recognize a
60–70kDa hormonally induced protein specifically in T47Dcells.
Moreover, steroid hormones induce the apperance of RT protein
foci in the cell cytoplasm, as demonstrated by confocal laser
microscopy. A parallel hormonal induction of the RT activity in cell
supernatants was observed. Expression of the RT-related protein
was also detected in tumor cells of breast cancer biopsies sec-
tions. These results support the idea that retroviruses may be asso-
ciated with human breast carcinoma.
A28
Antitumor potential of bisphosphonates
JR Green
Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland
Bisphosphonates (BPs), especially those with a nitrogen-contain-
ing substituent, are potent inhibitors of osteoclast-mediated bone
resorption. They have found extensive clinical use for the treatment
of both benign and malignant bone disease. BPs bind to hydroxy-
apatite and rapidly accumulate in bone where they inhibit the
mevalonate biosynthetic pathway, thereby preventing the post-
translational prenylation of small GTP-binding proteins and induc-
ing apoptosis in osteoclasts. Recent in vitro studies indicate that
BPs also inhibit proliferation, reduce viability and induce apoptosis
in several human tumor cell lines. In addition, BPs reduce the inva-
sion of tumor cells through extracellular matrix and impair the
Page 9
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
binding of tumor cells to bone in vitro. This growing body of evi-
dence suggests that BPs may have the potential to exert direct
antitumor effects in vivo, particularly in bone metastases where the
local BP concentration is elevated by the enhanced osteoclastic
resorption of BP-loaded bone. Several experiments with zoledronic
acid (a highly potent BP with an imidazole substituent) adminis-
tered to mice injected with mammary, prostate or myeloma cancer
cells indicate not only inhibition of the tumor-induced osteolysis,
but also a reduction in the growth of bone metastases, accompa-
nied by the induction of tumor cell apoptosis. Moreover, zoledronic
acid has recently been shown to potently inhibit endothelial cell
proliferation in vitro and angiogenesis in mice bearing subcuta-
neous implants loaded with growth factors. Overall, these findings
provide a rationale for testing the antitumor potential of the more
potent nitrogen-containing BPs in pilot clinical trials.
A29
Transcriptional regulation through the estrogen
receptor (ER)-α and splice variants of ER-β via
classical and nonclassical signal transduction
pathways
B Hanstein, T Flötotto, D Luke, D Niederacher, HG Bender
Universitäts-Frauenklinik Düsseldorf, Germany
The aim of this study was to analyze the transcriptional regulation of
different ERs via alternative cis-elements. For this purpose we per-
formed transient transfections with a luciferase reporter plasmid for
estrogen-responsive elements (ERE) and AP-1 elements, and
expression plasmids for ER-α, ER-β1 and ER-β2. Cells were left
unstimulated or stimulated with E2, tamoxifen or raloxifen. We found
that, in the breast cancer cell line SKBR3, ER-β1 lead to a signifi-
cant inhibition of AP-1 activity by E2, whereas through ER-β2 E2
lead to a stimulation of transcriptional activity. Antiestrogens inhib-
ited transcription through ER-β1 but did not exhibit an effect
through ER-β2. When transfecting ER-β1 in SKBR3 cells the basal
transcriptional activity increased, in contrast to the results obtained
when transfecting the human osteosarcoma cell line U2OS with the
same receptor. E2 in SKBR3 cells leads to a significant transcrip-
tional inhibition, whereas this effect is not seen in U2OS cells. Also
the antiestrogens tamoxifen and raloxifen exhibit in SKBR3 cells via
the same receptor a transcriptional inhibition, but in contrast in
U2OS cells they lead to a stimulation of transcription. In summary,
splice variants of ER-β are able to regulate the actvity of the AP-1
complex differentially, indicating that the relative expression of these
variants in a tumor could modulate its hormonal sensitvity.
Sponsored by DFG Ha 2404/2-1.
A30
Late radiation sequelae in women after breast-
conserving cancer therapy: effects of hyperbaric
oxygen therapy
KA Hartmann, JJ Feldmeier*, G Schmitt, UM Carl
Department of Radiation Oncology, University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf,
Germany; *Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical College of
Ohio, Toledo, Ohio, USA
Background: Persisting symptomatology after breast-conserving
surgery and radiation is frequently reported. In most cases symp-
toms in the breast resolve without further treatment. In some
instances, however, pain, erythema and edema can persist for
years and can impact on the patient’s quality of life. Hyperbaric
oxygen therapy was shown to be effective as treatment for late 
radiation sequelae. The objective of this study was to assess the
efficacy of hyperbaric oxygen therapy in symptomatic patients after
breast cancer treatment.
Patients and method: Forty-four patients with persisting symptoma-
tology after breast-conservation therapy were prospectively observed.
Thirty-two women received hyperbaric oxygen therapy in a multiplace
chamber for a median of 25 sessions (7–60). One hundred per cent
oxygen was delivered at 240kPa for 90-min sessions, five times per
week. Twelve control patients received no further treatment. Changes
throughout the irradiated breast tissue were scored before and after
hyperbaric oxygen therapy, using modified LENT-SOMA criteria.
Results: Hyperbaric oxygen therapy patients showed a significant
reduction in pain, edema and erythema scores as compared with
untreated controls (P<0.001).  Fibrosis and teleangiectasia,
however, were not significantly affected by hyperbaric oxygen
therapy. Seven out of 32 women were free of symptoms after
hyperbaric oxygen therapy, whereas all 12 patients in the control
group had persisting complaints.
Conclusion: Hyperbaric oxygen therapy should be considered as a
treatment option for patients with persisting symptomatology fol-
lowing breast-conserving therapy.
A31
Sentinel lymph node biopsies in breast cancer
A Hess, MO Flüß*, C Nestle-Krämling, HG Bender, P Dall
Institut für Frauenheilkunde und Geburtshilfe and *Institut für
Nuklearmedizin, Universität Düsseldorf, Germany
Introduction: Lymph node biopsy is not only important as a prog-
nostic factor, but also influences therapy. However, axillary lym-
phadenectomy is often accompanied by high morbidity. The
sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLN) should reduce the morbidity, but
give the same prognosic value. In 97.5% cases metastasis occurs
in lymph nodes (LN) of level I first, and only less than 3% directly in
LN level II. The first draining LN can be identified either by radioac-
tive material or colouring technique.
Method: Patients with primary breast cancer (41 cases, age
30–80 years), 1 day before surgery, received peritumoral 1–3ml
nanocolloid containing 99m-technetium, with scintigraphy per-
formed 30–120 min later. Alternatively 2ml Patentblau (2.5% Byk
Gulden) was applied during the surgery 15 min before the axillary
lymphadenectomy. The marked LN was separated and sent to
pathology together with the other LN.
Results: Seventeen patients received Tc-nanocolloid, 21 Patent-
blue. Three patients were treated with both identification methods.
Out of 41 patients, 14 had an axillary metastasis. Comparison of
radioactive labelling showed no false-negative results, but 7.3%
false negativity was obtained with the colour method.
A32
Organochlorines and breast cancer: effect of
exposure to dieldrin on risk and survival
AP Høyer, T Jørgensen*, AP Grandjean†
Copenhagen Center for Prospective Population Studies, Denmark;
*Center of Preventive Medicine, KAS Glostrup, Denmark; †Institute of
Community Health, Odense, Denmark
Some organochlorines have weak estrogenic activity, and may there-
fore interfere with breast cancer risk and survival. We assessed
prospectively risk and prognosis of breast cancer in relation to serum
concentrations of several compounds, which have shown to be
estrogenic in vitro and in vivo.  Study participants (7712 women)
Page 10
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
donated blood twice (1976–1978 and 1981–1983) and were fol-
lowed for 17 years with regard to development of breast cancer.
Information on potential breast cancer risk factors and prognostics
were obtained through standardized questionnaires and by linkage
to the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group.
Breast cancer risk associated with baseline exposure in
1976–1978, and repeated measurements of organochlorines
(average concentration of the two measurements) was examined in
two cohort-nested case–control studies, including 240 cases and
477 controls, and 155 cases and 274 controls, respectively. The
cases served as a cohort in the survival analysis, in which the
average duration of follow up to death was 86 and 79 months after
the first and second sampling.
The most consistent finding observed was dieldrin’s adverse effect
on breast cancer risk as well as prognosis. More than a twofold
increased risk was found among women with the highest baseline
concentration compared with those with the lowest, and a signifi-
cant trend was apparent. A high serum dieldrin concentration was
also significantly associated with an increased overall mortality,
being threefold for baseline measurements and almost sixfold
when repeated measurements was assessed. Similar results were
obtained when using breast cancer recurrence and/or death
caused by breast cancer as end-point.
A33
Fhit loss in familial breast cancer: is loss of DNA
repair function linked to alterations at
chromosome fragile sites?
K Huebner, B Turner, WW Hauck*, N Popescu
Kimmel Cancer Institute, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia,
USA; *Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
The FHIT gene at 3p14.2 encompasses the common fragile site,
FRA3B, and is involved in frequent chromosome rearrangements in
human cancers. Fhit protein expression is reduced or lost in the
majority of esophageal, lung, gastric, cervical, pancreatic, kidney
and bladder cancers, and a large fraction of other cancers. Fhit
expression in sporadic breast cancers has been studied by several
groups, and reported to show alteration in expression of Fhit in
30–50%. Because familial breast cancers were reported to show a
higher frequency of LOH at 3p14.2 than sporadic breast cancers,
we were interested in whether common fragile regions might be
targets for repair by the Brca1 and Brca2 proteins, and might thus
be a downstream target in BRCA1- and BRCA2-induced familial
breast tumors. We studied a panel of Brca2-deficient breast tumors
and showed that only 18% expressed Fhit strongly, compared with
48% of sporadic tumors (P=0.002). Very recently we completed a
similar study of BRCA1 familial tumors, and observed that only 9%
of these tumors showed strong expression versus more than 40%
of sporadic breast tumors (P<0.001, odds ratio 0.09). We con-
clude that loss of BRCA1 and BRCA2 functions affect stability of
the FHIT/FRA3B locus and possibly other fragile loci.
A34
ErbB family of receptors in breast cancer
NE Hynes, A Motoyama, HA Lane
Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland
The ErbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase is overexpressed in many
human breast tumors, a phenomenon correlating with more
aggressive tumor characterisitcs and a worse patient prognosis. 
ErbB2 is considered, therefore, as a target for cancer therapy. In
this respect, a growth inhibitory antibody (4D5) directed against
the extracellular domain of ErbB2 has been raised. Furthermore,
the humanized version (HerceptonTM) is now being used in the
clinic to treat metastatic breast cancer patients whose tumors
overxpress ErbB2. In our work, 4D5 has been applied as a selec-
tive inhibitor of ErbB2 function. Treatment with 4D5 blocks G1/S
phase progression in breast carcinoma cells that overexpress
ErbB2. This block correlates with a rapid reduction in ErbB2 phos-
photyrosine content, downregulation of signal transduction path-
ways, a reduction in the expression of proteins involved in the
sequestration of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27, and
relocalization of p27 onto Cdk2 complexes. Strikingly, the 4D5-
induced G1 block can be rescued by treatment with various ErbB
ligands. The degree of rescue is ligand-related and is associated
with activation of specific signaling pathways. Additionally, through
comparison with an ErbB2-overexpressing gastric carcinoma cell
line (MKN7) that proliferates normally in the presence of 4D5, we
have demonstrated that decreased ErbB2 phosphotyrosine levels
do not necessarily lead to growth inhibition in response to 4D5.
These data imply that ErbB2 overexpression alone is insufficient to
predict cellular response to ErbB2-directed therapies. The possi-
ble contribution of other ErbB receptors to the process of malig-
nant transformation will be discussed in relation to the evolution of
ErbB-directed treatment strategies.
A35
Effect of anthracyclin-based neoadjuvant
chemotherapy on disseminated tumor cells in
breast cancer patients: an immunocytologic and
molecular approach
CM Jäger, A Müller, V Heilmann, R Grundmann, R Kreienberg
Universitäts-Frauenklinik, Ulm, Germany
Objective: The leading cause of death from epithelial cancer is
metastatic tumor relapse due to early dissemination of tumor cells.
Cytokeratins are specific markers of epithelial cancer cells in bone
marrow. As previously shown, these epithelial cells in bone marrow
seem to be resting ‘in dormancy’. This biological behaviour might
be an explanation for the resistance to cytotoxic agents. In the
present study, we evaluated whether primary chemotherapy in
locally advanced, nonmetastatic breast cancer can eliminate cyto-
keratin-positive cells in bone marrow. Furthermore, we investigated
the influence of primary chemotherapy on the tumor-associated
gene expression.
Method: Twenty-one breast cancer patients underwent bone
marrow aspiration before and after neodjuvant chemotherapy. For
immunocytologic tumor cell detection we used the monoclonal
antibody 5D3 (Biogenex),  which is directed against common
epitope on cytokeratin polypeptides, including cytokeratin 8/18/19.
For the molecular approach, after isolation of RNA, the reverse
transcription with Superscript II  Reverse Transkriptase
(Gibco/BRL) and Oligo (dT)
12–18 
Primers (Gibco/BRL) was per-
formed, followed by the amplification procedure with nested-RT-
PCR for β
2
-microglobulin, muc-1, CK-20 and carcinoembryogenic
antigen (CEA).
Results: Fifteen patients met the inclusion criteria. Before
chemotherapy, five out of 15 (30%) had cytokeratin-positive cells in
bone marrow. Four out of five were still tested positive after finishing
chemotherapy. With the RT-PCR procedure, all bone marrow aspi-
rates showed a signal for β
2
-microglobulin (positive control).
Expression of cytokeratin-20 was absent, whereas muc-1 was
expressed in all aspirates. Two out of five showed expression of the
CEA before chemotherapy, which was absent in one and only slight
Page 11
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
in the other case after chemotherapy. Before chemotherapy
immunocytologic tumor cell detection and RT-PCR procedure for
CEA was concurrently negative in 10 out of 15 patients.
Conclusion: (1) A negative result in immunocytochemistry of bone
marrow of breast cancer patients seems to agree on the RT-PCR
for CEA. (2) Tumor cells could develop a different pattern of gene
expression under primary chemotherapy. (3) RT-PCR procedure
for muc-1 and CK-20 seems not to be useful for investigating dis-
seminated tumor cells in bone marrow.
A36
Cloning of novel mammary tumor progression and
metastasis genes
M Kimm, M Boer, I Gaemers, J Hilkens
Division of Tumorbiology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Crucial to the prognosis of cancer patients is not growth of the
primary tumor, but rather dissemination of neoplastic cells to other
organs As the process of the activation and inactivation of genes
that are involved in tumorigenesis and metastasis is still poorly
understood, the aim of this study is to identify novel mammary
cancer progression and metastasis genes in vivo. Proviral insertions
of mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) in mammary epithelial cells
are able to activate flanking oncogenes, leading to mammary tumor
induction. Classical examples of MMTV-induced oncogenes are
Wnt1 and Fgf3. Full neoplastic transformation to an invasive and
metastasizing tumor requires activation of collaborating
onco/metastasis genes. Thus, additional proviral insertions may lead
to metastasis-inducing genes. In this study we used a BALB/c+
mouse strain (ie a BALB/c substrain that aquired C3H-MMTV by
forster-nursing), and compared extra proviral integrations in a series
of sets of independent primary tumors and metastases. As a first
step, the isolated tumor sets (primary tumor and metastases) were
analyzed by Southern blotting using a MMTV-LTR specific probe. A
number of the lung metastases indeed carried additional MMTV
integrations, which were not found in the primary tumor. These addi-
tional integrations might activate genes being responsible for the
lung metastases. To analyze the flanking sequences more efficiently,
an adaptor ligation-mediated PCR (Splinkerette-PCR) was modified
for the metastasis-related proviral MMTV integrations. To this end,
genomic DNA was digested and ligated to a suitable splinkerette
linker. The subsequent PCR gets its specificity by using a unique
MMTV-LTR-related oligonucleotide and a splinkerette-specific
oligonucleotide, which is only able to bind to the DNA if extension of
the MMTV oligonucleotide occurs. BLAST/NIX (DNA analysis soft-
ware) analysis of the derived additional sequences from 23 tumor
sets resulted in the discovery of a novel common integration site.
The effect of this putative metastasis gene on the metastic potential
of mammary tumor cells is presently being investigated.
A37
The association between cyclo-oxygenase-2
expression and cell proliferation and
angiogenesis in human breast cancer
K Kirkpatrick, W Ogunkolade, AE Elkak, S Bustin, P Jenkins,
M Ghilchick, K Mokbel
The Breast Cancer Centre, St George’s Hospital, Blackshaw Road,
London, UK
Background: Cyclo-oxygenase (COX) is the rate-limiting enzyme
in converting arachidonic acid to prostaglandins. There are two iso- 
forms of COX: COX-1, which is expressed in many tissues; and
COX-2, which is the inducible form. COX-2 has been reported to
be involved in carcinogenesis and tumour angiogenesis. Therefore,
we hypothesized that COX-2 expression was associated with that
of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA) in human breast cancer.
Materials and method: RNA was extracted from 15 human breast
carcinomas and adjacent noncancerous tissue (ANCT).  COX-2,
VEGF 189 and PCNA expressions were estimated by reverse tran-
scriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) and Taqman methodology in the RNA
samples. The results were analyzed using Spearman’s correlation
with Student’s t-test.
Results: Median mRNA copy number for PCNA mRNA in
tumours was 1.65× 106 (range 3.79× 105–1.46× 107).  For
COX-2, the median mRNA copy number was 4.56× 105 (range
2.48× 103–5.10× 106)  in tumours and 2.26× 106  (range
1.37E+05–4.79E+07) in ANCT. Copy numbers of VEGF mRNA
in tumours had a  median value of 2.13× 106  (range
3.42× 101–3.37× 107). There was a highly significant correlation
between COX-2 and PCNA levels in tumours (rs= 0.7896;
P = 0.000001) and VEGF in tumour samples (rs= 0.4610;
2P = 0.0320).
Conclusion: COX-2 expression is significantly associated with
increased cellular proliferation and angiogenesis in invasive breast
cancer. The upregulation of COX-2 in ANCT suggests that COX-2
in the host is relevant to mammary carcinogenesis.
A38
Acidification-induced sensitization to
thermoradiotherapy in breast cancer
DB Leeper, LT Komarnicky
Department of Radiation Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, USA
Hyperthermia is an extensively studied cytotoxic agent, with strong
radio- and chemosensitizing potential. Recent positive clinical trials
combining superficial or deep heating techniques with radiation
therapy strongly support a role for hyperthermia as an adjuvant to
radiation. Many in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that acute
extracellular acidification will compromise fundamental protective
cellular responses and enhance tumor response to hyperthermia
and chemotherapy.
Breast cancers, like most other tumors, exhibit elevated levels of
lactate production that provides a basis for selective acidification.
A phaseI/II clinical trial is underway to test the hypothesis that
hyperglycemia-induced acute acidification will sensitize carcinoma
of the breast to thermoradiotherapy. Six patients consented to fast
for at least 4h and ingest oral glucose (2g/kg, 0.44g/ml) 1.5h
before each hyperthermia treatment (HT) during a course of ther-
moradiotherapy. Hyperglycemia reduced tumor pH
e 
before the first
hyperthermia session by 0.10±0.04pH unit (–0.29 to +0.08) from
7.12±0.11 (6.65–7.52); and during the third week of treatment
hyperglycemia reduced tumor pH
e 
in five patients by
0.01±0.04pH unit (–0.06 to +0.1). The three patients with a CR
(60%) exhibited tumor acidification during both sessions, in con-
trast to the two patients with a PR (40%) who exhibited tumor
acidification only during one session. Tumor acidification may indi-
cate tumor response.
Human tumor cells adapted to growth at pH
e 
6.7 do not show
thermosensitization until pH
e 
is below 6.3 (pH
i 
<6.45). Combin-
ing an inhibitor of respiration such as MIBG with hyperglycemia
blocks mitochondrial respiration and increases lactate produc-
tion. Thus, tumor oxygenation occurs coincidentally with acute
acidification.
Page 12
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
Rats bearing the R3230 Ac rat mammary adenocarcinoma were
administered 1g/kg glucose ip, and/or 20mg/kg MIBG ip. The
median pO
2 
for glucose plus MIBG was increased from 5.3 to
13.8mmHg. A single ip injection of glucose or MIBG in rats fasted
for 24h before irradiation did not show an increase in tumor
growth delay compared with 5Gy radiation alone. However, com-
bined treatment with glucose plus MIBG significantly inhibited
tumor growth delay. Radiation therapy and glucose plus MIBG was
more than additive. These results support our hypothesis that
hyperglycemia plus an inhibitor of respiration will sensitize tumors
to radiation by oxygenation, in addition to enhanced hyperthermia
sensitization by acute acidification.
Supported in part by USPHS grant CA59960.
A39
A novel phenylacetate-dextran derivative (NaPaC)
inhibits breast cancer cell proliferation and
modifies their interactions with endothelial cells
S Malherbe, M Bérard, M Di Benedetto, N Peyri, M Crépin,
C Legrand, MX Wei
Inserm U553 Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France
Breast cancer treatments are limited by secondary effects and
chemoresistances or hormone resistances. Sodium phenylacetate
(NaPa), a nontoxic metabolite, has been shown to induce in vivo and
in vitro antiproliferative effects on various cell types in our laboratory.
We have previously shown that NaPa treatment induced breast
tumor cell apoptosis without acquired drug resistance. On the other
hand, we have demonstrated that a dextran derivative (CMDB) was
not only antitumoral but also antiangiogenic in a MCF-7ras tumor
model in animals. Recently, we have synthesized a novel hybrid
molecule, CMDB-NaPa ester, called NaPaC, and tested its effect
on the proliferation of MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 breast tumor cells.
NaPaC inhibits, dose dependently, the proliferation of MDA-MB-231
cell (IC
50 
0.5mmol/l) and of MCF-7 cell (IC
50 
1.5mmol/l). Primary
cultured endothelial cells (HUVEC) are weakly affected by NaPaC
treatment. Cytostatic effect of NaPaC was evidenced from the accu-
mulation of tumor cells in G0/G1 phase after 96h of treatment.
As compared with the NaPa parent molecule, this new molecule
was 10-fold more efficient on these two tumor cell lines. Moreover,
NaPaC induces a strong apoptotic effect, as measured with
Annexin V-positive cells, on these tumor cells. In order to under-
stand the interactions between tumor cells and endothelial cells,
the conditioned media were prepared and added to HUVEC cells.
Our results showed a clear killing effect on HUVEC cells. However,
this killing effect can be rescued by adding NaPaC.
Taken together, our results showed that NaPaC is a powerful anti-
tumoral molecule, with cytostatic and proapoptotic effects on
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 tumor cells. Further studies should be
conducted to better understand the mechanism of these mutual
interactions between tumor cells and endothelial cells, especially
the killing effect on HUVEC cells.
A40
Structural features for peptides binding the class I
molecules
I McKenzie, V Apostolopoulos, Y Mu*, IA Wilson*
The Austin Research Institute, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia; *Scripps
Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA
Examination of the MHC crystal structures indicate that key
peptide binding positions are defined pockets within the groove 
of a particular allele of classI molecules; for example, for H-2Kb,
the high-affinity binding of ovalbumin peptide SIINFEKL requires
P5 to be occupied F/Y, and P8 to have L/I, and other peptides
that lack these anchoring amino acids would bind with such a
low affinity that would be unable to induce, or be effective targets
for CTLs. Using MUC1 8 or 9mers as model peptides, we were
able to demonstrate the following: (1) these bind with low affinity;
(2) the binding is unusual and the peptides loop out of the
groove – indeed, the 9mer loops out so much it can be detected
by monoclonal anti-MUC1 peptide antibody; and (3) crystalliza-
tion structures of Kb with the 8mer (SAPDTRPA) demonstrates
that MUC1 and SIINFEKL have an identical shape within the
groove, the only difference being imposed by the side chains,
which are selectively recognized by T-cell receptor. The amino
acids occupied in the specific anchoring pockets are small
hydrophobic, rather than long/large hydrophobic F/Y or L/I
residues, thus the low affinity of the MUC1 peptide. The implica-
tion of the studies is that the rules for high-affinity binding in gen-
eration of CTL hold, but that these are not fixed rules: low-affinity
peptides bind, and indeed with the same general conformation
and shape as high-affinity peptides in one dimension; in another
they are clearly more ‘flexible’.
A41
The standardized mistletoe preparation Lektinol
has antitumoral potencies
U Mengs, A Burger*, D Wetzel, K Weber†, HH Fiebig*
Research and Development, Madaus AG, Cologne, Germany;
*University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; †RCC, Itingen,
Switzerland
Extracts of Viscum albumL have been used for decades for non-
specific stimulation of the immune system in cancer therapy.
Mistletoe lectins have been identified as the active components,
with cytotoxic and immunomodulatory activities. New experimental
data demonstrate that the special extract preparation Lektinol®
(Madaus AG, Cologne, Germany),  standardized for bioactive
mistletoe lectin (ML),  has antitumoral potencies in vitro and in
animal tumor models.
In vitro studies on human tumor cell lines and xenografts showed
Lektinol to be highly cytotoxic (ie toward breast, lung, prostate and
renal cell cancers).
The in vivo antitumoral effects of Lektinol were examined in differ-
ent subcutaneously growing murine neoplasms following
repeated intraperitoneal treatment of 0.3–3–30–300ng ML/kg.
Marked tumor growth inhibition was observed with Renca renal
carcinoma, C8 colon 38, and F9 testicular teratoma. The
antimetastatic effects of Lektinol were investigated in the B16
melanoma model in mice. Following a single intravenous injection
of the melanoma cells, the daily treatment with 3–30–150ng
ML/kg significantly reduced the formation of lung metastases. In
parallel, Lektinol enhanced several immune parameters (ie the
number of MAC-1+ mononuclear cells and CD4+8+ thymocytes
in the tumor-bearing animals).  In a further study, the effects of
locally administered Lektinol were evaluated in the MB49 urinary
bladder carcinoma model in mice. After a single instillation of the
tumor cells, Lektinol was given repeatedly by intravesical adminis-
tration of 3–30ng ML/0.1 ml/animal. Lektinol showed a distinct
effect on survival ratio, growth of primary bladder tumors and the
formation of multiple metastases.
Page 13
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
A42
High-risk breast cancer patients: comparison of
lymphocyte phenotypes and function in vitro
S Mohrmann, A Oletzki, A Karaoglu, U Nitz, U Koldovsky
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, HH-University Düsseldorf,
Germany
The design of a phase III trial in high-risk breast cancer patients is
characterized by a dose-dense sequential control (arm B), and a
high-dose chemotherapy (HDC) arm with short induction phase and
tandem HDC (arm A). It is known that following such a treatment
there are profound changes in lymphocyte phenotypes and lympho-
cyte function. Here we show data on the changes in vitro during the
different treatment cycles, beginning with the tests 1995.
The lymphocyte membranes were tested using commercially avail-
able antibodies (Ortho) and the CytoronAbsolute cytofluorograf. The
lymphocyte functions were investigated in a H-3-thymidin incorpora-
tion test after stimulation with various stimuli (IL-2, IFN-γ, CD3, ConA,
Pokeweed, PHA and Candida antigen). In some of the patients, in
the supernatant of the lymphocyte proliferation test several cytokines
were determined (IL-2, IL-5, IL-10, IL-12, IL-13, IL-16, IFN-γ,
GM-CSF and TNF-α). From 80 examined patients, 16 died and eight
recurred. In arm A there were 57 patients (11 died and six got a
recurrence).  Arm B contained 23 patients (five died and two
recurred). CD3+ cells were relatively equal in arm A and B patients,
whereas there was an enormous difference in the CD4+ and CD8+
cells after end of therapy. In the HDC patients CD4+ cells declined
during the follow up and CD8+ cells increased. In arm B there was a
normal decline during the therapy and a recovery after 24 months. In
a few patients of arm A we observed an elevation in B-cells (CD19),
shortly after the end of therapy. The functions of the cells will be pre-
sented in tables. All patients had sustained changes of their lympho-
cyte situation at least for 24 months.
A43
The role of subareolar methylene blue in
identifying the sentinel node in patients with
invasive breast cancer
A Mostafa, AE Elkak, JCC Hu, K Kirkpatrick, C Wells,
R Carpenter, K Mokbel
The Breast Unit, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, West Smithfield,
London, UK
Background: Recent studies have demonstrated that the sentinel
node biopsy (SNB) is a reliable and minimally invasive method for
determining the axillary node status in patients with breast cancer.
However, the methods used for identifying the sentinel node (SN)
are heterogenous with variable success rates. Some studies have
reported low success rates with methylene blue (MB) dye for the
identification of the SN. The present study aims to examine the
accuracy of a simple method using subdermal injection of MB in
the subareolar region.
Patients and method: A total of 35 women with operable invasive
breast cancer undergoing axillary lymphadenectomy were recruited
at our centre over a 4-month period (April–July 2000). The SN was
identified in the axilla after injecting 1ml of 1% MB in the subareo-
lar region. The technical success rate, sensitivity and negative pre-
dictive value of this simple method were calculated. Furthermore,
the cost-benefit of using MB rather than isosulfan blue as the
labelling agent was determined.
Results: The SN was successfully identified in 34 (97%) out of 35
patients. Thirteen (37%) out of 35 patients had metastasis in the
axillary nodes. The SN correctly predicted the presence of axillary 
disease in 12 (92.3%) out of 13 cases. The negative predictive
value for SN was 96% (22/23). We have estimated that the use of
MB rather than isosulfan blue as the labelling agent would save
approximately £1.3 million/year in the UK, should the SNB become
the standard of care.
Conclusion: Subareolar MB for identifying the SN in patients with
operable invasive breast cancer provides a simple and reliable
technique that can be used widely.
A44
High-dose chemotherapy with peripheral blood
progenitor cell support in breast cancer:
WSG AM01 and MM01
U Nitz, S Mohrmann, G Schütt, A Zander, N Kröger, M Frick,
HG Bender, on behalf of the West German Study Group (WSG),
Düsseldorf, Germany
The WSG as a German interdisciplinary group initiated 05/94 a
large multicentre phaseIII trial to evaluate adjuvant high-dose
chemotherapy in high-risk breast cancer. About 100 centres all
over Germany participated. The second trial in metastatic breast
cancer (MBC) was initiated in 4/97 in co-operation with the
German Intergroup. The main characteristics of the two trials are
listed in Table 1.
Table 1 
AM 01
Patients Adjuvant N>9
Arm A
Arm B
Actually randomized
Status
Treatment related
mortality (%) 
Tandem-E,C,TT
EC ×4 → CMF ×3
q2w + G-CSF
368
Open
0% 
MM01
M1, PR or CR after conventional
induction, ER
STAMP V
Tandem STAMP V
180/480
Open
1.5%
The first trial tests high-dose Tandem E90C3000T400 + PBPC
versus dose-dense conventional chemotherapy with G-CSF
support. All patients received irradiation of the chest wall and the
supraclavicular lymph nodes, and tamoxifen in case of ER+ tumors.
The trial will probably be closed by the end of the year. The first
interim analysis was done in 1/99, and the second one is planned in
1/02. Interim data will be presented. The trial in MBC randomizes
chemosensitive, ER-negative patients to 1× versus 2× STAMPV.
The first interim analysis was done in 12/00. Data will be presented.
A45
Human estrogen receptor-α (ER-α) transactivation
by selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs)
on VIT regulatory region in ER-α-negative breast
cancer cell line Evsa-T transiently transfected by
ER-α
IP Nyamagana Butera, S Hadiy, G Leclercq
Laboratoire J-C Heuson de Cancérologie Mammaire, Institut Jules
Bordet, Brussels, Belgium
The action of 11 selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs)
was investigated in two breast cancer cell lines, the estrogen
receptor-α-positive (ER-α+) MCF-7 and the ERα– Evsa-T.
Page 14
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
Our experiments were conducted by transient transfection of these
cells by a reporter plasmid carrying the luciferase gene under the
transcriptional control of the minimal promoter tk and the regulatory
region of vitellogenin A1 gene (Vit-tk-Luc). This latter region is known
to include a perfect estrogen responsive element (ERE). Evsa-T cells
were cotransfected with an expression vector for the human ER-α.
Estradiol (E
2
) always increased transcription of Vit-tk-Luc basal
activity in both cell lines. Pure antiestrogens repressed it in MCF-7
cells, and had no effect in Evsa-T cells. Interestingly, in Evsa-T cells
as compared with MCF-7 cells, SERMs for which the chemical
structure contain clusters that mimic hydrophobic substituents
linked to the 11β-position of estradiol conferred greater transcrip-
tion. Of note, deletion of one half of the ERE site did not affect
transcription in Evsa-T cells, but abrogated it in MCF-7 cells. More-
over, substitution of Vit by an AP-1 site failed to activate transcrip-
tion in each case.
Our results show that some SERMs may act as strong agonists on
transcription mediated by transfected ER-α in ER-α– breast tumors
with poor prognosis for antihormone therapy. We speculate that
additional binding sites for transcription factors, as well as different
coactivators, would be involved in this enhancement of activity.
A46
MMP-9 production by T cells from mammary tumor
bearers is upregulated by tumor-derived VEGF
JL Owen, Z Gunja-Smith, DM Lopez
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA
Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) has been shown to be impor-
tant in tumor invasion and metastasis, and may be implicated in
lymphoreticular cell extravasation. Tcells from D1-DMBA-3
mammary tumor-bearing mice exhibit an overproduction of MMP-9
compared with the levels expressed in Tcells from normal mice,
both at the transcriptional and translational levels. This upregula-
tion is more pronounced in animals bearing large tumors. We have
previously characterized several tumor derived factors in our
system using the in vitro DA-3 tumor cells derived from the in vivo
D1-DMBA-3 tumors (ie PGE
2
, GM-CSF and phosphatidyl serine).
Treatment of normal Tlymphocytes with these factors yielded no
increased production of MMP-9. TNF-α and IL-6, although not
expressed by the tumor cells themselves, are greatly increased in
the tumor bearers’ lymphoreticular cells and in their sera. Exposure
of normal Tcells to these two cytokines also failed to upregulate
MMP-9 production. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has
been shown to be produced by many tumors. Using a VEGF-spe-
cific ELISA, we determined that the DA-3 tumor cells, as well as
the Tlymphocytes from tumor bearers, express high levels of this
growth factor. Treatment of normal T cells with VEGF resulted in an
overproduction of MMP-9. These results indicate that VEGF may
be responsible for the elevated levels of MMP-9 observed in T cells
from tumor-bearing mice.
A47
A retrovirus similar to MMTV associated with
human breast cancer
BG-T Pogo
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, USA
We investigated whether a retrovirus similar to the mouse
mammary tumor virus (MMTV) is implicated in human breast
carcinogenesis. 
Using PCR and specific primers, a 660-bp sequence homologous
to the env gene of MMTV was detected in 38% of the human
breast cancers. This sequence was absent in normal tissues and
other tumors [1].  Samples from several geographical locations
have higher or lower frequencies.
The MMTV-like sequence was expressed as RNA in most positive
specimens [2].  The complete 9.9-kb proviral sequence of an
MMTV-like agent has now been amplified and sequenced in two
breast cancers. Structural features of this provirus suggest that it is
replicative competent [3].
Primary cultures of env positive tumors show budding retroviral
particles, and the supernatant particulate fractions show RT activ-
ity, presence of MMTV-like genes by RT-PCR and viral particles by
electron microscopy [4].  Experiments to prove infectivity are in
progress.
Whether this virus is MMTV or a related human mammary tumor
virus is not certain, or is it known how humans are infected.
However, if a retrovirus is indeed involved in human breast carcino-
genesis, then preventive strategies can be planned.
References
1. Wang et al: Cancer Res 1995, 55:5173.
2. Wang et al: Cancer Res 1998; 4:2565.
3. Liu et al: Cancer Res 2001, 61:1754.
4. Melana et al: Proc Ann Meeting AACR 2001, 42:115.
A48
Effect of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) on transforming
growth factor-β (TGF-β) regulation of sialomucin
complex/Muc4
SA Price-Schiavi, V Ramsauer, X Zhu, KL Carraway
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Miami School
of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA
Sialomucin complex (SMC, rat Muc4) is a heterodimeric glycopro-
tein complex consisting of a mucin subunit ASGP-1 (Ascites
sialoglycoprotein-1) and a transmembrane subunit ASGP-2,
which is highly overexpressed on the surface of ascites 13762 rat
mammary adenocarcinoma cells. The complex is produced from a
single gene and polypeptide precursor. SMC is developmentally
regulated in normal rat mammary gland by multiple and complex
mechanisms, with levels in the lactating gland being 100-fold
those in the virgin gland. SMC transcript levels are enhanced in
normal rat mammary epithelial cells by fetal bovine serum, insulin,
and IGF-1 by an ERK-1/2-dependent pathway. SMC is post-tran-
scriptionally regulated by Matrigel (extracellular matrix) by inhibi-
tion of SMC precursor synthesis. SMC is  also
post-transcriptionally regulated by TGF-β by disruption of SMC
precursor processing into mature ASGP-1 and ASGP-2. The inhi-
bition of SMC levels by TGF-β occurs by an ERK1/2-independent
pathway, suggesting that the SMAD or another pathway may be
involved in this effect. Interestingly, the inhibition of SMC levels by
TGF-β can be blocked by treatment with IFN-γ, which has been
shown to block TGF-β effects via a Jak/Stat-dependent pathway.
This effect is dose-responsive and is dependent on the order in
which the cytokines are added, suggesting that the balance of
signaling inputs is important in determining the expression level of
SMC. Thus, SMC is regulated by multiple mechanisms, and the
delicate interplay of the pathways involved serves to maintain
normal levels of the complex and repress potential deleterious
effects of overexpression.
Page 15
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
A49
Apoptosis-related factors in nonpalpable breast
tumors: an immunohistochemical study.
Correlation with the mammographic image
P Ravazoula, E Likaki-Karatza*, FA Mpadra*, MV Karamouzis†,
P Aroukatos, E Tzorakoeleptherakis‡, HP Kalofonos†
Department of Pathology, *Department of Radiology, †Division of
Oncology 8211; Department of Medicine, ‡Department of Surgery,
University Hospital of Patras, Rion, Greece
Objectives: Retrospective evaluation of the mammographic
appearance of nonpalpable breast cancers and correlation with
apoptosis-related factors.
Method: Patients with nonpalpable breast lesions (n=211) were
evaluated between 1989 and 1999. All patients underwent preop-
erative mammographically guided needle-excision biopsy. Speci-
men radiography was always followed. Histological examination
revealed 55 cancers (26%; 30 ductal invasive [54.5%], 18 ductal
insitu [32.7%], five lobular invasive [9%] and two lobular insitu
[3.8%]). In 41 out of 55 carcinomas, immunohistochemistry was
conducted, using monoclonal antibodies against bcl-2, fas and
DNA fragmentation, and polyclonal antibody for bax.
Results: Mammography revealed malignant microcalcifications in
42 out of 55 patients (76%) and opacity with undefined borders
(greater diameter <1cm) in 13 out of 55 patients (24%). In 16 out
of 41 carcinomas (41%) there was immunostain positivity for bcl-2.
In seven out of 16 patients (17.5%) mammography showed micro-
calcifications, whereas opacity was observed in nine out of 16
patients (22.5%). Twenty-three out of 41 carcinomas (56%) were
positive for fas. In 14 out of 23 patients (60%) mammography
showed microcalcifications and opacity in 11 out of 23 (47%).
Thirty out of 41 carcinomas (73%) were positive for bax and DNA
fragmentation. In 17 out of 30 (58%) carcinomas that were posi-
tive for DNA fragmentation, mammography showed microcalcifica-
tions, whereas opacity was revealed in 16 out of 30 (53%)
patients. In 18 out of 30 (60%) carcinomas that were positive for
bax, mammography showed microcalcifications, whereas opacity
was detected in 14 out of 30 (46%) carcinomas.
Conclusion: Our results suggest the existence of significant corre-
lation between mammographic appearance and expression of
apoptosis factors in nonpalpable breast cancers, although the
number of patients evaluated was relatively small.
A50
C-erbB-2 overexpression in primary breast cancer:
relationship to clinical and histopathological
parameters of patients with breast cancer
S Regele*, FD Vogel*†, IB Runnebaum‡, R Kreienberg*
*Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ulm, Germany;
‡University of Freiburg, Germany; †International Agency for Research
on Cancer, Lyon, France
Objective: Amplification of c-erbB-2 oncoprotein has been
described in 10–35% of primary breast cancers. Breast tumors
with immunohistochemical overexpression of c-erbB-2 protein
seem to be more aggressive. We evaluated the impact of c-erbB-2
overexpression on clinical and histopathological parameters of
patients with breast cancer.
Method: Primary tumors from 417 patients, who were treated at
our Department for breast cancer, were studied. Immunostaining of
c-erbB-2 oncoprotein was carried out utilizing the monoclonal anti-
body CB11. 
Results: C-erbB-2 overexpression was seen in 72 out of 417
(17%) of primary breast tumors. Patients with positive immunohisto-
chemistry (IHC) for c-erbB-2 were significantly younger (P=0.015),
on average. The number of involved lymph nodes was higher in
patients with positive IHC (P=0.014).  Nearly all IHC positive
tumors (98.6%) were invasive ductal carcinomas, whereas all but
one lobular carcinoma were negative. Tumors with negative IHC
more often demonstrated positive estrogen (P=0.001) and proges-
terone (P=0.001) expression than did patients with positive IHC.
There was a significant relation of c-erbB-2 IHC and nuclear
grading, Ki67 and p53. No association was found with menopausal
status, tumor size, T-staging and presence of metastases.
Conclusion: (1) Overexpression of c-erbB-2 oncoprotein in
primary breast cancer tumors may be an indicator of the extent of
lymph node metastases in patients. (2) Lobular carcinomas repre-
sent a defined subtype of breast carcinomas.
A51
Whole-body hyperthermia in the treatment of
breast cancer
E Rethfeldt, M Becker, P Koldovsky
Oncological Dayclinic, Düsseldorf, Germany
Hyperthermia has two major effects on cancer. (1) Tumor cells can
be killed, because they are more sensitive to heat than normal
cells. Thereby, membrane components can also be released. Both
events can induce antitumoral immunity. (2) It can revert chemo-
resistance of tumors. The patients in this study were postsurgery
and treated with radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy. Additionally to
chemotherapy, nonspecific immune stimulation was applied. All
patients were studied more than 5 years after the primary diagno-
sis. A total of 105 patients received the above-mentioned therapy.
The 35 patients of the ‘hyperthermia group’ received whole-body
hyperthermia treatment. The distribution of tumor at various staging
was practically identical in both groups, as was the median follow-
up period: 70 months. In the control group (105 patients) 12
patients died and 61 developed metastasis within a mean period of
36 months. On the contrary, in the hyperthermia group (35
patients) no patient died and only three developed metastasis
within 52 months.
A52
Identification and refinement of two regions on
chromosomal arm 15q involved in breast cancer
progression
K Rhiem, M Münch, R Kreutzfeld, P Decker†, OD Wiestler*,
T Bauknecht, RK Schmutzler
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Bonn,
Medical Center, Bonn; *Department of Neuropathology, University of
Bonn, Medical Center, Bonn; †Department of Surgery, University of
Bonn, Medical Center, Bonn, Germany
Loss of heterozygosity constitutes a major mechanism of genetic
abberations in breast cancer, and strongly indicates the involve-
ment of tumor-suppressor genes in the affected chromosomal
regions. Ascertainment and refinement of such deleted regions by
highly polymorphic microsatellite markers is a prerequisite for the
identification of candidate genes and the isolation of novel genes.
Prelimary results from our group indicate the existence of genes
located on chromosomal arm 15q that may be involved in breast
cancer progression to metastatic stage (Wick et al,  Oncogene
1996). In this study a panel of 210 primary breast carcinomas, 28
Page 16
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
metastases and 17 local recurrencies from primary breast carcino-
mas were analyzed for loss of heterozygosity by the use of 16
highly polymorphic markers spanning the chromosomal region
15q11-21. After PCR amplification, microsatellite markers were
separated by PAGE. LOH15q was seen in 30 out of 45 (67%)
metastases and recurrences, but only in 50 out of 210 (24%)
primary tumors (P<0.01). We identified two subregions defined
by microsatellite markers D15S514 (15q15) and CYP19
(15q21.1). LOH15q21.1 was most frequently detected in progres-
sive tumor stages. Importantly, analysis of LOH in several other
chromosomal regions (ie BRCA1 and BRCA2, TP53, RB1, ATM)
did not demonstrate a general increase in LOH frequencies, indi-
cating that LOH15q is a specific event associated with tumor pro-
gression. We are currently analyzing candidate genes located in
the regions of interest.
A53
Role of stromelysin-3 in mammary tumor
progression
MC Rio
Institut de Genetic et de Biologei Moleculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
Universite Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France
Numerous studies have provided evidence that, although the trans-
formation of epithelial cells is the sine qua non condition for the
development of carcinomas, the nature of the connective/stromal
tissue environment is crucial for tumor progression. Matrix metallo-
proteinases (MMPs) that interact with stromal components have
been shown to contribute to malignancy in both the early and late
stages of tumor progression in human and mouse. Therefore, these
studies are of interest to improve our understanding of malignant
processes. In this context, the 11th member of the MMP family
(MMP11), also named stromelysin-3 (ST3), fulfills this paradigm. It
was discovered in 1990 because of its overexpression in a cDNA
library established from a human breast cancer biopsy. Later, clini-
cal trials showed that high levels of ST3 expression correlated with
a lower survival rate among patients with breast, head and neck, or
colon cancer. Therefore, the possibility that ST3 might play a role
during tumor progression was promising for the diagnosis, progno-
sis and design of new treatment. During the past 10 years, numer-
ous experiments have been performed to enhance the knowledge
of the biological function of ST3, and to evaluate its clinical rele-
vance. From the data, ST3 appears to be a unique member of the
MMP family, exhibiting peculiar features and function. 
studies comparing conventional dose adjuvant chemotherapy with
high-dose chemotherapy have been reported in abstract form: the
American Intergroup study (ASCO 1999) and the Dutch National
Study (ASCO 2000). The American study shows fewer relapses in
the high-dose arm. The Dutch study suggests a modest disease-
free survival advantage for the high-dose arm, but further follow up
is required to ascertain statistical significance (P=0.057, two-
sided, at the early analysis). In 2002, a 24% reduction in hazard
rate will be detectable with 80% power. Both the efficacy and toxi-
city of high-dose therapy may depend on the drugs, dosage and
schedules selected. In the Dutch study, a regimen was employed
that is similar to the frequently used CTCb (STAMP-V) regimen.
The carboplatin dose is, however, twice as high, and the agents
are administered as short-term infusions rather than as continuous
96-h infusions. This may have an impact on the activation of the
prodrug cyclophosphamide; the activation route is strongly inhib-
ited by the presence of even low concentrations of thiotepa.
A55
Novel liposomal vectors for an enhanced gene
transfer in vitro
G Röder, JB Prisack*, O Keil*, D Niederacher, HG Bender, P Dall
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, and *Oncological
Chemistry, Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany
Highly efficient gene transfer methods are basic requirements for a
successful gene therapy. Liposomal vectors based on cationic
lipids have been proven to be an attractive alternative to viral vector
systems concerning production and safety. The major disadvan-
tage of liposomes is their distinct lower transduction rate. To
improve the transduction efficiency in comparison with commer-
cially available liposomal vector systems, we have synthesized two
novel cationic lipids. In in vitro experiments with these novel liposo-
mal vectors, we examined gene transfer efficiency and cytotoxicity.
As controls we used the commercially available DC-Chol and
FuGeneTM. We analyzed the cytotoxicity of our new lipids with a
dual-reporter-gene-assay and gene transfer efficiency via FACS-
analysis in seven gynaecological cancer cell lines. With the new
lipids, in different cell lines we achieved equivalent or better trans-
duction rates compared with the results obtained with DC-Chol or
FuGeneTM.  Apart from improved transduction rates, cytotoxicity
was very low in all cases. These promising in vitro results led to
further analysis of possible usability of our new lipids in in vivo
experiments.
A54
High-dose chemotherapy in breast cancer: Dutch
randomized studies
S Rodenhuis, H van Tinteren, EGE de Vries*
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
*Groningen University Hospital, Groningen, The Netherlands
The role of high-dose chemotherapy in the adjuvant treatment of
breast cancer will eventually be defined by a range of randomized
trials that still require years for maturation. Two underpowered
single-institution studies (from the MD Anderson Cancer Center
and from the Netherlands Cancer Institute) failed to show an
advantage for high-dose therapy. A randomized Scandinavian
study compared prolonged and intensive chemotherapy without
stem-cell support with brief chemotherapy followed by the
STAMP-V regimen. The intensive conventional treatment arm was
shown to be superior in terms of relapse-free survival. Two large 
A56
Pathway pathology: the wnt and erbB mammary
tumors
A Rosner, RD Cardiff
Department of Medical Pathology and Center for Comparative
Medicine, University of California, Davis, USA
Human mammary cancer is frequently associated with the erbB
pathway, whereas ‘spontaneous’ mouse mammary tumor virus
(MMTV)-induced mammary tumors are associated with the wnt-1
pathway. Many members of both pathways have been studied in
genetically engineered mice. Using examples from the UCD Mutant
Mouse Pathology Laboratory, we studied the characteristics of
both pathways and found that they have unique, identifiable pheno-
types. These observations are the foundation for pathway pathol-
ogy. Members of the wnt1 pathway tend to form variations of the
classical, MMTV-induced, typeA, B and P tumors described by
Page 17
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
Dunn. Wnt1 tumors are expansile, surrounded by dense stroma,
develop around central ducts, retain myoepithelial differentiation,
and frequently have squamous metaplasia. Examples include the
following: wnt1, wnt10b, APC1, GSK, CKII, B-Catenin, and FGF
mice. In contrast, members of the erbB pathway are more likely to
resemble human tumors, to be invasive, lose myoepithelial differen-
tiation, form solid nodular asymetrical masses budding from individ-
ual ducts, have less stroma, and be less metaplastic. Examples
include the following: erbB2, PyV-mT, mutants and bigenics of
erbB and PyV-mT, src, and ras. Interestingly, GEM tumors initiated
by nuclear factors do not tend to have the characteristics of either
of these pathways. Examples: myc and lef1. These observations
suggest that the principles of pathway pathology can be applied to
human tumors of the breast and other organs. This work was sup-
ported by the DAAD (AR, individual grant), the State of California,
BCRP JB-0014, and RO1CA89140 from NCI.
A57
CD31 expression by cells of extensive ductal
in situ and invasive carcinomas of the breast
A Sapino, L Righi, P Cassoni, M Bongiovanni, S Deaglio*,
F Malavasi*, G Bussolati
Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology and
*Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of
Torino Medical School, Torino, Italy
CD31 is a surface molecule mediating homo- and heterotypic inter-
actions that control leukocyte trafficking through the endothelial
layer. Monoclonal antibodies against CD31 are used as markers of
neovascularization. Assessment of angiogenesis in 270 breast car-
cinomas revealed expression of CD31 in a single case of large
(5.2cm in diameter) high nuclear grade ductal carcinoma, in both
in situ and invasive components. Expression was limited to the cell
membrane, suggesting an adhesion function of CD31 in epithelial
cells. At variance with invasive breast carcinomas, angiogenesis is
not considered as a prognostic parameter in DCIS, and conse-
quently anti-CD31 MoAb are not included in standard testing.
Thus, a reasonable explanation for our finding was that CD31
expression might be underscored in DCIS cells. Therefore, we
focused on 32 ductal carcinomas in situ (DCIS) larger than 2 cm,
pure or associated with invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). Cancer
cells of seven extensive, high nuclear grade DCIS associated with
IDC were CD31+. CD31 was expressed by cells of DCIS the were
able to colonize lobules and large ducts extending to the nipple
(Paget’s disease). It was also expressed by IDC, but only in associ-
ation with CD44. Normal epithelium and hyperplastic epithelial
lesions were consistently CD31–. We conclude that CD31 expres-
sion is a feature acquired by breast cancer cells in DCIS model.
Secondly, CD31 expression mainly correlates with tumor cell
spreading within the ductal system; and, finally, the invasive pheno-
type requires the coexpression of CD31 and CD44. 
breast carcinomas in elderly women can also express apocrine
immuno-phenotype, and analyze the histological and clinical
aspects of such differentiation. A selected series of 50 NE tumors
(positive for NE markers in >50% of the cells) was tested for the
immunocytochemical expression of gross cystic disease fluid
protein-15 (GCDFP-15). About 50% of moderately (G2) and well-
differentiated (G1) NE breast carcinomas coexpressed the apoc-
rine marker. In these cases specific mRNA for GCDFP-15 (PIP)
and for chromogranin A was demonstrated using in situ hybridiza-
tion (ISH). Carcinomas of the alveolar subtype (G2) and poorly dif-
ferentiated carcinomas (G3) were pure NE carcinomas, devoid of
apocrine differentiation. The steroid receptor status of these
lesions was evaluated to test a possible involvement of androgen
receptors (AR) in apocrine differentiation. The level of AR and the
mean age of patients at diagnosis were significantly higher in apoc-
rine than in nonapocrine differentiated tumors. The histological
grade and the expression of estrogen receptor significantly influ-
enced the prognosis of these NE carcinomas, either pure or NE-
apocrine differentiated. In conclusion, NE breast carcinomas may
exhibit divergent apocrine differentiation that might be regulated by
the activation of AR in elderly patients. In addition, the possibility to
use Chs or GCDFP-15 serum values in the follow up of these
patients, as demonstrated in two cases of the present series, can
justify the immunophenotyping of the tumors.
A59
Constitutional genomic instability of 9p23-24 in
BRCA2 mutation carriers
L Savelyeva, M Schwab
Cytogenetics, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany
Germ-line mutations in the BRCA2 gene account for a large propor-
tion of familial breast cancer cases in females, and for the majority of
familial breast cancers in males. Recent studies provide evidence for
a role of the BRCA2 protein in the maintenance of genomic integrity
by involvement in DNA repair and recombination. In order to identify
genetic damage resulting from mutated BRCA2 in humans, we ana-
lyzed constitutional karyotypes of BRCA2 mutation carriers. FISH
anlysis from lymphocytes of patients of breast cancer families with
germ-line BRCA2 mutation revealed additional constitutional chro-
mosomal alterations on 9p23-24. The rearrangements observed
include inversions, duplications and amplifications. Additionally, a
high level of random somatic chromosomal abnormalities on
9p23-24 has been shown. The 9p rearrangements are complex in all
families analysed, showing that this chromosomal region has suf-
fered a number of intrachromosomal recombinations. The topogra-
phy of the 9p rearrangements can differ among family members,
even within an individual that can have cell populations with different
9p rearrangements. Collectively, these results point to an association
of mutant BRCA2 with genomic instability and gene alteration in
9p23-24, in at least a subset of BRCA2 mutation carriers.
A58
Neuroendocrine breast carcinomas of aged women
may express apocrine differentiation markers
A Sapino, P Cassoni, L Righi, M Papotti, P Gugliotta,
G Bussolati
Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology, University
of Torino, Torino, Italy
Neuroendocrine (NE) carcinomas of the breast are a rare entity
that diffusely expresses NE markers. We here demonstrate that NE A60
Heterocyclic amines (HCAS) and risk of breast
cancer
R Sinha, EG Snyderwine
National Cancer Institute, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA
HCAs are mutagenic and carcinogenic compounds formed in meat
and fish prepared by high-temperature cooking methods, such as
frying, grilling and barbecuing. The precursors are amino acids,
Page 18
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
reducing sugars and creatine, found specifically in muscle meat.
One of the HCAs, 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyri-
dine (PhIP), the most abundant HCA in the Western diet, has been
found to be a mammary gland carcinogen in rats. Studies in
rodents have also shown that PhIP is distributed to the mammary
gland and excreted into breast milk. Several epidemiologic studies
have found a moderately increased risk of breast cancer with
higher intake of red meat. Zheng et al (JNCI 1998) conducted a
case–control study within the cohort of the Iowa Women’s Health
Study to investigate the potential role of meat and HCAs and the
risk of breast cancer. A questionnaire was mailed to women in the
cohort who had breast cancer diagnosed during the period from
1992 to 1994, and to a random sample of cancer-free cohort
members to obtain information on usual intake of meats and
cooking practices. Color photographs showing various levels of
doneness for hamburger, beefsteak, and bacon were included.
Using a HCA database (Sinha etal: Food Chem Toxicol 1998),
dietary intake of 2-amino-3, 8-dimethylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoxaline
(MeIQx), 2-amino-3, 4, 8-trimethylimidazo[4,5-f]quinoxaline (DiMeIQx)
and PhIP were estimated. Multivariate analysis was performed on
data from 273 cases and 657 control subjects who completed the
survey. Well-done red meat intake was associated with increased
risk of breast cancer (Zheng et al: JNCI 1998). The odds ratios
(95% confidence interval) for categorical analysis of PhIP, with first
quintile as the referent group, were as follows: second quintile 1.1
(0.6–1.8); third quintile 1.2 (0.7–1.9); fourth quintile 1.4 (0.8–2.3);
and fifth quintile 1.9 (1.1–3.4) – P value for trend 0.001 (Sinha
etal: JNCI 2000). There was no statistically significant increase in
risk with either MeIQx or DiMeIQx. Both animal carcinogenicity
studies and epidemiologic evidence suggests that consumption of
PhIP may increase the risk of breast cancer, but this hypothesis
needs to be investigated further. Simple changes in cooking
methods could eliminate the presence of PhIP in foods, if it is con-
clusively found to increase the risk of breast cancer.
A61
Control of apoptosis in breast by growth factors
and extracellular matrix: targets for therapeutic
intervention
C Streuli, A Gilmore, P Wang, K Green, A Valentijn
School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Cell survival is adhesion-dependent in normal breast epithelium.
Survival requires the integrin class of extracellular matrix (ECM)
receptors. We have demonstrated that specific ECM such as base-
ment membrane promote cell survival, whereas others, including
collagen I, do not. Basement membrane proteins are largely absent
around invasive breast cancer cells. Thus, cancer cells have lost
their specific ECM-dependency, presumably due to inappropriate
activation of adhesion-regulated survival enzymes. Such enzymes
represent potential targets for cancer intervention, particularly
where there is sufficient redundancy of signalling on basement
membrane to provide reduced or no dependency in normal cells.
We have shown that pp125FAK mediates integrin survival signals
in breast epithelia, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase overcomes
apoptosis induced by dominant negative pp125FAK. Signals
downstream of pp125FAK regulate apoptosis through a control on
the activity of the proapoptotic protein Bax.
Signal transduction through growth factor receptors can be regulated
by adhesive interactions via integrins. We have discovered that phar-
macological inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor signalling
strongly induces apoptosis in breast epithelia. The mechanism of
apoptosis induction appears not to be through Bax activation, but
rather through dephosphorylation of the proapoptotic protein Bad. 
Thus, different classes of potent survival regulators (ie adhesion
and soluble factors) determine apoptotic cell fate within the same
cells through independent control of different mitochondrial acting
proapoptotic proteins. Our results broaden the scope for future
strategies of cancer intervention.
A62
Normo- and hyperbaric oxygenation of tumors:
from bench to bedside
O Thews
Institute of Physiology & Pathophysiology, University of Mainz, Mainz,
Germany
Tumor hypoxia is an important factor limiting the efficacy of
sparsely ionizing radiation and O
2
-dependent chemotherapy.
Because the tumor pO
2 
is the result of a dynamic steady state
between oxygen supply and O
2 
consumption of the tumor cells,
hypoxia could be reduced by improving the O
2 
supply for instance
by breathing hyperoxic gas mixtures to increase the arterial oxygen
partial pressure. This technique seems to be the most effective
method to improve tumor oxygenation, and thus to enhance the
efficacy of standard radiotherapy and chemotherapy in experimen-
tal malignancies, as well as in human tumors. However, the role of
varying inspiratory pCO
2 
on tumor oxygenation has been dis-
cussed controversially. Although carbogen (95% O
2 
+ 5% CO
2
) is
used in the clinical setting, it remains unclear whether the benefi-
cial therapeutic effects are more pronounced than with pure
oxygen. Because in some tumor entities oxygenation is inadequate
and anisotropic, normobaric hyperoxia is often not sufficient to
completely eradicate tumor hypoxia. In these cases, breathing of
hyperoxic gases under hyperbaric conditions (2–3atm) may be
sufficient to lead to therapeutic results. However, studies on exper-
imental tumors in animals as well as clinical trials in patients
showed nonuniform results concerning the therapeutic benefit of
hyperbaric hyperoxia, depending on the tumor entity, site of
growth, or tumor vascularization. Especially, squamous cell carci-
nomas of the head and neck region seem to benefit from additional
HBO therapy during radiotherapy, although several technical prob-
lems of irradiation during hyperbaric conditions are presently not
satisfactorily resolved.
A63
Serological Her2/neu-determination in patients
receiving Herceptin®
A Thomas, M Hoopmann, T Schöndorf, R Neumann*,
P Mallmann, U-J Göhring, CM Kurbacher, C Eisberg,
T Tanasale, M Warm
University of Cologne, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Cologne; *Bayer Vital GmbH, Leverkusen, Germany
Objective: Treatment with Herceptin® is one of the most promis-
ing therapies for patients with metastatic breast cancer whose
tumors overexpress the HER2/neu protein. Recent studies
provide evidence that patients receiving herceptin have a signifi-
cant benefit. Taking into account this clinical success and, addi-
tionally, the favorable side-effect pattern, addition of Herceptin in
first-line treatment of metastatic breast cancer is considered the
most encouraging therapeutic option. However, prognostic and/or
predictive markers justifying the therapy have not been available
until now. Therefore, we designed a retrospective study in order to
evaluate the serological Her2/neu determination accompanying a
Herceptin therapy.
Page 19
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
Method: The sera samples of 10 Herceptin-patients were col-
lected immediately after standard hematological investigation.
Serological Her2/neu was quantified using the Her2/neu Kit (Bayer
Diagnostics, Munich, Germany).  Automatical determination was
performed on the immunoanalyzer Bayer Immuno1™. The values
were analyzed in terms of the clinical course of each patient. Each
assay was performed in duplicate.
Results: The 10 patients were observed 15 months (median),
range 6–21. Two patients had visceral metastases, two patients
bone metastases and six patients developed multiple occult metas-
tases. Seven patients had suffered a relapse. In all these seven
patients the serological Her2/neu concentration increased strik-
ingly at time of progress. The Her2/neu levels of the three patients
with stable disease did not change during the observation period.
Conclusion: Serological Her2/neu concentrations paralleled the
clinical course of a patient with metastatic breast cancer receiving
Herceptin therapy. Prospective studies should be designed in
order to demonstrate the prognostic/predictive value of serological
Her2/neu determination.
A64
Downregulation of macrophage IL-12 production
by tumor-derived IL-11
M Torroella, DM Lopez
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA
We have previously shown that macrophages from mammary
tumor-bearing mice have a profound downregulation of IL-12,
which has been implicated in the low levels of IFN-γ and generally
depressed lymphoreticular cells functions in this tumor model. The
tumor used in our studies constitutively produces several factors
that have immunosuppressive activity (ie granulocyte macrophage-
colony stimulating factor [GM-CSF], prostaglandin E
2 
[PGE
2
], and
phosphatidyl serine [PS]). Of these factors, PGE
2 
and PS have
been shown to exert effects on macrophage functions. Recently,
we found that these tumor cells express IL-11 at both the transcrip-
tional and translational levels, as evidenced by RT-PCR and by
Western blots. Treatment of normal macrophages with IL-11
resulted in a downregulation of IL-12. In further studies using a
murine IL-11 ELISA, we observed low constitutive levels of this
cytokine in the supernatants of macrophage cultures from normal
mice, which is upregulated upon stimulation with LPS. Importantly,
macrophages from tumor bearers have higher production of IL-11
than their normal counterparts. Our results suggest that tumor cell
derived IL-11, in conjunction with the elevated levels of this
cytokine in tumor-bearing animal macrophages, play a role in the
depressed IL-12 production, leading to the impaired immune func-
tions observed during mammary tumorigenesis.
A65
Chromosomal instability and cancer
predisposition: insights from studies on the
breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA2
A Venkitaraman
University of Cambridge, CRC Department of Oncology; The
Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Mechanisms in Disease,
Cambridge, UK
Inherited mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility gene
BRCA2 predispose to breast, ovarian and other cancers. BRCA2
encodes a 3418-amino-acid protein that localizes to the nucleus of 
dividing cells. The biological functions of the protein and its role in
tumour suppression remain uncertain.
We have identified an essential function for BRCA2 in DNA repair by
homologous recombination. In BRCA2-deficient cells, DNA breaks
introduced into chromosomal substrates are inefficiently repaired by
homology-directed mechanisms, although repair by nonhomologous
end-joining is unaffected. BRCA2 interacts with the RAD51 recom-
bination protein, a functional homolog of bacterial RecA. The correct
intracellular localization and function of RAD51 are dependent upon
BRCA2, suggesting a mechanistic basis for its role in repair.
Loss of BRCA2 induces chromosomal instability characterized by
spontaneous breakage, in appropriate mitotic exchanges and chro-
mosomal fusions. Evidence will be presented that the repair of DNA
breaks that arise spontaneously during DNA replication require
BRCA2 for their error-free resolution. Loss of this function may foster
carcinogenesis by increasing the rate of spontaneous mutation.
Paradoxically, BRCA2-deficient cells undergo cell cycle arrest
rather than the unrestrained proliferation that is typical of neoplas-
tic transformation. We find that mutations inactivating cell cycle
checkpoints that regulate assembly of the mitotic spindle reverse
proliferative arrest, and foster transformation, in BRCA2-deficient
cells. These findings have implications not only for the evolution of
tumours following BRCA2 loss, but also for the mechanisms by
which cells perceive and respond to chromosome breakage.
A66
Herceptin clinical trials: past, present and future
CL Vogel
Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miami, Florida, USA
Herceptin is the humanized monoclonal antibody targeting the
Her-2-Neu oncogene, which, when amplified, connotes a poor
prognosis for the 25% of breast cancer patients with gene amplifi-
cation. Pivotal clinical trials in metastatic breast cancer have estab-
lished clinical benefit in approximately one-third of patients treated
with one or two prior chemotherapy regimens for metastatic
disease; almost half of patients when used as a first-line single
agent; and in even higher percentages when used in combination
with cytotoxic chemotherapy. Antitumor response rates can be
maximized by selecting patients for treatment based on gene
amplification tests (eg FISH) rather than on immunohistochemistry.
Although Herceptin is very well tolerated subjectively, it was, unex-
pectedly, found to be cardiotoxic, especially when used in conjunc-
tion with anthracyclines. This finding has made the development of
adjuvant programs a challenge, but several such adjuvant proto-
cols in earlier stage disease are in progress or planned. In addition
to adjuvant protocols, newer Herceptin combinations with other
cytotoxics and hormonal therapy will also be discussed. Herceptin
is the first (hopefully of many) targeted therapies that could revolu-
tionize breast cancer therapy in the decade to come.
A67
Radioprotective and tumor antiangiogenic effect
of the novel synthetic superoxide dismutase
(SOD) mimetic compounds
Z Vujaskovic, I Batinic-Haberle, I Spasojevic, I Fridovich,
TV Samulski, MW Dewhirst, MS Anscher
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA
We have developed and tested several synthetic superoxide dis-
mutase (SOD) mimetic metalloporphyrin compounds to determine
their ability to protect/ameliorate radiation-induced (RT) normal
Page 20
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
tissue injury, and, at the same time, to produce significant anti-
tumor activity. In rats with R3230 AC mammary adenocarcinoma
tumors, a significant inhibition of tumor growth was observed after
intraperitoneal administration of 6mg/kg of manganese(III) tetrakis
(N-ethylpyridinium-2-yl) porphyrin (MnTE-2PyP). Furthermore, rats
that received MnTE-2PyP had a significant inhibition of the postra-
diation tumor regrowth. Animals pretreated with MnTE-2PyP
(6mg/kg intraperitoneal) 24h before implantation of R3230
mammary adenocarcinoma show a significant inhibition of tumor
angiogenesis. MnTE-2-PyP significantly delayed development of
RT-induced lung injury in rats after 28Gy of right hemithoracic irra-
diation. The magnitude of the change in breathing rate is, on
average, reduced by 30%, indicating the ability of MnTE-2PyP to
significantly reduce the severity of RT-induced lung injury. Six
months after the treatment, a significant increase in hydroxyproline
content per gram of dry or wet lung was observed in animals
receiving radiation only. Administration of 6mg/kg of MnTE-2-PyP
before RT resulted in a significant reduction in hydroxyproline
content. Furthermore, we have found a significant association
between the radioprotective effect of MnTE-2-PyP and changes in
plasma levels of transforming growth factor-β.  This association
suggests a possible role of SOD mimetics in activation/regulation
of cytokines that are involved in development of radiation-induced
lung injury. This new strategy of utilizing a single compound with
antitumor activity to simultaneously protect normal tissues could
allow a higher dose of radiation to be delivered to the tumor
without increasing the risk of complications, and could further
improve breast-conserving cancer therapy.
A68
Ultrasound-guided pO
2 
measurement in breast
cancer patients before and after hyperthermia
treatment
Z Vujaskovic, E Rosen, K Blackwell, EL Jones, LP Prosnitz,
TW Samulski, MW Dewhirst
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA
The significance of tumor hypoxia extends beyond conventional
radiation resistance. It has been found that tumor hypoxia affects
drug resistance, angiognesis, cytokine production, cell cycle
control, apoptosis and development of distant metastases.
Recently, it has been reported that hyperthermia improves tumor
oxygenation in both canine as well as human soft tissue sarcoma.
This study describes a new optimized technique for pO
2 
mea-
surement in breast cancer patients using ultrasound-guided
placement of Eppendorf polarographic oxygen probes. Locally
advanced breast cancer patients, participating in a phaseI/II
study of neoadjuvant liposomal doxorubicin/paclitaxel/hyperther-
mia treatment, were the subjects of this study. Tumor oxygena-
tion was measured before and 24h after hyperthermia treatment.
Advantages of the ultrasound-guided pO
2 
probe placement are
the following: accuracy with visualization and verification of the
Eppendorf electrode placement in tumor tissue; monitoring of the
electrode movement through the tumor tissue during the mea-
surement; ability to avoid electrode placement near or in large
blood vessels by using color Doppler imaging; and spatial repro-
ducibility of the second measurement. Despite progress in the
technology that can be used to measure tumor hypoxia, accurate
and verifiable placement of the oxygen probes in tumor tissue is
of tremendous importance. Ultrasound-guided pO
2 
probe place-
ment should become standard technique to improve accuracy
and reliability in the assessment of tumor oxygenation for disease
sites in which it is appropriate.
Supported by a grant from the NIH CA42745 . 
A69
Haplotype analysis in German families with
recurrent BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations
B Wappenschmidt, A Golla*, A Kempe, A Meindl*,
RK Schmutzler, and the German Breast Cancer Consortium
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany; *Department of Medical Genetics, University of Munich,
Munich, Gemany
Association analysis was performed for 19 different BRCA muta-
tions (BRCA1: 14; BRCA2: 5), which were detected at least three
times in the German population. The aim of this study is the identifi-
cation of founder mutations and hot-spot mutations that are spe-
cific for the German population. Patients were genotyped for three
intragenic markers (D17S855, D17S1322 and D17S1323) in the
BRCA1 gene and for closely flanking markers (D13S1698,
D13S171 and D13S267) in the BRCA2 gene. Statistical analysis
was performed with an exact test of goodness-of-fit (Müller et al:
1991). The genotype data for the three markers analyzed each in
the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are in concordance with the pres-
ence of probable common haplotypes. Therefore, most of the fre-
quent mutations detected are likely to be founder mutations.
Suprisingly, four C→T transitions in the BRCA1 gene, which had
been expected to result from independent mutational events, are
probably also founder mutations. In contrast, the 4-bp deletion in
the BRCA1 gene (4184del4bp) and the most frequent mutation
3034delA in BRCA2 are recurrent mutations, for which no signifi-
cant association with specific founder alleles could be shown.
Testing further informative family members to define the specific
haplotype is the aim of our current investigations.
A70
On-site audits of the two clinical trials reported
from South Africa involving high-dose
chemotherapy (HDC) therapy for breast cancer
RB Weiss, CA Hudis, RA Beveridge
Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York; US Oncology,
Annadale, Virginia, USA
An investigator at the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannes-
burg has reported (J Clin Oncol 1995; 13:2483–2489, and Proc
Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999, 18:2a) two clinical trials purporting to
be randomized prospective evaluations of HDC in comparison with
treatment administered in conventional doses. One involved
metastatic breast cancer, and the other high-risk primary disease.
In both trials two cycles of a regimen devised at this institution
combining cyclophosphamide, mitoxantrone, and etopside were
used for the HDC. A total of 90 patients were reported in the
metastatic disease study, and 154 (or 151) were said to have been
treated in the high-risk study. Two separate on-site audits of avail-
able patient records have been performed.
Results: Of the 154 (or 151) patients allegedly entered into the
high-risk study, medical records for only 58 patients (all appearing
to have received HDC) were made available for review. Of the 90
patients allegedly entered on the metastatic study (based on infor-
mation provided by the investigator), records for only 61 could be
found. Only 25 of these appeared to have received protocol treat-
ment (22 receiving HDC). The remainder could not be verified to
have received the purported study therapy. Many of the patients
reviewed for both studies did not meet the stated eligibility criteria,
and there was no evidence of any acceptable randomization
process. The reported results of these two studies cannot be used
Page 21
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/3/S1
as a basis for evaluating HDC for either metastatic or high-risk
primary breast cancer.
A71
Diminished milk fat secretion and premature
mammary gland involution in episialin/MUC1
transgenic mice
J Wesseling, A Maas*, P Hageman*, J Storm*, M van der Valk*,
J Hilkens*
Department of Pathology, University Hospital Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands; *Department of Tumor Biology, The Netherlands
Cancer Institute and Antoni van Leeuwenhoekhuis, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands
Background: Episialin (MUC1, EMA, CA15.3) is a membrane-
associated mucin and is frequently overexpressed in adenocarcino-
mas. If overexpressed, it inhibits cell adhesion, promotes
invasiveness, and protects against cytotoxic T-cells in vitro.  To
study the effects of episialin in vivo,  we developed an episialin
transgenic mouse model.
Method: Transgenic FVB mice were developed expressing the
human episialin gene under the control of the glucocorticoid
inducible MMTV promoter. Two transgenic founder lines were
selected: one expressing relatively low levels (F64) and one
expressing high levels of episialin (F8), both in a variety of glandular
epithelia.
Results: Juvenile mice, either transgenic or not, showed significant
growth retardation at day 13 of age if fostered by a F8 transgenic
mother. In the F8 mammary gland, large intracellular fat droplets
were present just beneath the apical membrane of the luminal
epithelial cells. In addition, the fat content in milk of fostering F8
transgenic mice was significantly reduced. This suggests that the
accumulation of large intracellular fat droplets is the result of ham-
pered fat secretion machinery in the mammary glands of these
transgenic mice. Moreover, the mammary glands of the F8 trans-
genic mice already showed histological signs of premature involu-
tion after 13 days of lactation. Moreover, lactoferrin levels in milk of
mice lactating for 13 days were higher in F8 mice than in nontrans-
genic mice, confirming that episialin overexpression induces pre-
mature involution.
Conclusion: Overexpression of episialin strongly inhibits fat secre-
tion, and critically affects timing of involution of the lactating
mammary gland.
A72
Patterns of cytokines and lymphocyte subsets in
patients with breast and prostate cancer treated
with a standardized mistletoe extract preparation
D Wetzel, A Gromöller, U Elsässer-Beile*
Research and Development, Madaus AG, Cologne, Germany;
*Department of Urology, University of Freiburg, Germany
In an open, multicentre clinical trial (GCP),  136 patients with
cancer were included to develop a quality of life instrument.
After completion of primary cancer therapy, patients received
subcutaneous injections of a standardized mistletoe extract
preparation corresponding to a dose of approximately 5ng
mistletoe lectin twice weekly for 3 months. In 19 patients with
breast or prostate cancer, immunological parameters were
determined at baseline, and after 6 and 12 weeks of treatment. 
FACS analysis revealed a slight increase in Tlymphocytes
(CD3+, P = 0,13) and B lymphocytes (CD19+, P = 0.01) during
treatment. The ability of patient blood cells to release cytokines
was tested by measuring cytokine concentrations in the super-
natants of cell cultures stimulated with two different mitogens
(PHA or PWM). A mean increase was seen for IL-2, IL-10 and
TNF-α (P < 0.05, PHA method after 12 weeks of treatment). For
IL-1-α,  IL-6, IFN-γ and IL-12 no clear effects were observed.
However, the PHA and PWM methods produced different
results for some cytokines.
Conclusion: Mild immunomodulatory effects were observed in
patients with breast and prostate cancer during treatment with a
mistletoe extract preparation standardized to mistletoe lectin (Lekti-
nol®). Changes in the different cytokines and lymphocyte subsets
remained within the physiological range.
A73
Design and profile of low-molecular-weight
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors for
antiangiogenic therapy
JM Wood
Oncology Research, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland
Angiogenesis occurs physiologically during embryogenesis, ovula-
tion and wound healing, and pathologically in inflammation, psoria-
sis and tumor growth. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
also known as vascular permeability factor (VPF), appears to be a
key factor in pathological situations that involve neovascularization
as well as enhanced vascular permeability. Our aim was to design
synthetic low-molecular-weight molecules that, by blocking the
VEGF/VEGF receptor system after oral administration, can be
used therapeutically. One compound we developed is
PTK787/ZK 222584, a potent inhibitor of VEGF receptor tyrosine
kinases that is active in the submicromolar range. It also inhibits
other class III kinases, like the PDGFR-β tyrosine kinase, c-Kit and
c-Fms, but at higher concentrations. It is not active against
kinases from other receptor families such as EGFR, FGFR-1,
c-Met and Tie-2, or intracellular kinases such as c-Src, c-Abl,
PKC-α.  PTK787/ZK 222584 inhibits VEGF-induced autophos-
phorylation of KDR, and endothelial cell proliferation, migration
and survival in the nanomolar range in cell-based assays. In con-
centrations up to 1 µmol/l, PTK787/ZK 222584 does not have
any cytotoxic or antiproliferative effect on cells that do not express
VEGF receptors. After oral dosing (50mg/kg) to mice, plasma
concentrations of PTK787/ZK 222584 remain above 1µmol/l for
more than 8h. PTK787/ZK 222584 induces dose-dependent inhi-
bition of VEGF- and PDGF-induced angiogenesis in a growth
factor implant model, as well as a tumor cell-driven angiogenesis
model after once daily oral dose (25–100mg/kg).  In the same
dose range, it also inhibits the growth of xenografted human carci-
nomas either solid or in ascites formation, as well as a murine
renal carcinoma and its metastasis in syngeneic, orthotopic
models. Histological examination of tumors reveals inhibition of
microvessel formation in the interior of the tumor. PTK787/ZK
222584 is very well tolerated and does not impair wound healing
or hematopoietic recovery after concomitant cytotoxic anticancer
agent challenge.
Compounds that inhibit VEGF, such as PTK787/ZK 222584, have
the potential to provide a novel, effective and well-tolerated therapy
for the treatment of solid tumors, and may provide a new therapeu-
tic approach for the treatment of other diseases where angiogene-
sis plays an important role.
Page 22
Breast Cancer Research Vol 3 Suppl 1 23rd Congress of the International Association for Breast Cancer Research
A74
The mechanism of tamoxifen in breast cancer
prevention
F Yu, W Bender
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Illinois College of
Medicine at Rockford, Rockford, Illinois, USA
Tamoxifen (TAM) is known to have a dual mechanism of action: (1)
to compete with 17β-estradiol (E
2
) at the receptor site and to block
the promotional role of E
2 
in breast cancer; and (2) to bind DNA
after metabolic activation and to initiate carcinogenesis. Recent
large clinical trials indicate that TAM is also an effective chemopre-
ventive agent against breast cancer. The mechanism is unknown.
Because E
2 
requires activation by epoxidation to bind DNA forming
DNA adducts [1], and the same is true for TAM [2], the question is
whether this preventive effect of TAM against breast cancer is con-
tributory to the possibility that TAM, as an effective competitor for
epoxidation, prevents the formation of E
2 
epoxide and conse-
quently breast cancer. Evidence will be presented to show that,
indeed, when incubated together with E
2 
for epoxidation, TAM was
able to dramatically reduce the formation of E
2 
epoxide as mea-
sured by both the loss of the ability of E
2 
to inhibit nuclear RNA
synthesis, and the reduced binding of [3H]labeled E
2 
to nuclear
DNA. Identical results were obtained when TAM and estrone (E
1
)
were used. These results suggest that the breast cancer preven-
tive effect of TAM is through a competitive epoxidation mechanism
with E
1
/E
2
.
References
1. Yu FL, et al: A hypothesis on breast cancer. In: The 22nd Con-
gress of International Association for Breast Cancer Research;
September 25–28 1998; Athens, Greece. Edited by Ioannidou-
Mouzaka L, Agnantis NJ, Lopez DM. pp. 19–24.
2. Phillips DH, et al: Carcinogenesis 1994, 15:793–795.
LATE SUBMISSIONS
A75
CD95 ligand expression in dedifferentiated breast
cancer
C Moers, M Müschen*, MW Beckmann†, P Mallmann
Klinik für Geburtshilfe und Gynäkologie and *Klinik für Genetik,
Universität zu Köln, Köln; †Klinik für Geburtshilfe und Gynäkologie,
Universität Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
CD95 ligand expression has been observed in various malignan-
cies. Studying the CD95 ligand (CD95L) and receptor (C95)
system in benign and malignant breast tumours from 48 patients
mRNA and protein expression were determined by quantitative
RT-PCR and immunofluorescence. mRNA levels of CD95 corre-
lated inversely (r  = 0.90; P < 0.01) and CD95L positively
(r = 0.89; P < 0.01) with histopathological grading of the breast
tumours. CD95 mRNA levels were low in high-grade carcino-
mas, but high in benign mammary tissues. In contrast, CD95
mRNA levels were low in adenomas, but increased 20-fold in
grade I, 120-fold in grade II and 310-fold in grad III breast
cancer.
Since CD95L acts as an efficient inducer of apoptosis in CD95+
cells, apoptotic cells were identified on the tissue sections. Tumour
infiltrating lymphocytes and stroma cells in close proximity to
CD95L expressing breast cancer underwent apoptosis. As a func- 
tional test, CD95+ target cells were cultured on breast cancer sec-
tions. The target cells underwent apoptosis when cultured on
breast cancer sections, but could be rescued when CD95L was
specifically blocked by a CD95-Fc fusion molecule.
In conclusion, the findings suggest an inverse regulation of CD95
and CD95L expression during dedifferentation of breast cancer
and that killing of bystander cells by the CD95L expressing tumour
could be involved in tissue invasion. 
A76
CD95 ligand expression mediates immune escape
in breast cancer
C Moers, M Müschen*, MW Beckmann†, P Mallmann
Klinik für Geburtshilfe und Gynäkologie and *Klinik für Genetik,
Universität zu Köln, Köln; †Klinik für Geburtshilfe und Gynäkologie,
Universität Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
Interaction of CD95 and its ligand (CD95L) plays an important
role in the regulation of immune response, since CD95+ lym-
phocytes may be killed after engagement of the CD95 receptor.
Studying the CD95/CD95L system in 40 cases of breast
cancer, the malignant cells expressed CD95L, but lost CD95
expression, when compared to non-malignant mammary epithe-
lia. In addition, four breast cancer lines expressed CD95L, which
was further enhanced, when the cells were treated with IFN-γ.
This was functionally relevant, because Jurkat T cells incubated
on breast cancer cells underwent CD95L specific apoptosis
and the rate of apoptosis was demonstrated by inhibition of
matrix metalloproteinases, CD95L expressed on breast cancer
cells could also be shed from the cell membrane into the culture
supernatant and supernatants derived from breast cancer cell
cultures induced CD95L specific apoptosis in Jurkat T cells.
Interestingly, in breast cancer patients depletion of CD4+ and
CD8+ peripheral blood lymphocytes was tightly correlated with
CD95 ligand expression in the tumours, which is suggestive for
a relationship between CD95 ligand expression by tumour and
systemic immunosuppression.
A77
Resistance to CD95-mediated apoptosis in breast
cancer is not due to somatic mutation of the CD95
gene
C Moers, M Müschen*, MW Beckmann†, P Mallmann
Klinik für Geburtshilfe und Gynäkologie and *Klinik für Genetik,
Universität zu Köln, Köln; †Klinik für Geburtshilfe und Gynäkologie der
Universität Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany
Resistance to CD95 (Apo-1/Fas)-mediated apoptosis is a typical
feature of breast cancer cells. Recent studies identified deleterious
mutations of the CD95 gene not only in a variety of B cell lym-
phomas but also in a number of solid tumour entities.
Therefore, we amplified and sequenced selected regions (includ-
ing regulatory promoter regions and the last exon coding for the
death domain) of the CD95 gene from 48 breast cancer cases and
10 breast cancer cell lines but no mutation was found. In the pres-
ence of both polymorphic allele, loss of heterozygosity was
excluded in 27 informative cases. We conclude that relevant
somatic mutations of the CD95 gene occur, if at all, at a very low
frequency and are not the primary cause for resistance to CD95-
mediated apoptosis in breast cancer.
