Keywords: Arctic;Denitrification;Genome-resolved metagenomics;Nitrous oxide
CrossMarkDomains[1]: springer.com
Creator: Adobe InDesign 15.0 (Windows)
ModDate: 2022/06/11 10:36:45+02'00'
Trapped: 
CreationDate: 2022/06/10 11:52:44 (UTC)
CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
Subject: Environmental Microbiome, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40793-022-00424-2
Author: Igor S. Pessi
Title: In-depth characterization of denitrifier communities across different soil ecosystems in the tundra
CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
robots: noindex
Producer: Adobe PDF Library 15.0; modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
doi: 10.1186/s40793-022-00424-2
CrossMarkDomains[2]: springerlink.com
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2022-06-10T11:52:44
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Adobe InDesign 15.0 (Windows)
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2022-06-11T10:36:45+02:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2022-06-11T10:36:45+02:00
xmp:pdf:Producer: Adobe PDF Library 15.0; modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Arctic;Denitrification;Genome-resolved metagenomics;Nitrous oxide
xmp:pdf:Trapped: False
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40793-022-00424-2
xmp:dc:publisher: BioMed Central
xmp:dc:description: Environmental Microbiome, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40793-022-00424-2
xmp:dc:subject: Arctic; Denitrification; Genome-resolved metagenomics; Nitrous oxide
xmp:dc:title: In-depth characterization of denitrifier communities across different soil ecosystems in the tundra
xmp:dc:creator: Igor S. Pessi; Sirja Viitamäki; Anna-Maria Virkkala; Eeva Eronen-Rasimus; Tom O. Delmont; Maija E. Marushchak; Miska Luoto; Jenni Hultman
xmp:crossmark:DOI: 10.1186/s40793-022-00424-2
xmp:crossmark:MajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
xmp:crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:crossmark:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:prism:url: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40793-022-00424-2
xmp:prism:doi: 10.1186/s40793-022-00424-2
xmp:prism:issn: 2524-6372
xmp:prism:aggregationType: journal
xmp:prism:publicationName: Environmental Microbiome
xmp:prism:copyright: The Author(s)
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:pdfx:doi: 10.1186/s40793-022-00424-2
xmp:pdfx:robots: noindex
xmp:pdfx:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:d0feb445-7d9f-41d4-a24f-5c75d7eabfb3
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:4e9708fd-2ec1-4b7b-8f0a-9d8a1cf0019b
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:d0feb445-7d9f-41d4-a24f-5c75d7eabfb3
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2022-06-10T12:35:20Z
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Jenni Hultman
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3431-1785
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe Document Info PDF eXtension Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkMajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrosMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: robots
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://crossref.org/crossmark/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: crossmark
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Crossmark Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Usual same as prism:doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The date when a publication was publishe.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: seq Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://prismstandard.org/namespaces/basic/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: prism
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Prism Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: This element provides the url for an article or unit of content. The attribute platform is optionally allowed for situations in which multiple URLs must be specified. PRISM recommends that a subset of the PCV platform values, namely “mobile” and “web”, be used in conjunction with this element. NOTE: PRISM recommends against the use of the #other value allowed in the PRISM Platform controlled vocabulary. In lieu of using #other please reach out to the PRISM group at prism-wg@yahoogroups.com to request addition of your term to the Platform Controlled Vocabulary.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: url
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The Digital Object Identifier for the article.
The DOI may also be used as the dc:identifier. If used as a dc:identifier, the URI form should be captured, and the bare identifier should also be captured using prism:doi. If an alternate unique identifier is used as the required dc:identifier, then the DOI should be specified as a bare identifier within prism:doi only. If the URL associated with a DOI is to be specified, then prism:url may be used in conjunction with prism:doi in order to provide the service endpoint (i.e. the URL).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ISSN for an electronic version of the issue in which the resource occurs. Permits publishers to include a second ISSN, identifying an electronic version of the issue in which the resource occurs (therefore e(lectronic)Issn. If used, prism:eIssn MUST contain the ISSN of the electronic version.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: issn
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Volume number
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: volume
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Issue number
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: number
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Starting page
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: startingPage
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Ending page
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: endingPage
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The aggregation type specifies the unit of aggregation for a content collection. Comment PRISM recommends that the PRISM Aggregation Type Controlled Vocabulary be used to provide values for this element. NBOOKMARKS:
In-depth characterization of denitrifier communities across different soil ecosystems in the tundra
  Abstract
    Background:
    Results:
    Conclusions:
  Background
  Methods
    Study area and sampling
    Soil physicochemical characterization and in situ measurement of GHG fluxes
    Metagenome sequencing and processing of raw data
    Taxonomic profiling
    Metagenome assembling and binning
    Gene-centric analyses
    Phylogenomic analyses of MAGs and metabolic reconstruction
    MAG dereplication and read recruitment analysis
  Results
    Environmental characterization and in situ GHG fluxes
    Differences in microbial community structure across soils ecosystems
    A manually curated genomic database from tundra soil metagenomes
    Microorganisms from tundra soils have truncated denitrification pathways
    Microorganisms affiliated with the Chloroflexota lineage Ellin6529 are the main denitrifiers stricto sensu in fen soils
    Acidobacteriota with the potential to reduce NO and N2O are abundant in the fens
  Discussion
  Conclusions
  Acknowledgements
  References
Page 1
Pessi et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40793-022-00424-2 
Environmental Microbiome
RESEARCH ARTICLE  Open Access
In‑depth characterization of denitrifier
communities across different soil ecosystems
in the tundra
Igor S. Pessi1,2, Sirja Viitamäki1, Anna‑Maria Virkkala3,4, Eeva Eronen‑Rasimus1,5, Tom O. Delmont6,
Maija E. Marushchak7,8, Miska Luoto4 and Jenni Hultman1,2,9*[URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3431-1785"]     
Abstract 
Background:  In contrast to earlier assumptions, there is now mounting evidence for the role of tundra soils as
important sources of the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide ­(N2
O). However, the microorganisms involved in the cycling of
­N2
O in this system remain largely uncharacterized. Since tundra soils are variable sources and sinks of N­ 2
O, we aimed
at investigating differences in community structure across different soil ecosystems in the tundra.
Results:  We analysed 1.4 Tb of metagenomic data from soils in northern Finland covering a range of ecosystems
from dry upland soils to water-logged fens and obtained 796 manually binned and curated metagenome-assembled
genomes (MAGs). We then searched for MAGs harbouring genes involved in denitrification, an important process driv‑
ing ­N2
O emissions. Communities of potential denitrifiers were dominated by microorganisms with truncated deni‑
trification pathways (i.e., lacking one or more denitrification genes) and differed across soil ecosystems. Upland soils
showed a strong ­N2
O sink potential and were dominated by members of the Alphaproteobacteria such as Bradyrhizo-
bium and Reyranella. Fens, which had in general net-zero ­N2
O fluxes, had a high abundance of poorly characterized
taxa affiliated with the Chloroflexota lineage Ellin6529 and the Acidobacteriota subdivision Gp23.
Conclusions:  By coupling an in-depth characterization of microbial communities with in situ measurements of N­ 2
O
fluxes, our results suggest that the observed spatial patterns of N­ 2
O fluxes in the tundra are related to differences in
the composition of denitrifier communities.
Keywords:  Arctic, Denitrification, Genome-resolved metagenomics, Nitrous oxide
Background
Nitrous oxide ­(N2
O) is a greenhouse gas (GHG) that has
approximately 300 times the global warming potential of
carbon dioxide on a 100-year scale [1]. Atmospheric ­N2
O
concentrations have increased by nearly 20% since pre-
industrial times, with soils—both natural and anthropo-
genic—accounting for up to 70% of the global emissions
*Correspondence: jenni.hultman@helsinki.fi
1 Department of Microbiology, University of Helsinki, Viikinkaari 9, 
00014 Helsinki, Finland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
[2]. Despite being nitrogen (N) limited and enduring low
temperatures throughout most of the year, tundra soils
are increasingly recognized as important sources of ­N2
O
[3–7]. The relative contribution of tundra soils to global
GHG emissions is predicted to increase in the future [8, 
9], as the warming rate at high latitude environments is
more than twice as high than in other regions [10].
Microbial denitrification is an important source of
­(NO
­Nin 
which nitrate
2
O [
2–
11
),  nitric oxide (NO),
]. Denitrification is a series of enzymatic steps
(­NO3–
) is sequentially reduced to nitrite
N­ 2
O, and dinitrogen (­N2
)
via the activity of the Nar, Nir, Nor, and Nos enzymes, 
respectively. The denitrification trait is common across a
©The Author(s) 2022. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit [URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://​creat​iveco​
 mmons.​org/​publi​cdoma​in/​zero/1.​0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
Page 2
Pessi et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 2 of 17
wide range of archaea, bacteria, and some fungi, most of
which are facultative anaerobes that switch to N oxides
as electron acceptor when oxygen becomes limiting [12].
Denitrification is a modular community process per-
formed in synergy by different microbial taxa that exe-
cute only a subset of the complete denitrification pathway
[12, 13]. With the growing number of microbial genomes
sequenced in recent years, it has become evident that
only a fraction of the microorganisms involved in the
denitrification pathway encode the enzymatic machinery
needed for complete denitrification [14, 15].
Compared to high ­N2
O-emitting systems such as agri-
cultural and tropical soils, our knowledge of denitrifier
communities in tundra soils is limited. As denitrification
leads to the loss of N to the atmosphere, it enhances the
N-limited status of tundra systems thus impacting both
microbial and plant communities [16, 17]. Investigations
of denitrifier diversity in the tundra have been largely
limited to gene-centric surveys using microarrays, ampli-
con sequencing, qPCR, and read-based metagenomics, 
which provide limited information on the taxonomic
identity and genomic composition of community mem-
bers. These studies have shown that denitrifier communi-
ties in the tundra are dominated by members of the phyla
Proteobacteria,  Actinobacteria,  and Bacteroidetes,  and
that the potential for complete denitrification is usually
present at the community level [18–22]. However, it is
not known whether the complete denitrification poten-
tial occurs within discrete microbial populations or is
widespread throughout populations of truncated denitri-
fiers lacking one or more denitrification genes. In addi-
tion, tundra soils encompass many different ecosystems, 
some of which are notorious N­ 2
O sources (e.g. bare peat
surfaces [
wetlands, where low
3]).  ­N2
O consumption is usually
N­ O3– 
availability due to
favoured in
anoxia pro-
motes the reduction of ­N2
O to N­ 2 
[23]. In upland soils, 
­N2
O fluxes vary in both time and space. Strong ­N2
O
sinks have been observed specially in sparsely vegetated
upland soils [7], but the microbial processes underlying
­N2
O consumption in these systems are largely unknown
[24].  Altogether, these large differences in ­N2
O fluxes
across tundra ecosystems indicate differences in the
structure of microbial communities, but a comprehensive
understanding of the microorganisms driving ­N2
O fluxes
in tundra soils is lacking.
Modelling ­N2
O emissions based on microbial commu-
nity structure is challenging. ­N2
O fluxes are character-
ized by a high temporal and spatial heterogeneity driven
by several environmental constraints related to soil pH, 
N, moisture, and oxygen content [11]. In addition, our
knowledge of the regulation of the denitrification process
is largely based on the activity of model organisms such
as the complete denitrifier Paracoccus denitrificans [25]. 
It has been suggested that incomplete denitrifiers that
contain Nir and Nor but lack Nos contribute substan-
tially to soil ­N2
O emissions [26], while non-denitrifying
­N2
O reducers, i.e., microorganisms that contain Nos but
lack Nir, can represent an important N­ 2
O sink [27–29].
Furthermore, the partitioning of metabolic pathways
across different populations with truncated pathways—
also known as metabolic handoffs [30]—has been linked
to higher efficiencies in substrate consumption com-
pared to complete pathways [15, 31]. However, it remains
largely unclear how populations of truncated denitrifiers
with different sets of denitrification genes interact with
each other and the environment impacting in situ N­ 2
O
emissions.
The paucity of in-depth knowledge on denitrifying
communities in the tundra impairs our ability to model
current and future ­N2
O fluxes from this biome. A better
understanding of the ecological, metabolic, and func-
tional traits of denitrifiers is thus critical for improving
current models and mitigating ­N2
O emissions [32]. This
invariably relies on the characterization of the so-called
uncultured majority, i.e., microorganisms that have not
been cultured to date but which comprise a high propor-
tion of the microbial diversity in complex ecosystems [33, 
34]. Genome-resolved metagenomics is a powerful tool
to access the genomes of uncultured microorganisms and
has provided important insights into carbon cycling pro-
cesses in tundra soils [35–37]. However, this approach
has not yet been applied to investigate the mechanisms
driving ­N2
O fluxes in the tundra. Here, we used genome-
resolved metagenomics to investigate the diversity and
metabolic capabilities of denitrifiers across different tun-
dra soil ecosystems characterised by a high variability in
net ­N2
O fluxes in an area of mountain tundra in Kilpis-
järvi, northern Finland.
Methods
Study area and sampling
The Saana Nature Reserve (69.04°N, 20.79°E) is located
in Kilpisjärvi, northern Finland (Fig. 1a). The area is part
of the mountain tundra biome and is characterized by a
mean annual temperature of − 1.9 °C and annual precipi-
tation of 487 mm [38]. Sampling was performed across 43
sites during the peak of the growing season in the north-
ern hemisphere. Our study sites are distributed across
Mount Saana and Mount Korkea-Jehkas and the valley in
between (Fig. 1b), and include barren soils (n = 2), heath-
lands (dominated by evergreen and deciduous shrubs) 
(n = 18), meadows (dominated by graminoids and forbs) 
(n = 7), and fens (n = 16) (Fig. 1c). Elevation across the
sampling sites varies from 586.6 to 904.5 m.a.s.l. (Addi-
tional file 1: Table S1). Fen sites were sampled in July 2018
and all other sites in July 2017. Samples were obtained
Page 3
Pessi   et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 3 of 17
with a soil corer sterilized with 70% ethanol and, when
possible, cores were split into organic and mineral sam-
ples using a sterilized spatula. In total, 69 samples (41
organic and 28 mineral) were obtained from the 43 sites
(Fig. 1c, Additional file 1: Table S1). Samples were trans-
ferred to a whirl-pack bag and immediately frozen in dry
ice. Samples were transported frozen to the laboratory
at the University of Helsinki and kept at − 80 °C until
analyses. 
principal component analysis (PCA) and permutational
ANOVA (PERMANOVA) with the package vegan v2.5–6
in R v3.6.3 (functions rda and adonis, respectively) [40, 
41]. C, N, and C:N ratio were not included in the multi-
variate dataset due to a high amount of missing data, and
moisture and SOM were log-transformed prior to analy-
sis. Due to the limited number of samples from barren
sites, these were not included in the ANOVA and PER-
MANOVA procedures.
Soil physicochemical characterization and in situ
measurement of GHG fluxes
Soil pH, moisture, and soil organic matter (SOM) content
were measured from the 69 samples according to Finn-
ish (SFS) and international (ISO) standards (SFS 300, ISO
10390, and SFS 3008). Carbon (C) and N content were
measured using a Vario Micro Cube machine (Elementar, 
Langenselbold, Germany). In situ ecosystem-level N­ 2
O
and methane (­CH4
) fluxes were measured from the 43
sites using a static, non-steady state, non-flow-through
system composed of a darkened acrylic chamber (20 cm
diameter, 25 cm height) [4, 39]. Measurements were con-
ducted between 2nd July and 2nd August 2018, between
10 am and 5 pm. Simultaneous measurement of GHG
fluxes and sampling for metagenomic sequencing was not
possible due to limited resources and logistic constraints. 
At each site, five 25 mL gas samples were taken during
a 50-min chamber closure and transferred to evacuated
Exetainer vials (Labco, Lampeter, UK). Gas samples were
analysed using an Agilent 7890B gas chromatograph
(Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped
with an autosampler (Gilson, Middleton, WI, USA) and
a flame ionization detector for ­CH4 
and an electron cap-
ture detector for N­ 2
O. Gas concentrations were calcu-
lated from the gas chromatograph peak areas based on
standard curves with a ­CH4 
concentration of 0–100 ppm
and a N­  2
O concentration of 0–5000 ppb.
Differences in physicochemical composition and rates
of GHG fluxes across soil ecosystems and depths were
assessed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
followed by Tukey’s HSD test with the lm and TukeyHSD 
functions in R v3.6.3 [40]. The relationship between soil
ecosystem, depth, and physicochemical properties was
also verified using a multivariate approach consisting of 
Metagenome sequencing and processing of raw data
Total DNA and RNA were co-extracted as previously
described [42]. Briefly, extraction was performed on 0.5 g
of soil using a hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide
(CTAB),  phenol–chloroform, and bead-beating proto-
col. DNA was purified using the AllPrep DNA Mini Kit
(QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) and quantified using the
Qubit dsDNA BR Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, 
Waltham, MA, USA). Library preparation for Illumina
metagenome sequencing was performed using the Nex-
tera XT DNA Library Preparation Kit (Illumina, San
Diego, CA, USA). Metagenomes were obtained for the
69 samples across two paired-end NextSeq (132–170 bp) 
and one NovaSeq (2 × 151 bp) runs. Two samples were
additionally sequenced with Nanopore MinION. For this, 
libraries were prepared using the SQK-LSK109 Ligation
Sequencing Kit with the long fragment buffer (Oxford
Nanopore Technologies, Oxford, UK) and the NEBNext
Companion Module for Oxford Nanopore Technologies
Ligation Sequencing Kit (New England Biolabs).  Each
sample was sequenced for 48 h on one R9.4 flow cell.
We obtained more than 9 billion Illumina (1.4 Tb) 
and 7 million Nanopore (21.5 Gb) reads from the 69 soil
metagenomes (mean: 19.9 Gb, minimum: 0.7 Gb, maxi-
mum: 82.9 Gb) (Additional file 1: Table S1). The quality
of the raw Illumina data was verified with fastQC v0.11.9
[43] and multiQC v1.8 [44].  Cutadapt v1.16 [45] was
then used to trim sequencing adapters and low-quality
base calls (q < 20) and to filter out short reads (< 50 bp).
Nanopore data were basecalled with GPU guppy v4.0.11
using the high-accuracy model and applying a minimum
quality score of 7. The quality of the basecalled Nanopore
data was assessed with pycoQC v2.5.0.21 [46] and adapt-
ers were trimmed with Porechop v0.2.4 [47].
(See figure on next page.)
Fig. 1  Saana Nature Reserve, an area of mountain tundra in Kilpisjärvi, northern Finland. a Map of Fennoscandia showing the location of Kilpisjärvi
and b aerial overview of the study area showing the location of the 43 sampling sites. Image provided by the National Land Survey of Finland under
the Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 license. c In situ photographs of the four types of soil ecosystems investigated. d Physicochemical characterization
of the soil ecosystems based on organic samples taken from the 43 sites. More information about the samples can be found in Additional file 1: 
Table S1. e In situ ecosystem-level nitrous oxide ­(N2
O) and methane (­CH4
) fluxes measured from the 43 sites using a static, non-steady state, 
non-flow-through system. Negative values represent net uptake and positive net emissions. For clarity, one outlier measurement from a meadow
site (660 µg ­N2
O ­m–2 ­day–1) was removed. In panels d and e, ecosystems followed by different letters are significantly different (one-way ANOVA, 
p < 0.05). Samples from barren soils were not included in the ANOVA procedure due to the limited number of samples (ND: not determined)
Page 4
Pessi et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 4 of 17
Fig. 1  (See legend on previous page.)
Page 5
Pessi   et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 5 of 17
Taxonomic profiling
Taxonomic profiles of the microbial communities
were obtained using a read-based approach, i.e., based
on unassembled Illumina data. Due to differences in
sequencing depth across the samples, the dataset was
resampled to 2,000,000 reads per sample with seqtk v1.3
[48]. Reads matching the SSU rRNA gene were identi-
fied with METAXA v2.2 [49] and classified against the
SILVA database release 138.1 [50] in mothur v1.44.3 [51] 
using the Wang’s Naïve Bayesian Classifier [52] and a
80% confidence cut-off. Differences in community struc-
ture across soil ecosystems and depths were assessed
using non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) 
and PERMANOVA with the package vegan v2.5-6 in R
v3.6.3 (functions metaMDS and adonis,  respectively) 
[40, 41].  The relationship between community struc-
ture, soil physicochemical properties, and elevation was
also assessed using PERMANOVA and distance-based
redundancy analysis (db-RDA) with forward selection
with the package vegan v2.5-6 in R v3.6.3 (functions
adonis and capscale/ordistep, respectively) [40, 41]. The
physicochemical dataset included only pH, moisture, 
and SOM due to a high amount of missing data for the
other variables, and barren sites were not included in the
PERMANOVA procedure due to the limited number of
samples. Moisture and SOM were log-transformed prior
to analysis. Relationships between the abundance of indi-
vidual genera and N­ 2
O flux rates were assessed using lin-
ear regression in R v3.6.3 [40].
Metagenome assembling and binning
Metagenome assembling of the Illumina data was per-
formed as two co-assemblies. One co-assembly com-
prised the upland soils (barren, heathland, and meadow; 
n = 47) and the other the fen samples (n = 22). For each
co-assembly, reads from the respective samples were
pooled and assembled with MEGAHIT v1.1.1.2 [53].
Assembling of the Nanopore data was done for each sam-
ple individually with metaFlye v2.7.1 [54],  and contigs
were corrected based on Illumina data from the respec-
tive sample with bowtie v2.3.5 [55], SAMtools v1.9 [56],
and pilon v1.23 [57].  Quality assessment of the (co-)
assemblies was obtained with metaQUAST v5.0.2 [58].
Binning of metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) 
was done separately for each Illumina and Nanopore
(co-)assembly with anvi’o v6.2 [59] after discarding con-
tigs shorter than 2500 bp. The two Illumina co-assem-
blies and the two individual Nanopore assemblies yielded
more than 4 million contigs longer than 2500 bp, with
a total assembly size of 21.1 Gb. Gene calls were pre-
dicted with prodigal v2.6.3 [60]. Single-copy genes were
identified with HMMER v.3.2.1 [61] and classified with
DIAMOND v0.9.14 [62] against the Genome Taxonomy 
Database (GTDB) release 04-RS89 [63, 64].  Illumina
reads were mapped to the contigs with bowtie v2.3.5 [55] 
and SAM files were sorted and indexed using SAMtools
v1.9 [56]. The co-assemblies covered a significant fraction
of the original metagenomic data, with an average read
recruitment rate of 54.6% across samples (minimum: 
22.9%, maximum: 75.8%). Due to their large sizes, Illu-
mina co-assemblies were split into 100 smaller clusters
based on differential coverage and tetranucleotide fre-
quency with CONCOCT v1.0.0 [65]. Contigs were then
manually sorted into bins based on the same composition
and coverage metrics using the anvi-interactive interface
in anvi’o v6.2 [59]. Nanopore contigs were binned directly
without pre-clustering. Bins that were ≥ 50% complete
according to the presence of single-copy genes were fur-
ther refined using the anvi-refine interface in anvi’o v6.2
[59]. In addition to taxonomic signal (based on single-
copy genes classified against GTDB), either differential
coverage or tetranucleotide frequency was used to iden-
tify and remove outlying contigs. The former was used
for bins with a large variation in contig coverage across
samples, and the latter for those with marked differences
in GC content across contigs. Medium- and high-quality
bins (≥ 50% complete and < 10% redundant according to
the MIMAG standard [66]) were renamed as MAGs and
kept for downstream analyses.
Gene‑centric analyses
Functional profiles of the microbial communities were
obtained using a gene-centric approach based on assem-
bled data. For each (co-)assembly, gene calls were trans-
lated to amino acid sequences and searched against the
KOfam hidden Markov model (HMM) database with
KofamScan v1.3.0 [67]. Only matches with scores above
the pre-computed family-specific thresholds were kept. 
Genes putatively identified as denitrification genes (nirK,
nirS, norB, and nosZ) were submitted to further analyses
to identify false positives consisting of distant homo-
logues that are not involved in denitrification. Amino
acid sequences were aligned with MAFFT v7.429 [68] 
and alignments were visualized with Unipro UGENE
v38.1 [69]. Sequences were then inspected for the pres-
ence of conserved residues at positions associated with
the binding of co-factors and active sites: nirK, Cu-bind-
ing and active sites [70]; nirS, c-heme and ­d1
-heme bind-
ing sites [71]; norB, binding of the catalytic centres cyt b, 
­b3
, and ­Feb 
[72]; nosZ: binding of the C­ uZ 
and ­CuA 
centres
[72]. Sequences which did not contain the correct amino
acid at these positions were removed. Finally, resulting
amino acid sequences were aligned with MAFFT v7.429
[68] along with reference sequences from the genome
of cultured denitrifiers [14] and a maximum-likelihood
tree was computed with FastTree v2.1.11 [73] using
Page 6
Pessi et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 6 of 17
the LG + GAMMA model. Annotation of denitrifica-
tion genes was also performed for previously published
genomes retrieved from GenBank. These included a set
of 1529 MAGs obtained from soils in Stordalen Mire, 
northern Sweden [37], and all (n = 69) genomes of Aci-
dobacteriota strains and candidate taxa (accessed on 9
October 2020).
The abundance of functional genes was computed
based on read coverage with CoverM v0.6.1 [74].  For
this, Illumina reads were mapped to the contigs with
minimap v2.17 [75] and coverage was normalized to
reads per kilobase million (RPKM). Differences in func-
tional community structure were assessed using NMDS, 
PERMANOVA, and db-RDA as described above for the
taxonomic profiles. Differences in the abundance of indi-
vidual genes across soil ecosystems were assessed using
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s HSD test with the lm and
TukeyHSD functions in R v3.6.3 [40]. Due to the limited
number of samples from barren sites, these were not
included in the ANOVA and PERMANOVA procedures. 
Relationships between the abundance of denitrifica-
tion genes and N­ 2
O flux rates were assessed using linear
regression in R v3.6.3 [40].
Phylogenomic analyses of MAGs and metabolic
reconstruction
Phylogenetic placement of MAGs was done based on
122 archaeal and 120 bacterial single-copy genes with
GTDB-Tk v1.3.0 [76] and the GTDB release 05-RS95 [63, 
64].  Acidobacteriota MAGs containing denitrification
genes were submitted to further phylogenomic analyses
alongside all genomes of Acidobacteriota strains and can-
didate taxa available on GenBank (n = 69; accessed on 9
October 2020). For this, the amino acid sequence of 23
ribosomal proteins was retrieved for each genome with
anvi’o v6.2 [59] and aligned with MUSCLE v3.8.1551 [77].
A maximum likelihood tree was then computed based on
the concatenated alignments with FastTree v2.1.11 using
the LG + GAMMA model [73].  Escherichia coli ATCC
11,775 was used to root the tree.
For metabolic reconstruction, MAGs were annotated
against the KOfam HMM database [67] with HMMER
v.3.2.1 [61] using the pre-computed score thresholds of
each HMM profile. The anvi-estimate-metabolism pro-
gram in anvi’o v6.2 [59] was then used to predict the
metabolic capabilities of the MAGs. A metabolic path-
way was considered present in MAGs containing at least
75% of the genes involved in the pathway. Carbohydrate-
active enzymes (CAZymes) were annotated with dbCAN
v.2.0 based on the dbCAN v7 HMM database [78]. Only
hits with an e-value < 1 × ­10−14 and coverage > 0.35 were
considered. 
MAG dereplication and read recruitment analysis
Prior to read recruitment analyses, Illumina and Nano-
pore MAGs were dereplicated based on a 99% aver-
age nucleotide identity (ANI) threshold with fastANI
v1.3 [79] to remove redundancy (i.e., MAGs that were
recovered multiple times across the different assem-
blies). Read recruitment analyses were then performed
with CoverM v0.6.1 [74]. For this, Illumina reads were
mapped to the set of non-redundant MAGs with mini-
map v2.17 [75] and relative abundances were calculated
as a proportion of the reads mapping to each MAG.
Results
Environmental characterization and in situ GHG fluxes
Our sampling design in Kilpisjärvi included two soil
depths across four ecosystems that are characteristic
of the tundra biome (barren soils, heathlands, mead-
ows, and fens) (Fig. 1a–c). In previous studies, we have
established in the area a systematic fine-scale sampling
of microclimate, soil conditions, and vegetation in top-
ographically distinct environments [42, 80, 81]. Local
variation in topography and soil properties creates a
mosaic of habitats characterized by contrasting eco-
logical conditions. This makes the study setting ideal to
investigate species-environment relationships and eco-
system functioning in the tundra [42, 82, 83].
Physicochemical composition varied across samples
(Additional file 1: Table S1). Soil ecosystem and depth
explained a significant fraction of the variation in pH, 
gravimetric soil moisture, and SOM across samples
(PERMANOVA, ­R2 = 0.91, p = 0.01) (Additional file 2: 
Fig. S1).  Samples from the organic layer had higher
moisture and SOM than samples from the mineral layer
(one-way ANOVA, ­R2 = 0.44–0.71, p < 0.001),  while
pH did not vary significantly between soil layers (one-
way ANOVA, p > 0.05).  Soil physicochemical proper-
ties did not differ across soil ecosystems in the mineral
layer (one-way ANOVA, p > 0.05). In the organic layer, 
however, fens were characterized by higher pH, mois-
ture, and N content (one-way ANOVA, ­R2 = 0.10–0.66, 
p < 0.001) and, together with the meadows, lower C:N
ratio (one-way ANOVA, ­R2 = 0.55, p < 0.001) (Fig. 1d).
In situ measurements showed a high sink-source vari-
ability in net ­N2
O fluxes across the ecosystems (Fig. 1e).
small (net consumption of 6  µg 
­NAlthough 
the average
2
O emission at rates of up to 660 µg 
­N2
O flux across all sites was
­N2
O ­m­
N
–22 O ­day
­m
–1
–2
), high
 ­day–1
was observed at the meadow sites. Likewise, strong
­N2
O consumption (up to − 435 µg ­N2
O ­m–2 ­day–1) was
observed particularly at the heathland and meadow
sites. Net ­CH4 
emissions were observed exclusively at
the fen sites.
Page 7
Pessi   et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 7 of 17
Differences in microbial community structure across soils
ecosystems
Read-based analyses of unassembled SSU rRNA gene
sequences showed that microbial community composi-
tion differed across the ecosystems, with fen soils har-
bouring contrasting microbial communities compared
to the other ecosystems (PERMANOVA, ­R2 = 0.35, 
p < 0.001) (Additional file 2: Fig. S2a). No differences in
community structure were observed between soil depths
or the interaction between soil ecosystem and depth
(PERMANOVA, p > 0.05). A significant relationship was
observed between community structure and soil physico-
chemical properties (pH, gravimetric soil moisture, and
SOM; PERMANOVA, ­R2 = 0.28, p < 0.001), but not ele-
vation (PERMANOVA, p > 0.05). Due to the significant
overlap between soil ecosystem and physicochemical
composition (Additional file 2: Fig. S1), we used db-RDA
with forward selection to investigate in more detail the
links between community structure and the environ-
ment. The best model explaining community structure
comprised soil ecosystem and pH (db-RDA, ­R2 = 0.40, 
p < 0.001).  Addition of elevation did not improve the
model (db-RDA, p > 0.05).
Among previously described (i.e.,  not unclassified) 
taxa, microbial communities in barren, heathland, and
meadow soils were dominated by aerobic and facultative
anaerobic heterotrophs such as Acidipila/Silvibacterium,
Bryobacter,  Granulicella,  Acidothermus,  Conexibacter,
Mycobacterium, Mucilaginibacter, Bradyrhizobium, and
Roseiarcus (Additional file 2: Fig. S2b).  On the other
hand, fen soils were dominated by methanogenic archaea
from the genera Methanobacterium and Methanosaeta 
and anaerobic bacteria such as Thermoanaerobacu-
lum, Desulfobacca, and Smithella, but also the putative
aerobic heterotroph Candidatus Koribacter. We did not
observe a significant relationship between the abundance
of individual microbial genera and N­ 2
O flux rates (linear
regression, p > 0.05).
Communities from different ecosystems also differed
in their functional potential (Additional file 2: Fig. S2c).
Denitrification genes (nirK, nirS, norB, and nosZ) were
in general more abundant in the meadows and fens (one-
way ANOVA, ­R2 = 0.48–0.76, p < 0.001) (Additional file 2: 
Fig. S2d). Fen soils, which had the highest gravimetric
soil moisture content, also had a higher abundance of
genes involved in sulfate reduction (dsrA and dsrB) and
methanogenesis (mcrA and mcrB) (one-way ANOVA, 
­R2 = 0.59–0.90, p < 0.001),  indicating the prevalence of
anoxic and reductive soil conditions in these wet sites. 
We did not observe a significant relationship between
­N2
O flux rates and neither the abundance of individual
denitrification genes nor the ratio between nosZ and
nirK + nirS abundances (linear regression, p > 0.05). 
However, the ratio between nosZ and nirK + nirS abun-
dances was higher in the meadows (one-way ANOVA, 
­R2 = 0.29, p < 0.001) (Additional file 2: Fig. S2d), which
indicates a higher potential for N­ 2
O consumption in this
ecosystem.
A manually curated genomic database from tundra soil
metagenomes
Using anvi’o [59], we obtained 8,043 genomic bins and
manually curated these to a set of 796 medium- and
high-quality MAGs (≥ 50% complete and ≤ 10% redun-
dant according to the MIMAG standard [66]) (Additional
file 1: Table S2, Additional file 2: Fig. S3). According to
estimates based on domain-specific single-copy genes, 
the obtained MAGs were on average 65.4% complete
(minimum: 50.0%, maximum: 100.0%) and 2.7% redun-
dant (minimum: 0.0%,  maximum: 9.9%)  (Additional
file 1: Table S2).  Phylogenomic analyses based on 122
archaeal and 120 bacterial single-copy genes placed the
MAGs across 35 bacterial and archaeal phyla accord-
ing to the GTDB classification [63, 64] (Additional file 2: 
Fig. S3). The most represented phyla were Acidobacte-
riota (n = 172), Actinobacteriota (n = 163), Proteobacte-
ria (Alphaproteobacteria, n = 54; Gammaproteobacteria,
n = 39),  Chloroflexota (n = 84),  and Verrucomicrobiota 
(n = 43). Most MAGs (n = 703) belonged to genera that
do not comprise formally described species, including
303 MAGs that were placed outside genus-level lineages
currently described in GTDB and thus likely represent
novel genera (Additional file 1: Table S2).
To investigate their distribution across the different
soil ecosystems, MAGs were dereplicated based on a
99% ANI threshold, yielding a set of 761 non-redundant
MAGs (Fig. 2).  On average, 15.8% of the reads from
each sample were recruited by the set of non-redundant
MAGs (minimum: 7.6%, maximum: 30.5%). In agreement
with the read-based assessment, we observed differences
in MAG composition across the soil ecosystems, with
only 50 MAGs shared between the heathland, meadow, 
and fen soils (Additional file 2: Fig. S4a). Fen soils har-
boured the highest number of MAGs, with an average
of 155 MAGs per sample (Additional file 2: Fig. S4b).
Although barren and fen soils had similar taxonomic
richness according to the read-based estimates, only a
small number of MAGs was detected in the barren soils
(average of four MAGs per sample). This is likely a result
of limited sampling and sequencing of this ecosystem, 
which consisted of four samples and a total of 7.9 Gb of
metagenomic data (Additional file 1: Table S1). The num-
ber of MAGs in heathland and meadow soils was simi-
lar (average of 47 and 63 MAGs per sample, respectively) 
(Additional file 2: Fig. S4b). In general, barren, heath-
land, and meadow soils were dominated by the same
Page 8
Pessi et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 8 of 17
Fig. 2  Microbial community composition across different soil ecosystems in the tundra. Relative abundance of 761 non-redundant
metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) recovered from soils in Kilpisjärvi, northern Finland. Relative abundances were computed as a
proportion of the reads mapping to each MAG. Phylum-level taxonomic assignments are shown for the major groups found. More information
about the MAGs can be found in Additional file 1: Table S2. The scheme on the top of the figure represents ecosystem-level nitrous oxide (­N2
O) 
fluxes based on in situ measurements (Fig. 1) and the abundance of denitrification genes based on a gene-centric analysis (Additional file 2: Fig. S2).
The font size of denitrification genes represents their abundance across the different ecosystems
set of MAGs (Additional file 2: Fig. S4c). These included
members of the Acidobacteriota (Sulfotelmatobacter and
unclassified genera in the class Acidobacteriae),  Act-
inobacteriota (Mycobacterium and unclassified genera
in the family Streptosporangiaceae),  and Proteobacte-
ria (Alphaproteobacteria:  Reyranella,  Bradyrhizobium,
and unclassified Xanthobacteraceae;  Gammaproteobac-
teria:  unclassified Steroidobacteraceae).  On the other
hand, fen soils were dominated by MAGs that were not
assigned to formally described genera, including lineages
of Acidobacteriota (family Koribacteraceae), Actinobacte-
riota (family Solirubrobacteraceae), Chloroflexota (class
Ellin6529), Desulfobacterota (order Desulfobaccales), and
Halobacterota.
Microorganisms from tundra soils have truncated
denitrification pathways
To gain insights into the microorganisms involved with
the cycling of N­  2
O in tundra soils, we traced the curated 
denitrification genes to the set of recovered MAGs. 
Denitrification genes were found in 110 of the 796
MAGs (13.8%) (Additional file 1: Table S2). These were
affiliated with the archaeal phylum Thermoproteota and
many bacterial phyla such as Proteobacteria (classes
Gamma- and Alphaproteobacteria),  Acidobacteriota,
Bacteroidota, Actinobacteriota, Chloroflexota, and Ver-
rucomicrobiota (Fig. 3a). However, only 17 MAGs were
assigned to a validly described genera (Additional file 1: 
Table S2). These included members of the Acidobacte-
riota (Solibacter,  Sulfotelmatobacter,  Terracidiphilus,
and Gaiella), Myxococcota (Anaeromyxobacter), Planc-
tomycetota (Singulisphaera), Proteobacteria (Alphapro-
teobacteria:  Bauldia,  Bradyrhizobium,  Methylocella,
and Reyranella;  Gammaproteobacteria:  Gallionella 
and Rhizobacter),  and Verrucomicrobiota (Lacuni-
sphaera and Opitutus). On average, 1.8% of the reads
in each sample were recruited by all denitrifiers com-
bined (minimum: 0.4%,  maximum: 6.1%).  In general, 
Page 9
Pessi   et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 9 of 17
Fig. 3  Metabolic potential for denitrification in tundra soils. a Distribution of denitrification genes across 110 metagenome-assembled genomes
(MAGs) recovered from tundra soils in Kilpisjärvi, northern Finland. Genes encoding the nitrite (nirK/nirS), nitric oxide (norB), and nitrous oxide
(nosZ) reductases were annotated using a three-step approach including (1) identification using hidden Markov models from the KOfam database, 
(2) manual inspection for the presence of conserved residues at positions associated with the binding of co-factors and active sites, and (3) 
phylogenetic analyses along with sequences from archaeal and bacterial genomes (Additional file 2: Fig. S6). More information about the MAGs can
be found in Additional file 1: Table S2. b Phylum-level relative abundance of microorganisms harbouring denitrification genes across the different
soil ecosystems, computed as a proportion of reads mapping to each MAG
denitrifiers were most abundant in the fens (1.0–6.1%)
and least abundant in the heathlands (0.4–2.1%).
Genes involved in denitrification were found exclu-
sively in MAGs with truncated denitrification path-
ways, i.e., MAGs missing one or more genes involved
in the complete denitrification process (Fig. 3a).  Of
the 110 MAGs harbouring denitrification genes, the
vast majority (n = 104) encoded only one of the Nir, 
Nor, and Nos enzymes and no MAG encoded all the
three enzymes required for the reduction of N­ O2– 
to
­N2
.  Unsurprisingly, co-occurrence of genes encod-
ing the three enzymes was also not observed in any
of the other genomic bins of lower quality that were
discarded from the final MAG dataset (i.e., bins that 
were < 50% complete and/or > 10% redundant). To ver-
ify if microorganisms with truncated denitrification
pathways are common in other tundra systems, we
expanded our analysis to 1529 MAGs recovered from
permafrost peatland, bog, and fen soils in Stordalen
Mire, northern Sweden [37]. Among these, 225 MAGs
(14.7%)  contained denitrification genes (Additional
file 2: Fig. S5).  MAGs encompassed a similar taxo-
nomic profile as observed in the Kilpisjärvi dataset, 
and MAGs with truncated denitrification pathways
were also the norm in Stordalen Mire soils. Only one
MAG, assigned to the Gammaproteobacteria genus
Janthinobacterium, encoded all the Nir, Nor, and Nos
enzymes required for the reduction of ­NO2– 
to ­N2
.
Page 10
Pessi et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 10 of 17
Microorganisms affiliated with the Chloroflexota lineage
Ellin6529 are the main denitrifiers stricto sensu in fen soils
The reduction of N­ O2– 
to NO, performed by microor-
ganisms harbouring the nirK or nirS genes, is the hall-
mark step of denitrification and is often referred to as
denitrification stricto sensu as it involves the conversion
of a soluble substrate to a gaseous product thus leading to
the removal of N from the system [12]. Of the 110 Kilpis-
järvi MAGs harbouring genes involved in denitrification, 
46 contained nirK/nirS genes and are thus potential deni-
trifiers stricto sensu (Fig. 3a). These belonged mainly to
the bacterial phyla Chloroflexota, Actinobacteriota, and
Proteobacteria (classes Alpha- and Gammaproteobacte-
ria). Most MAGs (n = 43) contained the nirK gene, which
encodes the copper-containing form of Nir (Additional
file 2: Fig. S6a). The nirS gene encoding the cytochrome
­cd1
-containing form of Nir was present in four Gam-
maproteobacteria MAGs (Additional file 2: Fig. S6b),
including one MAG that contained both genes.
The composition of potential denitrifier stricto sensu
communities differed across the ecosystems (Fig. 3b).
MAGs belonging to the Alphaproteobacteria class of
the Proteobacteria were the most abundant in the bar-
ren, heathland, and meadow soils, particularly the MAG
KUL-0154 assigned to the genera Bradyrhizobium 
(Fig. 4). Two other Alphaproteobacteria MAGs that do
not correspond to formally described genera in the fami-lies Acetobacteraceae and Beijerinckiaceae (KUL-0057
and KUL-0056, respectively) were also found at high
abundances. In addition, one Actinobacteriota MAG
assigned to an uncharacterized genus in the family Gaiel-
laceae (KWL-0073), was abundant in the meadow soils. 
On the other hand, fen communities were dominated by
MAGs belonging to the phylum Chloroflexota (Fig. 3b),
which included seven MAGs assigned to the class-level
lineage Ellin6529 (Fig. 4).
None of the Ellin6529 MAGs that were dominant in
the fen communities contained the key genes involved in
autotrophic carbon fixation, dissimilatory sulfate reduc-
tion, dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonia, and
nitrogen fixation (Additional file 1: Table S3).  Analy-
sis of genes encoding terminal oxidases involved in the
aerobic respiratory electron chain revealed that all seven
Ellin6529 MAGs harboured the coxABC genes encod-
ing the aa3-type cytochrome c oxidase. Four MAGs also
contained the cydAB genes encoding the cytochrome bd 
ubiquinol oxidase, a terminal oxidase with high affinity
for oxygen that also plays a role in preventing the inac-
tivation of oxygen-sensitive enzymes and protecting
against oxidative and nitrosative stress, toxic compounds
such as cyanide, and other stress conditions such as high
temperature and high pH [84, 85]. The dominant MAGs
in the barren, heathland, and meadow soils encoded a 
different set of aerobic terminal oxidases. In addition
to the cydAB genes, the MAGs KUL-0057 and KUL-
0154 also contained the cyoABCD genes encoding the
cytochrome o ubiquinol oxidase, which is the main ter-
minal oxidase under highly aerobic conditions [86], and
KUL-0057 also contained genes encoding the cbb3-type
cytochrome c oxidase, a terminal oxidase with high affin-
ity for oxygen [87]. Genes involved in the Calvin cycle
(e.g., rbcL, rbcS, and prkB) were found in the Bradyrhizo-
bium MAG (KUL-0154), and none of the key genes for
autotrophic carbon fixation pathways were present in the
other Alphaproteobacteria MAGs that were dominant in
the barren, heathland, and meadow soils.
Acidobacteriota with the potential to reduce NO and ­N2
O
are abundant in the fens
The stepwise reduction of NO to N­ 2
O and N­ 2 
carried
out by microorganisms containing the norB and nosZ 
genes, respectively, represents the final step of denitri-
fication and the main biotic control on ­N2
O emissions. 
Soil denitrification rates depend on multiple environ-
mental conditions such as adequate moisture and inor-
ganic N availability, but whether it results in the emission
of ­N2
O or ­N2 
is ultimately linked to a balance between
the activity of NO and ­N2
O reducers [11, 15].  norB 
and nosZ genes were identified in 62 and 9 Kilpisjärvi
MAGs, respectively, belonging mostly to the phyla Act-
inobacteriota,  Bacteroidota,  Acidobacteriota,  and Pro-
teobacteria (class Alphaproteobacteria) (Fig. 3a). Apart
from one Gemmatimonadota and one Acidobacteriota 
MAG, norB- and nosZ-containing MAGs were almost
exclusively non-denitrifiers stricto sensu, i.e.,  they did
not harbour the nirK/nirS genes involved in the reduc-
tion of ­NO2– 
to NO. Most MAGs (n = 48) harboured a
norB gene encoding the monomeric, quinol-dependent
form of Nor (qNor), while the remaining MAGs (n = 8) 
encoded the cytochrome c-dependent Nor (cNor) (Addi-
tional file 2: Fig. S6c). In regards to the nosZ gene, most
MAGs (n = 6) contained sequences affiliated with the
clade II (also known as atypical) NosZ [14, 15, 27] (Addi-
tional file 2: Fig. S6d). Only four MAGs contained both
the norB and nosZ genes and thus have the potential to
reduce NO completely to ­N2 
(Fig. 3a).
As observed for the denitrifier stricto sensu com-
munities, the communities of potential NO and N­ 2
O
reducers also differed between the ecosystems (Fig. 3b).
MAGs assigned to the Alphaproteobacteria class of the
Proteobacteria were the most abundant in the barren, 
heathland, and meadow soils. In particular, the MAG
KWL-0112 assigned to the genera Reyranella was the
dominant norB-containing MAG, while KUL-0116
(belonging to an uncharacterized genus in the family Ace-
tobacteraceae) was the dominant MAG harbouring the
Page 11
Pessi   et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 11 of 17
Fig. 4  Relative abundance of metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) harbouring denitrification genes across different soil ecosystems in the
tundra. MAGs were recovered from soils in Kilpisjärvi, northern Finland, and annotated for genes encoding the nitrite (nirK/nirS), nitric oxide (norB),
and nitrous oxide (nosZ) reductases using a three-step approach (see methods). Relative abundances were computed as the proportion of reads
mapping to each MAG. MAG taxonomy is based on the Genome Taxonomy Database (GTDB) release 05-RS95
nosZ gene (Fig. 4). On the other hand, fen communities
were dominated by Acidobacteriota MAGs (Fig. 3b), par-
ticularly the norB- and nosZ-containing MAG KWL-0326 
affiliated with the class Thermoanaerobaculia (Fig. 4).
This MAG contained the same set of genes encoding
aerobic terminal oxidases as found in the nirK-containing
Page 12
Pessi et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 12 of 17
Ellin6529 MAGs that were dominant in the fen sites, 
namely coxABC and cydAB (Additional file 1: Table S3).
No genes involved in carbon fixation, dissimilatory sul-
fate reduction, dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammo-
nia, and nitrogen fixation were found in any of the
dominant norB- and nosZ-containing MAGs.
To elucidate the phylogenetic placement of the Acido-
bacteriota MAGs and to verify if the potential for NO
and ­N2
O reduction is present in other members of this
phylum, we analysed all available genomes of Acido-
bacteriota strains and candidate taxa available on Gen-
Bank. This revealed that genes encoding the Nir and Nos
enzymes are widespread across the phylum Acidobac-
teriota (Fig. 5). Genes encoding the Nor enzyme were
present in all but one of the six Acidobacteriota subdivi-
sions with genomes from cultured representatives. This
included the strains Acidobacterium ailaaui PMMR2
(subdivision Gp1), Acidipila sp. 4G-K13 (Gp1), Silvibac-
terium bohemicum DSM 103,733 and S. bohemicum S15
(Gp1),  Acidobacteriaceae bacterium URHE0068 (Gp1),
Edaphobacter aggregans DSM 19,364 (Gp1), Luteitalea
pratensis DSM 100,886 (Gp6), Geothrix fermentans DSM
14,018 (Gp8),  and Thermoanaerobaculum aquaticum 
MP-01 (Gp23), as well as the candidate taxa Candidatus 
Koribacter versatilis Ellin345 (Gp1), Candidatus Sulfotel-
matomonas gaucii SbA5 (Gp1), and Candidatus Solibac-
ter usitatus Ellin6076 (Gp3). On the other hand, genes
encoding the Nos enzyme were found only in members
of the subdivisions Gp6 and Gp23.
Discussion
The 796 MAGs obtained in the present study by a man-
ual binning and curation effort represent one of the larg-
est genomic catalogues of microorganisms from tundra
soils to date. Earlier gene-centric investigations have
revealed the potential for complete denitrification in tun-
dra soils [22, 88], however, these approaches fail to reveal
the wider genomic context of the genes involved in this
pathway. By applying the genome-resolved metagenom-
ics approach, we traced denitrification genes to specific
microbial populations, thereby allowing a detailed inves-
tigation of the genomic makeup of potential denitrifiers
in tundra soils. This approach also enabled us to access
the genomes of uncultured, poorly characterized taxa, 
which comprise the majority of the microorganisms in
soils and other complex ecosystems [33, 34].
Our genome-resolved survey revealed that denitrifica-
tion across different tundra soil ecosystems is dominated
by microorganisms with truncated denitrification path-
ways (i.e., harbouring only a subset of the genes required
for complete denitrification),  most of which represent
poorly characterized taxa without cultured representa-
tives. The congruence of these findings in both our 
original dataset of northern Finland soils and a re-anal-
ysis of a comprehensive metagenomic dataset from soils
in northern Sweden [37] suggests that truncated denitri-
fication pathways are not a methodological artifact aris-
ing from the metabolic reconstruction of fragmented
genomes. Indeed, recent genome-resolved investigations
have shown that cross-feeding between microorgan-
isms with truncated metabolic pathways, also known as
metabolic handoffs, are the norm across a wide range
of ecosystems such as grassland soil, aquifer sediment, 
groundwater, and the ocean, and not only in relation to
denitrification but other redox transformations as well
[30, 89, 90]. Although it has been established that deni-
trification is a community effort performed by different
microbial populations [12–15],  these genome-resolved
metagenomic studies are beginning to reveal a more in-
depth, ecosystem-centric representation of the denitri-
fication pathway. In addition to their predominance in
genomic databases [14], it appears that truncated denitri-
fiers are also dominant within defined ecosystems across
various terrestrial and aquatic biomes, including the tun-
dra. It has been suggested that the partitioning of meta-
bolic pathways across different populations via metabolic
handoffs is advantageous as it eliminates competition
between enzymes accelerating substrate consumption
[15, 31] and provides flexibility and resilience to the com-
munities in face of environmental disturbances [30]. We
further hypothesize that the predominance of denitrifica-
tion pathways characterized mostly by metabolic hand-
offs in tundra soils could be related to N limitation. If
metabolic handoffs enable a more effective substrate con-
sumption as previously suggested [15, 31], truncated den-
itrification pathways would be favoured in tundra soils
which are mostly N limited but undergo rapid surges in
N availability, e.g., during the spring melting season [91].
Tundra ecosystems are typically heterogeneous. Pre-
vious studies in the Kilpisjärvi region have shown that
soil properties such as pH and moisture do not have
any strong relationship with the macrotopography of
the area (50–500 m scale). Instead, environmental vari-
ation is controlled by the fine-scale mesotopographic
variation of the relief (2–20 m scale),  resulting in a
mosaic of different soil ecosystems with contrasting
vegetation [42, 80–83].  Our results agreed with this
observation and showed that denitrifier communities
in the tundra differ between drier upland ecosystems
(barren, heathland, and meadow soils) and water-
logged fens. This is likely related to differences in soil
moisture affecting oxygen availability in these ecosys-
tems. The dominant denitrifier populations in the oxic
dry upland soils, related to the genera Bradyrhizobium,
Reyranella,  and other uncharacterized genera in the
class Alphaproteobacteria,  encoded aerobic terminal
Page 13
Pessi   et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 13 of 17
Fig. 5  Metabolic potential for denitrification among members of the phylum Acidobacteriota. Phylogenomic analysis of 85 Acidobacteriota 
metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) containing denitrification genes recovered from tundra soils in Kilpisjärvi (northern Finland) and
Stordalen Mire (northern Sweden), and 69 genomes of Acidobacteriota strains and candidate taxa. Maximum likelihood tree based on concatenated
alignments of 23 ribosomal proteins and rooted with Escherichia coli ATCC 11775 (not shown). Genes encoding the nitrite (nirK), nitric oxide (norB),
and nitrous oxide (nosZ) reductases were annotated using a three-step approach (see Methods)
oxidases that are active under highly aerobic condi-
tions as well as oxidases with high oxygen affinity [86, 
87]. The former likely provides an adaptive advantage
in these soils by allowing rapid aerobic growth under
standard conditions of high oxygen availability, and the
latter would sustain growth in microoxic niches within 
the soil matrix and during periods of reduced oxygen
availability (e.g., during the spring melting season).
On the other hand, fen soils are continuously inundated
because they are located at lower topographic positions
where the water table is permanently at or near the soil
surface. The result is a mostly anoxic environment due
Page 14
Pessi et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 14 of 17
to the slow rate at which oxygen diffuses into the water-
logged soil, favouring reduced rather than oxidized soil
chemistry. In line with this, we found a predominance of
anaerobic processes in the fens, including a higher abun-
dance of genes involved in denitrification, sulfate reduc-
tion, and methanogenesis, the latter supported by in situ
measurements showing net C­ H4 
emission at the fen sites. 
Communities of potential denitrifiers in the fen soils were
dominated by somewhat enigmatic taxa, namely poten-
tial ­NO2– 
reducers affiliated with the class Ellin6529 of
the Chloroflexota and NO/N2
O reducers assigned to the
subdivision Gp23 of the Acidobacteriota. Both groups are
major members of microbial communities in soils world-
wide [92], and RNA-based investigations have shown that
they are active in tundra soils during both summer and
winter seasons [42, 93]. Thermoanaerobaculum aquati-
cum MP-01, the only cultivated member of the Acidobac-
teriota subdivision Gp23, is a strictly anaerobic bacterium
that has been shown to use Fe
­NO2–
, as electron acceptors in
and Mn, but not N­  O3– 
nor
anaerobic respiration [94].
However, studies investigating the use of nitrogen oxides
­NO
in anaerobic respiration usually provide soluble
2– 
as electron acceptors, not the gases NO and
­NON­3–
2
or
O, 
which bias against truncated denitrifiers that do not con-
tain the narG and nirK/nirS genes [95]. Ellin6529—for-
merly G04—were first detected by culture-independent
methods in alpine tundra wet meadow soil in the Colo-
rado Rocky Mountains, USA [96], and later isolated in a
study targeting slow-growing and mini-colony forming
bacteria from Australian agricultural soil [97]. However, 
their ecological, physiological, and metabolic preferences
remain largely unknown. Their genomic composition and
high abundance in the water-logged, anoxic fen soils sug-
gest that the Ellin6529 and Gp23 populations found in
this study are likely able to grow anaerobically with the
use of NO and ­N2
O as electron acceptors. However, it is
known that in addition to their role in anaerobic respira-
tion, NO and ­N2
O reduction can be used as a detoxifica-
tion mechanism or as electron sink for metabolism. For
example, the aerobe Gemmatimonas aurantica T-27 is
not able to grow on ­N2
O alone, but can use ­N2
O as elec-
tron acceptor transiently when oxygen is depleted [98].
In addition to microbial community structure, differ-
ences in N­ 2
O fluxes observed between upland and fen
soils also appear to be linked to soil moisture. Some of
the drier upland sites investigated were hotspots of ­N2
O
consumption. This is particularly interesting for the
acidic heathland soils, as low pH is known to impair the
expression of the NosZ enzyme thus promoting N­ 2
O
emission [99, 100]. On the other hand, fens had close to
net-zero ­N2
O fluxes, which is in line with previous obser-
vations for water-saturated soils both in the tundra [7] 
and worldwide [11, 13]. This has been linked to lower 
rates of N mineralization and nitrification in anoxic eco-
systems, which limit the availability of ­NO3– 
and ­NO2– 
and promote complete denitrification, resulting in N­ 2 
as
end product rather
soils in the tundra 
than
with
­N­
NO
2
O. Indeed, supplementing fen
3– 
and ­NO2– 
has shown to
promote ­N2
O emissions [101]. Moreover, climate change
models predict lowering of the water table in high-lati-
tude wetlands, which could lead to increased ­N2
O emis-
sions from these ecosystems which contain substantial
amounts of both C and N bound to the soil organic mat-
ter [102, 103].
Conclusions
A better understanding of denitrification is paramount
for our ability to model ­N2
O emissions and mitigate cli-
mate change. High-latitude environments in particular
have experienced amplified warming in recent decades, 
a trend that is likely to continue in the coming centu-
ries. As mechanisms of GHG emissions are very cli-
mate sensitive, the contribution of tundra soils to global
GHG atmospheric levels is thus predicted to increase
in the future leading to a positive feedback loop. Com-
pared with ­CO2 
and ­CH4
, measurements of ­N2
O fluxes
in tundra soils are sparse and are rarely coupled with a
characterization of the microorganisms involved, making
the magnitude and drivers of N­ 2
O fluxes across the polar
regions uncertain. While microorganisms with truncated
denitrification pathways appear to dominate the deni-
trifier communities investigated here, the potential for
complete denitrification was present at the ecosystem
level. In addition to a better monitoring of N­  2
O emissions
throughout the tundra biome, our results suggest that a
better understanding of the contribution of tundra soil to
global ­N2
O levels relies on the elucidation of the regula-
tory mechanisms of metabolic handoffs in communities
dominated by truncated denitrifiers.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1186/s40793-022-00424-2"] https://​doi.​
 org/​10.​1186/​s40793-​022-​00424-2.
Additional file 1. Table S1. Physicochemical information, sequencing
statistics, and accession numbers for 69 soil metagenomes from Kilpisjärvi, 
northern Finland. Table S2. Information on 796 metagenome-assembled
genomes (MAGs) recovered from tundra soils in Kilpisjärvi, northern
Finland.
Additional file 2. Fig. S1. Physicochemical composition of tundra soils in
Kilpisjärvi, northern Finland. Fig. S2. The microbial diversity of Kilpisjärvi
soils as seen using a gene-centric approach. Fig. S3. Genome-resolved
metagenomics of tundra soils. Fig. S4. Overview of the microbial diversity
in Kilpisjärvi soils based on a genome-resolved approach. Fig. S5. Meta‑
bolic potential for denitrification in Stordalen Mire soils. Fig. S6. Phylogeny
of a) nirK, b) nirS, c) norB, and d) nosZ sequences from metagenome-
assembled genomes (MAGs) recovered from tundra soils in Kilpisjärvi, 
northern Finland.
Page 15
Pessi   et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 15 of 17
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge CSC—IT Centre for Science for providing the
necessary computing resources and Kimmo Mattila for IT support; the staff
from the Kilpisjärvi Biological Station, Tanja Orpana, Aino Rutanen, Anniina
Sarekoski, Johanna Kerttula, and the members of the BioGeoClimate Model‑
ling Lab for assistance with fieldwork and soil characterization; Jillian Banfield
and Christina Biasi for helpful discussion; Laura Cappelatti for proof-reading
the manuscript; Murat Eren, Sebastian Lücker, Donovan Parks, and Antonios
Kioukis for tips, recommendations, and troubleshooting; and all anonymous
reviewers who provided important insights to the original manuscript.
Author contributions
JH and ML designed the research; SV and JH performed nucleic acid extrac‑
tion and metagenomic library preparation; AMV and MEM designed and
performed the GHG flux measurements and analyses; ISP analysed the data
and wrote the manuscript; EER and TOD contributed with the analyses; all
authors contributed to the final version of the manuscript. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This work was funded by the Academy of Finland (Grants 314114 and 335354) 
and the University of Helsinki. SV was funded by the Microbiology and Bio‑
technology Doctoral Programme (MBDP). AMV was funded by the Academy
of Finland (Grant 286950), the Otto Malm Foundation, and the Gordon and
Betty Moore Foundation (Grant 8414). MEM was supported by the Academy
of Finland (Grants 314630 and 317054). Open access funded by Helsinki
University Library.
Availability of data and materials
Raw metagenomic data and assembled MAGs have been submitted to the
European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) under the project PRJEB41762. MAGs can
also be downloaded from [URL: "https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.19722505"] https://​doi.​org/​10.​6084/​m9.​figsh​are.​19722​505. All
the code used can be found in [URL: "https://github.com/ArcticMicrobialEcology/Kilpisjarvi-MAGs"] https://​github.​com/​Arcti​cMicr​obial​Ecolo​gy/​
 Kilpi​sjarvi-​MAGs.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
1 Department of Microbiology, University of Helsinki, Viikinkaari 9, 00014 Hel‑
sinki, Finland. 2 Helsinki Institute of Sustainability Science (HELSUS), Yliopis‑
tonkatu 3, 00014 Helsinki, Finland. 3 Woodwell Climate Research Center, 149
Woods Hole Road, Falmouth, MA 02540‑1644, USA. 4 Department of Geo‑
sciences and Geography, University of Helsinki, Gustaf Hällströmin katu
2, 00014 Helsinki, Finland. 5 Marine Research Centre, Finnish Environment
Institute (SYKE), Agnes Sjöbergin katu 2, 00790 Helsinki, Finland. 6 Génom‑
ique Métabolique, Genoscope, Institut François‑Jacob, CEA, CNRS, Université
d’Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, 91057 Evry, France. 7 Department of Biological
and Environmental Science, University of Jyväskylä, 40014 Jyväskylä, Finland. 
8 Department of Environmental and Biological Sciences, University of Eastern
Finland, 70211 Kuopio, Finland. 9 Natural Resources Institute Finland (LUKE),
Latokartanonkaari 9, 00790 Helsinki, Finland. 
Received: 27 October 2021 Accepted: 3 June 2022
References
  1.  IPCC, editor. Climate change 2013: the physical science basis. Con‑
tribution of working Group I to the fifth assessment report of the 
intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press; 2013.
  2.  Tian H, Xu R, Canadell JG, Thompson RL, Winiwarter W, Suntharalingam
P, et al. A comprehensive quantification of global nitrous oxide sources
and sinks. Nature. 2020;586:248–56.
  3.  Repo ME, Susiluoto S, Lind SE, Jokinen S, Elsakov V, Biasi C, et al. Large
N2O emissions from cryoturbated peat soil in tundra. Nat Geosci. 
2009;2:189–92.
  4.  Marushchak ME, Pitkämäki A, Koponen H, Biasi C, Seppälä M, Marti‑
kainen PJ. Hot spots for nitrous oxide emissions found in different types
of permafrost peatlands. Glob Change Biol. 2011;17:2601–14.
  5.  Stewart KJ, Grogan P, Coxson DS, Siciliano SD. Topography as a key
factor driving atmospheric nitrogen exchanges in arctic terrestrial
ecosystems. Soil Biol Biochem. 2014;70:96–112.
  6.  Voigt C, Marushchak ME, Lamprecht RE, Jackowicz-Korczyński M, 
Lindgren A, Mastepanov M, et al. Increased nitrous oxide emissions
from Arctic peatlands after permafrost thaw. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 
2017;114:6238–43.
  7.  Voigt C, Marushchak ME, Abbott BW, Biasi C, Elberling B, Siciliano SD, 
et al. Nitrous oxide emissions from permafrost-affected soils. Nat Rev
Earth Environ. 2020;1:420–34.
  8.  Schuur EAG, McGuire AD, Schädel C, Grosse G, Harden JW, Hayes DJ, 
et al. Climate change and the permafrost carbon feedback. Nature. 
2015;520:171–9.
  9.  Hugelius G, Loisel J, Chadburn S, Jackson RB, Jones M, MacDonald G, 
et al. Large stocks of peatland carbon and nitrogen are vulnerable to
permafrost thaw. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2020;117:20438–46.
  10.  Post E, Alley RB, Christensen TR, Macias-Fauria M, Forbes BC, Goos‑
eff MN, et al. The polar regions in a 2°C warmer world. Sci Adv. 
2019;5:eaaw9883.
  11.  Butterbach-Bahl K, Baggs EM, Dannenmann M, Kiese R, Zechmeister-
Boltenstern S. Nitrous oxide emissions from soils: how well do we
understand the processes and their controls? Philos Trans R Soc B Biol
Sci. 2013;368:20130122.
  12.  Zumft WG. Cell biology and molecular basis of denitrification. Microbiol
Mol Biol Rev. 1997;61:533–616.
  13.  Wallenstein MD, Myrold DD, Firestone M, Voytek M. Environmental
controls on denitrifying communities and denitrification rates: insights
from molecular methods. Ecol Appl. 2006;16:2143–52.
  14.  Graf DRH, Jones CM, Hallin S. Intergenomic comparisons highlight
modularity of the denitrification pathway and underpin the importance
of community structure for N2O emissions. PLoS ONE. 2014;9: e114118.
  15.  Hallin S, Philippot L, Löffler FE, Sanford RA, Jones CM. Genomics and
ecology of novel N2O-reducing microorganisms. Trends Microbiol. 
2018;26:43–55.
  16.  Liu X-Y, Koba K, Koyama LA, Hobbie SE, Weiss MS, Inagaki Y, et al. Nitrate
is an important nitrogen source for Arctic tundra plants. Proc Natl Acad
Sci. 2018;115:3398–403.
  17.  Kou D, Yang G, Li F, Feng X, Zhang D, Mao C, et al. Progressive nitrogen
limitation across the Tibetan alpine permafrost region. Nat Commun. 
2020;11:3331.
  18.  Yergeau E, Kang S, He Z, Zhou J, Kowalchuk GA. Functional microarray
analysis of nitrogen and carbon cycling genes across an Antarctic latitu‑
dinal transect. ISME J. 2007;1:163–79.
  19.  Yergeau E, Hogues H, Whyte LG, Greer CW. The functional potential of
high Arctic permafrost revealed by metagenomic sequencing, qPCR
and microarray analyses. ISME J. 2010;4:1206–14.
  20.  Palmer K, Biasi C, Horn MA. Contrasting denitrifier communities relate
to contrasting N2O emission patterns from acidic peat soils in arctic
tundra. ISME J. 2012;6:1058–77.
  21.  Dai H-T, Zhu R-B, Sun B-W, Che C-S, Hou L-J. Effects of sea animal activi‑
ties on tundra soil denitrification and nirS- and nirK-encoding denitrifier
community in maritime Antarctica. Front Microbiol. 2020;11: 573302.
  22.  Ortiz M, Bosch J, Coclet C, Johnson J, Lebre P, Salawu-Rotimi A, 
et al. Microbial nitrogen cycling in Antarctic soils. Microorganisms. 
2020;8:1442.
  23.  Brummell ME, Farrell RE, Siciliano SD. Greenhouse gas soil produc‑
tion and surface fluxes at a high arctic polar oasis. Soil Biol Biochem. 
2012;52:1–12.
  24.  Chapuis-Lardy L, Wrage N, Metay A, Chotte J-L, Bernoux M. Soils, a sink
for ­N2
O? A review. Glob Change Biol. 2007;13:1–17.
Page 16
Pessi et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 16 of 17
  25.  Bakken LR, Bergaust L, Liu B, Frostegård Å. Regulation of denitrification
at the cellular level: a clue to the understanding of ­N2
O emissions from
soils. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci. 2012;367:1226–34.
  26.  Philippot L, Andert J, Jones CM, Bru D, Hallin S. Importance of denitri‑
fiers lacking the genes encoding the nitrous oxide reductase for ­N2
O
emissions from soil: role of denitrifier diversity for ­N2
O fluxes. Glob
Change Biol. 2011;17:1497–504.
  27.  Sanford RA, Wagner DD, Wu Q, Chee-Sanford JC, Thomas SH, Cruz-
Garcia C, et al. Unexpected nondenitrifier nitrous oxide reductase gene
diversity and abundance in soils. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2012;109:19709–14.
  28.  Jones CM, Graf DR, Bru D, Philippot L, Hallin S. The unaccounted yet
abundant nitrous oxide-reducing microbial community: a potential
nitrous oxide sink. ISME J. 2013;7:417–26.
  29.  Jones CM, Spor A, Brennan FP, Breuil M-C, Bru D, Lemanceau P, et al. 
Recently identified microbial guild mediates soil N­ 2
O sink capacity. Nat
Clim Change. 2014;4:801–5.
  30.  Anantharaman K, Brown CT, Hug LA, Sharon I, Castelle CJ, Probst
AJ, et al. Thousands of microbial genomes shed light on intercon‑
nected biogeochemical processes in an aquifer system. Nat Commun. 
2016;7:13219.
  31.  Lilja EE, Johnson DR. Segregating metabolic processes into different
microbial cells accelerates the consumption of inhibitory substrates. 
ISME J. 2016;10:1568–78.
  32.  Yu T, Zhuang Q. Quantifying global N2O emissions from natural ecosys‑
tem soils using trait-based biogeochemistry models. Biogeosciences. 
2019;16:207–22.
  33.  Rappé MS, Giovannoni SJ. The uncultured microbial majority. Annu Rev
Microbiol. 2003;57:369–94.
  34.  Steen AD, Crits-Christoph A, Carini P, DeAngelis KM, Fierer N, Lloyd KG, 
et al. High proportions of bacteria and archaea across most biomes
remain uncultured. ISME J. 2019;13:3126–30.
  35.  Mackelprang R, Waldrop MP, DeAngelis KM, David MM, Chavarria KL, 
Blazewicz SJ, et al. Metagenomic analysis of a permafrost microbial
community reveals a rapid response to thaw. Nature. 2011;480:368–71.
  36.  Hultman J, Waldrop MP, Mackelprang R, David MM, McFarland J, Blaze‑
wicz SJ, et al. Multi-omics of permafrost, active layer and thermokarst
bog soil microbiomes. Nature. 2015;521:208–12.
  37.  Woodcroft BJ, Singleton CM, Boyd JA, Evans PN, Emerson JB, Zayed AAF, 
et al. Genome-centric view of carbon processing in thawing perma‑
frost. Nature. 2018;560:49–54.
  38.  Pirinen P, Simola H, Aalto J, Kaukoranta J-P, Karlsson P, Ruuhela R. Clima‑
tological statistics of Finland 1981–2010. Helsinki: Finnish Meteorologi‑
cal Institute; 2012.
  39.  Livingston GP, Hutchinson GL. Enclosure-based measurement of trace
gas exchange: applications and sources of error. In: Harriss RC, Matson
PA, editors. Biogenic trace gases: measuring emissions from soil and
water. Oxford: Blackwell Science; 1995. p. 14–51.
  40.  R Core Team. R: a language and environment for statistical computing. 
Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2020. [URL: "https://www.r-project.org"] https://​www.r-​
 proje​ct.​org.
  41.  Oksanen J, Blanchet FG, Friendly M, Kindt R, Legendre P, McGlinn D, 
et al. vegan: community ecology package. 2019. [URL: "https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/vegan/"] https://​cran.r-​proje​ct.​
 org/​web/​packa​ges/​vegan/.
  42.  Viitamäki S, Pessi IS, Virkkala A-M, Niittynen P, Kemppinen J, Eronen-
Rasimus E, et al. The activity and functions of subarctic soil microbial
communities vary across vegetation types. bioRxiv. 2022. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.12.448001"] https://​doi.​
 org/​10.​1101/​2021.​06.​12.​448001.
  43.  Andrews S. FastQC: a quality control tool for high throughput sequence
data. Cambridge: Babraham Institute; 2019. [URL: "https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/"] https://​www.​bioin​forma​
 tics.​babra​ham.​ac.​uk/​proje​cts/​fastqc/.
  44.  Ewels P, Magnusson M, Lundin S, Käller M. MultiQC: summarize analysis
results for multiple tools and samples in a single report. Bioinformatics. 
2016;32:3047–8.
  45.  Martin M. Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput
sequencing reads. EMBnet J. 2011;17:10.
  46.  Leger A, Leonardi T. pycoQC, interactive quality control for Oxford
nanopore sequencing. J Open Source Softw. 2019;4:1236.
  47.  Wick R. Porechop: adapter trimmer for Oxford Nanopore reads. 2018. 
 https://​github.​com/​rrwick/​Porec​hop.
  48.  Li H. seqtk: toolkit for processing sequences in FASTA/Q formats. 2018. 
 https://​github.​com/​lh3/​seqtk. 
  49.  Bengtsson-Palme J, Hartmann M, Eriksson KM, Pal C, Thorell K, Larsson
DGJ, et al. METAXA 2: improved identification and taxonomic classifica‑
tion of small and large subunit rRNA in metagenomic data. Mol Ecol
Resour. 2015;15:1403–14.
  50.  Quast C, Pruesse E, Yilmaz P, Gerken J, Schweer T, Yarza P, et al. The SILVA
ribosomal RNA gene database project: improved data processing and
web-based tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012;41:D590–6.
  51.  Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M, Hollister
EB, et al. Introducing mothur: open-source, platform-independent, 
community-supported software for describing and comparing
microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009;75:7537–41.
  52.  Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR. Naïve Bayesian classifier
for rapid assignment of rRNA sequences into the new bacterial
taxonomy. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007;73:5261–7.
  53.  Li D, Liu C-M, Luo R, Sadakane K, Lam T-W. MEGAHIT: an ultra-fast
single-node solution for large and complex metagenomics assembly
via succinct de Bruijn graph. Bioinformatics. 2015;31:1674–6.
  54.  Kolmogorov M, Bickhart DM, Behsaz B, Gurevich A, Rayko M, Shin
SB, et al. metaFlye: scalable long-read metagenome assembly using
repeat graphs. Nat Methods. 2020;17:1103–10.
  55.  Langmead B, Salzberg SL. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. 
Nat Methods. 2012;9:357–9.
  56.  Li H, Handsaker B, Wysoker A, Fennell T, Ruan J, Homer N, et al. The
sequence alignment/map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics. 
2009;25:2078–9.
  57.  Walker BJ, Abeel T, Shea T, Priest M, Abouelliel A, Sakthikumar S, 
et al. Pilon: an integrated tool for comprehensive microbial variant
detection and genome assembly improvement. PLoS ONE. 2014;9: 
e112963.
  58.  Mikheenko A, Saveliev V, Gurevich A. MetaQUAST: evaluation of
metagenome assemblies. Bioinformatics. 2016;32:1088–90.
  59.  Eren AM, Esen ÖC, Quince C, Vineis JH, Morrison HG, Sogin ML, et al. 
Anvi’o: an advanced analysis and visualization platform for ‘omics
data. PeerJ. 2015;3: e1319.
  60.  Hyatt D, Chen G-L, LoCascio PF, Land ML, Larimer FW, Hauser LJ. 
Prodigal: prokaryotic gene recognition and translation initiation site
identification. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010;11:119.
  61.  Eddy SR. Accelerated profile HMM searches. PLoS Comput Biol. 
2011;7: e1002195.
  62.  Buchfink B, Xie C, Huson DH. Fast and sensitive protein alignment
using DIAMOND. Nat Methods. 2015;12:59–60.
  63.  Parks DH, Chuvochina M, Waite DW, Rinke C, Skarshewski A, Chaumeil
P-A, et al. A standardized bacterial taxonomy based on genome
phylogeny substantially revises the tree of life. Nat Biotechnol. 
2018;36:996–1004.
  64.  Parks DH, Chuvochina M, Chaumeil P-A, Rinke C, Mussig AJ, Hugen‑
holtz P. A complete domain-to-species taxonomy for Bacteria and
Archaea. Nat Biotechnol. 2020;38:1079–86.
  65.  Alneberg J, Bjarnason BS, de Bruijn I, Schirmer M, Quick J, Ijaz UZ, 
et al. Binning metagenomic contigs by coverage and composition. 
Nat Methods. 2014;11:1144–6.
  66.  Bowers RM, Kyrpides NC, Stepanauskas R, Harmon-Smith M, Doud
D, Reddy TBK, et al. Minimum information about a single amplified
genome (MISAG) and a metagenome-assembled genome (MIMAG) 
of bacteria and archaea. Nat Biotechnol. 2017;35:725–31.
  67.  Aramaki T, Blanc-Mathieu R, Endo H, Ohkubo K, Kanehisa M, Goto
S, et al. KofamKOALA: KEGG Ortholog assignment based on profile
HMM and adaptive score threshold. Bioinformatics. 2020;36:2251–2.
  68.  Katoh K, Standley DM. MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software
version 7: improvements in performance and usability. Mol Biol Evol. 
2013;30:772–80.
  69.  Okonechnikov K, Golosova O, Fursov M. Unipro UGENE: a unified
bioinformatics toolkit. Bioinformatics. 2012;28:1166–7.
  70.  Decleyre H, Heylen K, Tytgat B, Willems A. Highly diverse nirK genes
comprise two major clades that harbour ammonium-producing
denitrifiers. BMC Genomics. 2016;17:155.
  71.  Li Y, Bali S, Borg S, Katzmann E, Ferguson SJ, Schuler D. Cytochrome
cd1 nitrite reductase NirS Is involved in anaerobic magnetite biomin‑
eralization in Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense and requires NirN
for proper d1 Heme assembly. J Bacteriol. 2013;195:4297–309.
Page 17
Pessi   et al. Environmental Microbiome (2022) 17:30  Page 17 of 17
  72.  Heylen K, Keltjens J. Redundancy and modularity in membrane-
associated dissimilatory nitrate reduction in Bacillus. Front Microbiol. 
2012;3:371.
  73.  Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP. FastTree 2—approximately maximum-
likelihood trees for large alignments. PLoS ONE. 2010;5: e9490.
  74.  Woodcroft BJ. CoverM: read coverage calculator for metagenomics. 
2021. [URL: "https://github.com/wwood/CoverM"] https://​github.​com/​wwood/​CoverM.
  75.  Li H. Minimap and miniasm: fast mapping and de novo assembly for
noisy long sequences. Bioinformatics. 2016;32:2103–10.
  76.  Chaumeil P-A, Mussig AJ, Hugenholtz P, Parks DH. GTDB-Tk: a toolkit to
classify genomes with the genome taxonomy database. Bioinformatics. 
2019;36:btz848.
  77.  Edgar RC. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy
and high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004;32:1792–7.
  78.  Zhang H, Yohe T, Huang L, Entwistle S, Wu P, Yang Z, et al. dbCAN2: a
meta server for automated carbohydrate-active enzyme annotation. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2018;46:W95-101.
  79.  Jain C, Rodriguez-R LM, Phillippy AM, Konstantinidis KT, Aluru S. High
throughput ANI analysis of 90K prokaryotic genomes reveals clear spe‑
cies boundaries. Nat Commun. 2018;9:5114.
  80.  le Roux PC, Aalto J, Luoto M. Soil moisture’s underestimated role in
climate change impact modelling in low-energy systems. Glob Change
Biol. 2013;19:2965–75.
  81.  Niittynen P, Heikkinen RK, Aalto J, Guisan A, Kemppinen J, Luoto M. 
Fine-scale tundra vegetation patterns are strongly related to winter
thermal conditions. Nat Clim Change. 2020;10:1143–8.
  82.  le Roux PC, Pellissier L, Wisz MS, Luoto M. Incorporating dominant
species as proxies for biotic interactions strengthens plant community
models. J Ecol. 2014;102:767–75.
  83.  Kemppinen J, Niittynen P, Aalto J, le Roux PC, Luoto M. Water as a
resource, stress and disturbance shaping tundra vegetation. Oikos. 
2019;128:811–22.
  84.  Borisov VB, Gennis RB, Hemp J, Verkhovsky MI. The cytochrome bd
respiratory oxygen reductases. Biochim Biophys Acta Bioenerg. 
2011;1807:1398–413.
  85.  Giuffrè A, Borisov VB, Arese M, Sarti P, Forte E. Cytochrome bd oxidase
and bacterial tolerance to oxidative and nitrosative stress. Biochim
Biophys Acta Bioenerg. 2014;1837:1178–87.
  86.  Dinamarca MA, Ruiz-Manzano A, Rojo F. Inactivation of cytochrome
o ubiquinol oxidase relieves catabolic repression of the Pseu-
domonas putida GPo1 alkane degradation pathway. J Bacteriol. 
2002;184:3785–93.
  87.  Bueno E, Mesa S, Bedmar EJ, Richardson DJ, Delgado MJ. Bacterial
adaptation of respiration from oxic to microoxic and anoxic conditions: 
redox control. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2012;16:819–52.
  88.  Makhalanyane TP, Van Goethem MW, Cowan DA. Microbial diversity and
functional capacity in polar soils. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2016;38:159–66.
  89.  Diamond S, Andeer PF, Li Z, Crits-Christoph A, Burstein D, Ananthara‑
man K, et al. Mediterranean grassland soil C-N compound turnover
is dependent on rainfall and depth, and is mediated by genomically
divergent microorganisms. Nat Microbiol. 2019;4:1356–67.
  90.  Sun X, Ward BB. Novel metagenome-assembled genomes involved in
the nitrogen cycle from a Pacific oxygen minimum zone. ISME Com‑
mun. 2021;1:26.
  91.  Westergaard-Nielsen A, Balstrøm T, Treier UA, Normand S, Elberling
B. Estimating meltwater retention and associated nitrate redistribu‑
tion during snowmelt in an Arctic tundra landscape. Environ Res Lett. 
2020;15: 034025.
  92.  Delgado-Baquerizo M, Oliverio AM, Brewer TE, Benavent-González A, 
Eldridge DJ, Bardgett RD, et al. A global atlas of the dominant bacteria
found in soil. Science. 2018;359:320–5.
  93.  Männistö MK, Kurhela E, Tiirola M, Häggblom MM. Acidobacteria
dominate the active bacterial communities of Arctic tundra with widely
divergent winter-time snow accumulation and soil temperatures. FEMS
Microbiol Ecol. 2013;84:47–59.
  94.  Losey NA, Stevenson BS, Busse H-J, Damsté JSS, Rijpstra WIC, Rudd S, 
et al. Thermoanaerobaculum aquaticum gen. nov., sp. Nov., the first
cultivated member of Acidobacteria subdivision 23, isolated from a hot
spring. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2013;63(Pt_11):4149–57. 
  95.  Lycus P, Lovise Bøthun K, Bergaust L, Peele Shapleigh J, Reier Bakken
L, Frostegård Å. Phenotypic and genotypic richness of denitrifiers
revealed by a novel isolation strategy. ISME J. 2017;11:2219–32.
  96.  Costello EK, Schmidt SK. Microbial diversity in alpine tundra wet
meadow soil: novel Chloroflexi from a cold, water-saturated environ‑
ment. Environ Microbiol. 2006;8:1471–86.
  97.  Davis KER, Sangwan P, Janssen PH. Acidobacteria, Rubrobacteridae and
Chloroflexi are abundant among very slow-growing and mini-colony-
forming soil bacteria. Environ Microbiol. 2011;13:798–805.
  98.  Park D, Kim H, Yoon S. Nitrous oxide reduction by an obligate aerobic
bacterium, Gemmatimonas aurantiaca strain T-27. Appl Environ Micro‑
biol. 2017;83:e00502-e517.
  99.  Liu B, Frostegård Å, Bakken LR. Impaired reduction of ­N2
O to ­N2 
in acid
soils is due to a posttranscriptional interference with the expression of
nosZ. MBio. 2014;5:e01383-e1414.
100.  Samad MS, Biswas A, Bakken LR, Clough TJ, de Klein CAM, Richards KG, 
et al. Phylogenetic and functional potential links pH and N­ 2
O emissions
in pasture soils. Sci Rep. 2016;6:35990.
101.  Palmer K, Horn MA. Denitrification activity of a remarkably diverse fen
denitrifier community in finnish lapland is N-oxide limited. PLoS ONE. 
2015;10: e0123123.
102.  Smith K. The potential for feedback effects induced by global warming
on emissions of nitrous oxide by soils. Glob Change Biol. 1997;3:327–38.
103.  Kåresdotter E, Destouni G, Ghajarnia N, Hugelius G, Kalantari Z. Map‑
ping the vulnerability of arctic wetlands to global warming. Earth’s
Future. 2021;9:e2020EF001858.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in pub‑
lished maps and institutional affiliations.
Ready to submit your research? Choose BMC and benefit from: 
• fast, convenient online submission
• thorough peer review by experienced researchers in your ﬁeld 
• rapid publication on acceptance
• support for research data, including large and complex data types
• gold Open Access which fosters wider collaboration and increased citations
• maximum visibility for your research: over 100M website views per year
At BMC, research is always in progress.
Learn more biomedcentral.com/submissions
