BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction
Technical issues
Single-voxel spectroscopy
Lipids
Quantification
Applications Diagnosis
Monitoring response to treatment
Conclusions
Competing interests
Acknowledgements
References
Page 1
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/contents/7/4/149
Review
Imaging in breast cancer: Magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Patrick J Bolan1,2, Michael T Nelson2,3, Douglas Yee3,4 and Michael Garwood1,2,3
1Center for Magnetic Resonance Research, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN, USA
2Department of Radiology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN, USA
3Cancer Center, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN, USA
4Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN, USA
Corresponding author: Michael Garwood, gar@cmrr.umn.edu
Published: 12 May 2005
This article is online at http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/7/4/149
© 2005 BioMed Central Ltd 
Breast Cancer Research 2005, 7:149-152 (DOI 10.1186/bcr1202)
Abstract
A technique called in vivo magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)
can be performed along with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to
obtain information about the chemical content of breast lesions. This
information can be used for several clinical applications, such as
monitoring the response to cancer therapies and improving the
accuracy of lesion diagnosis. Initial MRS studies of breast cancer
show promising results, and a growing number of research groups
are incorporating the technique into their breast MRI protocols. This
article introduces 1H-MRS of the breast, reviews the literature,
discusses current methods and technical issues, and describes
applications for treatment monitoring and lesion diagnosis.
Introduction
The first in vivo magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS)
studies of breast measured resonances from phosphorus
atoms (31P). These studies showed that measurable variations
in phospholipid metabolism could be detected and used for
diagnosing cancer and monitoring the response to treatment
(reviewed in [1,2]). More recently, there has been growing
interest in breast cancer research using hydrogen (1H)-MRS,
because of its higher sensitivity than 31P-MRS. The first
breast 1H-MRS reports focused on the diagnostic utility of
the water :  fat ratio in the breast [3-5],  but subsequent
studies did not find this ratio to be a useful diagnostic metric
[6,7].  However, several studies performed with 1H-MRS
noted that a resonance from choline-containing compounds
(tCho) was commonly present in malignant lesions but not in
benign or normal tissues [4,6-11]. Figure1 shows a repre-
sentative example of a localized 1H spectrum of an invasive
ductal carcinoma, with the tCho resonance indicated.
Ex vivo studies have been performed to identify the different
choline compounds giving rise to the tCho resonance at a
chemical shift of 3.2ppm. High-resolution 1H spectra 
acquired from biopsy tissues have shown that the tCho
resonance is actually a superposition of several resonances
[12-14]. The primary constituents are those with a trimethyl-
amine moiety, R–(CH
2
)
2
–N+–(CH
3
)
3
, including free choline,
phosphocholine, and glycerophosphocholine. Other
metabolites possibly contributing include taurine, glucose,
phosphoethanolamine, and myo-inositol [14].  The choline
head groups associated with semi-mobile lipids may also
contribute. These resonances can be separated in ex vivo
studies with high-resolution magnetic resonance (MR)
spectrometers, but in vivo these peaks are substantially
broadened, and at fields as high as 4 T these resonances are
generally indistinguishable. Consequently, the simplified
approach used in studies in vivo is to treat the 3.2ppm
spectral peak as a single resonance.
Numerous in vivo, ex vivo, and in vitro studies have shown
that this tCho peak is elevated in neoplastic tissues.
However, the precise mechanisms that produce an elevated
tCho concentration ([tCho]) have not yet been fully identified.
A working hypothesis is that elevated [tCho] is an indicator of
increased cellular proliferation. The largest component
contributing to the tCho peak from neoplastic tissue is
phosphocholine, a known precursor of membranes. Thus, the
increased [tCho] in neoplastic tissues may be a reflection of
increased membrane turnover by replicating cells. This is
probably an oversimplified view, because [tCho] can be
modulated by numerous changes in enzymatic activity and
fluxes in biosynthetic and catabolic pathways in which choline
compounds serve as both precursors and catabolites. This is
an active area of research.
In spite of this seemingly complex situation, several groups
have successfully shown that tCho can be used as an
DCE = dynamic contrast-enhanced; MR = magnetic resonance; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; MRS = magnetic resonance spectroscopy;
MRSI = magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging; SVS = single-voxel spectroscopy; tCho = total choline-containing compounds; [tCho] = con-
centration of total choline-containing compounds.  149
Page 2
Breast Cancer Research July 2005 Vol 7 No 4 Bolan et al.
Figure 1
Example of a localized breast spectrum acquired at 4 T. The image on the left indicates the voxel placement, which covers a rim-enhancing lesion
of invasive ductal carcinoma. The water-suppressed spectrum on the right shows the resonances typically observed in malignant breast lesions.
Quantifying the spectrum by using water as an internal reference produced a measurement of concentration of total choline-containing compounds
of 4.4 ± 0.3 mmol/kg (±SD).
indicator of malignancy with clinical 1.5T scanners. Some
groups have also shown that the tCho peak decreases or
disappears in response to chemotherapy treatment. The
results of these studies are encouraging, and with continued
technical development it seems likely that MRS will become a
useful tool in detecting and managing breast cancer. 
multiple lesions or evaluating the spatial variation of a
metabolite in a heterogeneous lesion. However, MRSI is
technically more challenging than SVS, and quantification of
metabolite levels is more problematic. For these reasons, and
because it is not yet commonly used in the breast, the rest of
the discussion here will focus on SVS.
Technical issues
Historically, 1H-MRS research has been focused mainly on the
brain, in part because use of this technique on the brain poses
fewer technical challenges than on other organ sites. Most of
the research and development in the field of MR has been
focused on brain applications; as a result, commercial MR
systems are generally better optimized for brain rather than
breast studies. As a result of increased interest by clinicians and
researchers in the application of MR to breast cancer, many
technical advances are now taking place that are improving the
quality and reliability of breast magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) and MRS. For example, significant improvement in signal :
noise ratio can be realized by using multi-channel phased-array
coils that are now commercially available.
Single-voxel spectroscopy
Most breast MRS studies so far have used single-voxel
spectroscopy (SVS) to localize the chemical signals to a single,
cuboid volume (called a voxel) centered on the lesion of
interest. Our group uses a specialized pulse sequence called
LASER (localization by adiabatic selective refocusing) [15].
This technique has several useful properties; most notably it is
insensitive to radiofrequency field inhomogeneity and provides
clean localization. Although most breast MRS studies have
been done with SVS, other researchers have explored the use
of magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) as an
alternative [16]. In MRSI, spectra are acquired in a grid. MRSI
has an important advantage: it provides information about the
150 spatial distribution of metabolites, which is useful for studying 
A typical MRS study is performed immediately after acquiring
dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) MR images. Decisions
about the placement of the MRS voxel are usually based on a
review of the lesion morphology and the kinetics of contrast
agent uptake while the patient is still in the magnet. With
SVS, the placement of the voxel is of critical importance. The
voxel should be placed so that it contains as much of the
lesion as possible while excluding other tissues such as
normal fibroglandular or adipose tissue. In studies using MRS
to monitor response to treatment, the voxel size and position
can be adjusted to cover the same anatomical region of the
tumor, decreasing the voxel size as the tumor shrinks.
Lipids
Intense resonances from mobile lipids are a prominent feature
of 1H spectra of breast tissues, whereas these signals are
essentially absent from brain spectra. The amplitude of the
lipid resonance can vary markedly depending on the tissue
heterogeneity. The adipose tissue not directly involved in
breast carcinoma can pose problems for breast MRS. When
trying to place a voxel in a suspect lesion, any adipose tissue
inadvertently included in the voxel creates a partial volume
effect, reducing the effective volume for spectroscopy.
Adipose tissue also limits the ability to optimize (or ‘shim’) the
homogeneity of the magnetic field inside the voxel, which in
turn leads to broad resonances and reduced signal : noise
ratio. Intense lipid resonances can also produce sideband
artefacts that can interfere with MRS measurements. These
artefactual resonances can be larger than the tCho
Page 3
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/contents/7/4/149
resonance. To reduce sideband artefacts, our group uses a
method called echo-time averaging, which causes coherent
cancellation of sideband artefacts by averaging spectra
acquired at several different echo-time values [17].  For all
these reasons, it is important to plan voxels carefully to
minimize the amount of adipose tissue included.
Quantification
Although several groups have had success in using the
detectability of tCho to indicate malignancy, this approach
assumes that the MRS measurement sensitivity is roughly
constant from one measurement to the next. However, there
are several factors that make this assumption questionable in
breast MRS, such as variations in voxel size, adipose tissue
content, and coil sensitivity. In our experience at 4 T, we have
found that these factors produce a large variation in
sensitivity [18]. Thus, some form of quantification should be
used to correct for sensitivity variations, or at the very least
exclude those voxels with unusual sensitivity.
A variety of approaches have been used for quantifying MRS
data. We chose to use the intravoxel water resonance as an
internal reference, because this method is robust and
automatically compensates for variations in many factors [18].
Some groups have proposed using an external standard for
referencing [6,19].  This approach also works but requires
additional corrections for voxel size, adipose tissue content,
and coil efficiency. Both internal and external referencing
methods need correction for differences in relaxation rates,
which are difficult to measure in individual subjects.
Applications
Diagnosis
The first and most studied application for breast MRS is to
distinguish benign from malignant lesions before biopsy. The
first published paper on this topic, by Roebuck and colleagues
in 1998 [6], proposed the idea that tCho could be used as a
marker of malignancy. Several papers that followed, listed in
Table1, continued to use this hypothesis but performed
studies with somewhat different techniques. The overall results
are quite consistent. Katz-Brull and colleagues published a
combined analysis of the first five papers in Table1 and
reported an overall sensitivity of 83% and specificity of 85%
[20].  These results are very encouraging, especially
considering that the determination of malignancy was done
without considering any other diagnostic or historical
information that would normally be available clinically.
Other publications describing tCho detection in breast
cancers did not report diagnostic specificity and sensitivity
[5,7]. Although the results using a simple detectability hypo-
thesis are encouraging, it seems likely that there are benign
pathologies that also produce detectable levels of tCho.
Indeed, at 1.5T, a detectable tCho resonance has been
reported in fibroadenomas [8,9,16,21],  tubular adenomas
[6,10] and lactating subjects [8,11]. 
Table 1
MRS in the diagnostic context
No. of
Reference cancers 
No. 
benign
[6]  10  7
[8]  11  11
[10]  23  15
[11]  32  14
[9]  24  6
[24]  19  16
[25]  19  27
[16]  8  7 
Sensitivity
(%)
70
82
83
78
92
100
89
87 
Specificity
(%)
86
82
87
86
83
100
100
85
Two recent studies have sought to evaluate whether MRS
can improve the specificity of a diagnostic breast MR exam.
Huang and colleagues appended a single-voxel MRS
measurement and a single-slice T
2*
-weighted perfusion
measurement to a conventional DCE-MRI exam [21].  They
found that the addition of MRS increased the specificity of
the exam from 62.5% to 87.5%, and the further addition of
the perfusion measurement raised the specificity to 100%.
Our group recently performed a retrospective blinded-
observer performance study with four readers and 55
subjects to determine whether quantitative MRS could
improve the specificity and sensitivity of a DCE-MRI exam
[22]. In this study we reported that adding quantitative MRS
results to a DCE-MRI exam produced improvements in the
sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for all readers, and
improved the interobserver agreement between the readers.
Monitoring response to treatment
A second and perhaps more promising application is the use of
breast MRS for predicting response to cancer treatment.
Current clinically available methods such as palpation and
imaging rely on changes in tumor size, which take several
weeks before any changes are detectable. Breast MRS, in
contrast, detects changes in intracellular metabolism that
would occur before any gross morphological change. The first
report using tCho measurements to detect treatment response
in breast cancer was by Jaganathan and colleagues, who
observed that the tCho resonance disappeared or became
smaller in 89% of subjects undergoing chemotherapy [11].
Expanding on this observation, our group performed a study
designed to determine whether changes in [tCho] could
provide a biomarker of clinical response as soon as 24hours
after the first dose of doxorubicin-based chemotherapy for
locally advanced breast cancer [23]. Of the first 13 patients
who successfully completed the protocol without technical
problems, the change in [tCho] between baseline and
24hours after the first dose of chemotherapy showed a
significant positive correlation (R = 0.79, P = 0.001) with the 151
Page 4
Breast Cancer Research July 2005 Vol 7 No 4 Bolan et al.
This article is part of a review series on Imaging in breast
cancer, edited by David A Mankoff.
Other articles in the series can be found online at
http://breast-cancer-research.com/articles/
review-series.asp?series=bcr_imaging
change in lesion size measured at the end of four cycles of
chemotherapy (median duration 67days; range 65 to
72days).  The change in [tCho] within 24hours was
significantly different between responders and nonresponders
(P = 0.007) classified with RECIST (Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid Tumors).  These results suggest that the
change in [tCho] within 24hours after the first dose of the
drug can serve as an early indicator for predicting clinical
response to treatment for locally advanced breast cancer.
Conclusions
The quality and reliability of MRS data will only improve as
further refinements in MR systems and techniques continue
to occur. At present, dissemination of MRS methodology
optimized for breast studies is occurring, and breast MRS
and MRI are rapidly becoming standard capabilities of most
state-of-the-art clinical MR systems with magnets 1.5T or
stronger. The promising results from multiple institutions
reported so far suggest that MRS, along with MRI, will have
an increased role in the clinical assessment of breast cancer
in the future. However, large multicenter trials are still needed
before the tCho biomarker can be widely used to guide
diagnostic decisions and to predict response to therapy.
Competing interests
The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the NIH (grants CA92004,
RR08079, and RR00400), the DOD Breast Cancer Research program
(DAMD 17–01-1–0331), the Lillian Quist–Joyce Henline Chair in Bio-
medical Research, the Tickle Family Land Grant Endowment in Breast
Cancer Research, and the MIND Institute.
References
1. Daly PF, Cohen JS: Magnetic resonance spectroscopy of
tumors and potential in vivo clinical applications: a review.
Cancer Res 1989, 49:770-779.
2. Leach MO, Verrill M, Glaholm J, Smith TAD, Collins DJ, Payne GS,
Sharp JC, Ronen SM, McCready VR, Powles TJ et al: Measure-
ments of human breast cancer using magnetic resonance
spectroscopy: a review of clinical measurement and a report
of localized 31P measurements of response to treatment.
NMR Biomed 1998, 11:314-340.
3. Sijens PE, Wijrdeman HK, Moerland MA, Bakker CJG, Vermeulen
JWAH, Luyten PR: Human breast cancer in vivo: H-1 and P-31
MR spectroscopy at 1.5 T. Radiology 1988, 169:615-620.
4. Jagannathan NR, Singh M, Govindaraju V, Raghunathan P,
Choshic O, Julka PK, Rath GK: Volume localized in vivo proton
MR spectroscopy of breast carcinoma: variation of water-fat
ratio in patients receiving chemotherapy. NMR Biomed 1998,
11:414-422.
5. Thomas MA, Binesh N, Yue K, DeBruhl N: Volume-localized two-
dimensional correlated magnetic resonance spectroscopy of
human breast cancer. J Magn Reson Imaging 2001, 14:181-186.
152 6. Roebuck JR, Cecil KM, Schnall MD, Lenkinski RE: Human breast 
lesions: characterization with proton MR spectroscopy. Radiol-
ogy 1998, 209:269-275.
7. Gribbestad IS, Singstad TE, Nilsen G, Fjosne HE, Engan T,
Haugen OA, Rinck PA: In vivo 1H MRS of normal breast and
breast tumors using dedicated double breast coil. J Magn
Reson Imaging 1998, 8:1191-1197.
8. Kvistad KA, Bakken IJ, Gribbestad IS, Ehrnholm B, Lundgren S,
Fjosne HE, Haraldseth O: Characterization of neoplastic and
normal human breast tissues with in vivo 1H MR spec-
troscopy. J Magn Reson Imaging 1999, 10:159-164.
9. Yeung DK, Cheung HS, Tse GM: Human breast lesions: char-
acterization with contrast-enhanced in vivo proton MR spec-
troscopy – initial results. Radiology 2001, 220:40-46.
10. Cecil KM, Schnall MD, Siegelman ES, Lenkinski RE: The evalua-
tion of human breast lesions with magnetic resonance
imaging and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 2001, 68:45-54.
11. Jagannathan NR, Kumar M, Seenu V, Coshic O, Dwivedi SN, Julka
PK, Srivastava A, Rath GK: Evaluation of total choline from in
vivo volume localized proton MR spectroscopy and its
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in locally advanced
breast cancer. Br J Cancer 2001, 84:1016-1022.
12. Mackinnon WB, Barry PA, Malycha PL, Gillett DJ, Russell P, Lean
CL, Doran ST, Barraclough BH, Bilous M, Mountford CE: Fine-
needle biopsy specimens of benign breast lesions distin-
guished from invasive cancer ex vivo with proton MR
spectroscopy. Radiology 1997, 204:661-666.
13. Cheng LL, Chang W, Smith BL, Gonzalez RG: Evaluating
human breast ductal carcinomas with high-resolution magic-
angle spinning proton magnetic resonance spectrscopy. J
Magn Reson 1998, 135:194-202.
14. Gribbestad IS, Sitter B, Lundgren S, Krane J, Axelson D: Metabo-
lite composition in breast tumors examined by proton nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Anticancer Res 1999, 19:
1737-1746.
15. Garwood M, DelaBarre L: The return of the frequency sweep:
designing adiabatic pulses for contemporary NMR. J Magn
Reson 2001, 153:155-177.
16. Jacobs MA, Barker PB, Bottomley PA, Bhujwalla Z, Bluemke DA:
Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging of human
breast cancer: a preliminary study. J Magn Reson Imaging
2004, 19:68-75.
17. Bolan PJ, DelaBarre L, Baker EH, Merkle H, Everson LI, Yee D,
Garwood M: Eliminating spurious lipid sidebands in 1H MRS
of breast lesions. Magn Reson Med 2002, 48:215-222.
18. Bolan PJ, Meisamy S, Baker EH, Lin J, Emory T, Nelson M,
Everson LI, Yee D, Garwood M: In vivo quantification of choline
compounds in the breast with 1H MR spectroscopy. Magn
Reson Med 2003, 50:1134-1143.
19. Bakken IJ, Gribbestad IS, Singstad TE, Kvistad KA: External
standard method for the in vivo quantification of choline-con-
taining compounds in breast tumors by proton MR spec-
troscopy at 1.5 Tesla. Magn Reson Med 2001, 46:189-192.
20. Katz-Brull R, Lavin PT, Lenkinski RE: Clinical utility of proton
magnetic resonance spectroscopy in characterizing breast
lesions. J Natl Cancer Inst 2002, 94:1197-1203.
21. Huang W, Fisher PR, Dulaimy K, Tudorica LA, O’Hea B, Button
TM: Detection of breast malignancy: diagnostic MR protocol
for improved specificity. Radiology 2004, 232:585-591.
22. Meisamy S, Bolan PJ, Baker EH, Pollema MG, Le CT, Kelcz F,
Lechner MC, Luikens BA, Carlson RA, Brandt KR, et al.: The
value of adding quantitative 1H MRS for improving diagnostic
accuracy of breast MRI: preliminary results from an observer
performance study at 4 Tesla. Radiology 2005, in press.
23. Meisamy S, Bolan PJ, Baker EH, Bliss RL, Gulbahce E, Everson
LI, Nelson MT, Emory TH, Tuttle TM, Yee D, et al.: Predicting
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy of locally advanced
breast cancer with in vivo 1H MRS: a pilot study at 4 Tesla.
Radiology 2004, 233:424-431.
24. Kim J-K, Park S-H, Lee HM, Lee Y-H, Sung N-K, Chung D-S, Kim
O-D: In vivo 1H-MRS evaluation of malignant and benign
breast disease. Breast 2003, 12:179-182.
25. Tse GMK, Cheung HS, Pang L-M, Chu WCW, Law BKB, Kung
FYL, Yeung DKW: Characterization of lesions of the breast
with proton MR spectroscopy: comparison of carcinomas,
benign lesions, and phyllodes tumors. Am J Roentgenol 2003,
181:1267-1272.
