BOOKMARKS:
Competing interests
References
Page 1
Breast Cancer Research December 2005 Vol 7 No 6 Mankoff
Editorial
Imaging in breast cancer – breast cancer imaging revisited
David Mankoff
Division of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Radiology, University of Washington and Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
Corresponding author: David Mankoff, dam@u.washington.edu
Published: 29 November 2005
This article is online at http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/7/6/276
© 2005 BioMed Central Ltd 
Breast Cancer Research 2005, 7:276-278 (DOI 10.1186/bcr1359)
In 2000, Breast Cancer Research published a series of
articles describing the state-of-the-art of breast cancer
imaging, edited by James Basilion [1-6]. This series reviewed
developments in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS),  radionuclide
imaging with single-photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT) and positron emission tomogrophy (PET),  and
optical imaging, including optical computed tomography and
near infra-red imaging fluorescence. The series had an
emphasis on technical development, pre-clinical research,
and early clinical studies. Five years later, we revisit the same
areas of breast cancer imaging with an eye towards ongoing
translational research and new opportunities to detect breast
cancer early and to direct effective, individualized therapy.
Some of these imaging modalities have entered routine use in
the clinic. Breast MRI is frequently used in the management
of breast cancer, especially to determine the extent of
disease in the breast and to direct local therapy [7].  18F-
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET is increasingly used in
staging advanced or recurrent breast cancer and in
monitoring response to therapy and has received approval for
Medicare re-imbursement for these clinical indications [8].
MRS and optical breast cancer imaging are not yet in routine
clinical use, but increasingly compelling data in patients will
likely to lead to more clinical use in the near future.
Lehman and Schnall [7] from the Universities of Washington
and Pennsylvania provide a broad overview of the current and
future uses of contrast-enhanced breast MRI. They review
breast MRI imaging approaches that emphasized either
temporal or spatial resolution. These approaches have been
successfully merged to provide an optimal combination of
sensitivity and specificity for breast cancer detection. New
computer-based analysis methods may improve the ability to
interpret the large volumes of data generated by dynamic
contrast-enhanced MRI. The authors describe the use of
breast MRI to direct local therapy and highlight work using 
MRI to measure primary or ‘neo-adjuvant’ systemic therapy.
They review exciting recent work using breast MRI for
screening high-risk women, showing the ability to detect
lesions not found by mammography. As we continue to refine
our estimate of a woman’s individual risk of breast cancer, it
is likely that breast MRI will play a role, perhaps
complementary to mammography, in screening for high-risk
patients. The development of newer and possibly more
targeted MRI contrast agents may expand the capabilities of
breast MRI.
Using much of the same technology needed for breast MRI,
MRS provides a method for characterizing the chemical
composition of breast cancer in vivo. Bolan, Nelson, Yee and
Garwood [9] from the University of Minnesota review the
technological issues and current state of breast MRS. Although
MRS is frequently used in the clinical management of some
tumors, such as brain tumors, breast MRS is just emerging as a
clinically practical tool. Bolan and colleagues nicely describe
the chemical and physical principles underlying breast MRS
and the technical challenges of applying MRS to human breast
cancer in vivo.  The authors review technical developments,
including higher magnetic fields, that have brought breast MRS
to the point of being clinically practical. The authors review very
interesting data on the ability of MRS to diagnose and
characterize breast cancer in a  way that is highly
complementary to breast MRI. In addition, they highlight early
but very promising work using MRS to monitor response to
therapy, emphasizing that biochemical changes associated
with disease response or progression precede anatomical
changes (i.e., a change in tumor size).
Benard and Turcotte [8] from the University of Sherbrooke
review the application of radionuclide imaging to breast
cancer, including both SPECT and PET studies. Radionuclide
imaging has long been used in breast cancer management,
primarily in the form of bone scintigraphy (‘bone scan’) to
detect bone metastases. The authors provide a thorough
CT = computed tomography; FDG = 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PET = positron emission tomogrophy; SPECT =
276 single-photon emission computed tomography.
Page 2
Available online http://breast-cancer-research.com/content/7/6/276
review of SPECT and PET applied to breast cancer
detection, regional lymph node metastasis detection, distant
metastases staging, and therapeutic response assessment
for both primary tumors and metastases. They review results
in primary breast cancer detection with both SPECT and PET
imaging agents, although this application has had only limited
clinical use thus far. They highlight FDG PET for breast
cancer staging and response to therapy, now routinely used
in breast cancer care, emphasizing the complementary use of
FDG PET and anatomical methods for these indications. As
in MRS, the biochemical information provided by radiotracer
imaging provides an early window to identify response to
systemic therapy and may provide a quantitative endpoint for
both clinical practice and clinical trials. The authors review
preliminary studies using experimental radiotracers designed
to image aspects of in vivo breast cancer biology beyond
glucose metabolism and blood flow. This includes SPECT
and PET methods to quantify estrogen receptor expression in
breast cancer in vivo as a predictor of response to hormonal
therapy. Hormonal therapy is perhaps the earliest form of
‘targeted’ cancer treatment, and estrogen receptor PET and
SPECT therefore provide important paradigms for using
imaging to direct breast cancer therapy by assessing the
therapeutic target.
Tromberg, Carussi, Shah, Compton, and Fedyk [10] from the
University of California, Irvine, review developments in optical
imaging applied to breast cancer. They provide a thorough
description of the methodology, emphasizing near-infrared
imaging. They review specific approaches that have been
applied to human breast cancer imaging, including diffuse
optical imaging and diffuse optical spectroscopy. The authors
nicely describe how optical imaging can be used to infer
tissue properties of direct relevance to breast cancer care.
They present early results using a prototype laser breast
scanner to characterize breast lesions and describe a tissue
optical index that indicates the likelihood that a particular
lesion is malignant. Serial measures of optical indices can
also be used to measure response to therapy. The
development of robust, portable, and inexpensive devices
holds great promise for making optical imaging a truly
‘bedside’ diagnostic tool that can contribute significantly to
our ability to treat breast cancer.
It is important to emphasize that these newer imaging
methods are complementary to existing imaging modalities,
such as mammography and computed tomography (CT), and
to each other. Lehman and Schnall emphasize that
mammography and breast MRI have overlapping, but non-
identical, sensitivity for clinically occult breast cancer,
underscoring that the newer method, MRI, is a companion,
not a replacement for, the existing and extensively tested
older modality, mammography [7].  It  is increasingly
recognized that anatomical imaging and functional imaging
work well together; this consideration led to the widespread
use of imaging devices with both PET and CT capability 
(PET/CT) [8]. MRI and MRS can be used together without
changing devices and are already used in combination for
clinical management of some tumors. Bolan and colleagues
[9] suggest compelling indications for the combined use of
MRI and MRS in breast cancer. Preliminary studies show the
complementary nature of PET and MRI in assessing response
to primary systemic therapy [11]. MRS and PET are also likely
to be quite complementary in measuring tumor biochemistry,
since MRS measures biochemical pool sizes and PET
measures the flux between different biochemical pools.
Tromberg and colleagues [10] describe how optical imaging
can be used routinely and repeatedly in the clinic or in the
operating suite in a way that is highly complementary to the
detailed and more geometrically extensive images generated
by the other modalities. They provide specific examples of
how optical imaging and MRI work well together.
A comparison of the 2000 and 2005 Breast Cancer
Research imaging series suggests that we have made
progress in moving newer breast cancer imaging modalities
out of the laboratory and into the clinic; however, we have a
lot more work to do. For applications like MRI and PET that
have recently entered the clinical realm, we will need
outcome and cost-effectiveness studies to decide how best
to use these powerful, but often expensive,  tools. For
MRSand optical imaging, early clinical trials will help direct
the use of these modalities in clinical research and clinical
practice. In many cases, imaging will provide capabilities not
previously available in the clinic, for example, the ability to
assess the therapeutic target serially over the course of
treatment, leading to new approaches for choosing and
monitoring therapy. New treatments, for example, gene
therapy, will need new imaging capabilities, such as imaging
gene expression [2].  Advances in both human and animal
imaging instruments will improve imaging’s role as a facilitator
of research translation. Imaging should serve increasingly as
a tool for quantifying in vivo tumor biology in both animals and
humans and for accelerating the transition from pre-clinical
studies to early clinical trials to routine clinical practice. I look
forward to the next Breast Cancer Research review series
and the opportunity to report on more progress in using
imaging to further our understanding of breast cancer and to
improve the lives of breast cancer patients.
Competing interests
The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.
References
1. Basilion JP: Current and future technologies for breast cancer
imaging. Breast Cancer Res 2001, 3:14-16.
2. Berger F, Gambhir SS: Recent advances in imaging endoge-
nous or transferred gene expression utilizing radionuclide
technologies in living subjects: applications to breast cancer.
Breast Cancer Res 2001, 3:28-35.
3. Leach MO: Application of magnetic resonance imaging to angio-
genesis in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 2001, 3:22-27.
4. Ntziachristos V, Chance B: Probing physiology and molecular
function using optical imaging: applications to breast cancer.
Breast Cancer Res 2001, 3:41-46.  277
Page 3
Breast Cancer Research December 2005 Vol 7 No 6 Mankoff
5. Ronen SM, Leach MO: Imaging biochemistry: applications to
breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 2001, 3:36-40.
6. Schnall MD: Application of magnetic resonance imaging to
early detection of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 2001, 3:
17-21.
7. Lehman CD, Schnall MD: Magnetic resonance imaging of the
breast. Breast Cancer Res 2005, 7:215-219.
8. Benard F, Turcotte E: Imaging breast cancer with signle
photon computed tomography and positron emission tomog-
raphy. Breast Cancer Res 2005, 7:153-162.
9. Bolan BJ, Nelson MT, Yee D, Garwood M: Magnetic resonance
spectroscopy of the breast. Breast Cancer Res 2005, 7:149-
152.
10. Tromberg BJ, Cerussi A, Shah N, Compton M, Fedyk A: Diffuse
optics in breast cancer: detection in pre-menopausal women,
co-registration with MRI, and monitoring neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy. Breast Cancer Res 2005, 7:279-285.
11. Chen X, Moore MO, Lehman CD, Mankoff DA, Lawton TJ,
Peacock S, Schubert EK, Livingston RB: Combined use of MRI
and PET to monitor response and assess residual disease for
locally advanced breast cancer treated with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Acad Radiol 2004, 11:1115-1124.
278
