Page 1
Susan Sharp
Lawyers and Politics
Professor Mark Miller
Final Paper
December 10, 2007 
Environmental Justice:
How disadvantaged communities can achieve environmental equity through
activism, lawsuits and legislation.
Environmental justice is the social movement that deals with disadvantaged
communities as the recipients of unfair environmental burdens. Also referred to as
environmental racism in certain cases, environmental justice strives to provide a fair and
just living environment for all United States citizens. Notoriously difficult to define and
still somewhat controversial, those working towards environmental justice face political
and legal challenges in their quest for equity and protection. This paper will explore the
concept of environmental justice and its birth as a social movement, as well as its role as
a legal concept. Additionally, it will explore the idea of environmental rights and
investigate the efficacy of tactics used by environmental justice groups in court, the
legislatures, and the streets. 
Born in the early 1980’s, the concept of environmental justice merely attaches a
name to a phenomenon that has proliferated for decades: black and/or poor communities
experience environmentally hazardous living situations at a much higher rate than whiter, 
richer areas. These hazards include, but are not limited to, the presence of incinerators, 
landfills, toxic waste, and industries that use heavy metals and chemicals. Often, these
industries locate just yards away from schools and residential areas, posing legitimate, 
dangerous health concerns to entire communities. While this trend may not necessarily
indicate overt racism or classism on behalf of industries or governments, the reality
1
Page 2
reveals structural discrimination at the very least. Communities and neighborhoods of
color have spearheaded the environmental justice movement, with the notable public
interest groups like the Sierra Club joining later. The movement is somewhat disjointed, 
as it operates on local levels with grassroots activism and on national levels with the
Environmental Protection Agency providing grants and support for communities. 
Additionally, some groups focus purely on racial injustice, while others argue that one’s
social class is more likely to influence one’s proximity to environmental hazards. Some
scholars refer to environmental justice solely as environmental racism and others extend
the notion of inequality to other characteristics. While different studies identify different
social factors as the defining characteristic of environmental discrimination, this paper
will consider race and class as the defining characteristics of communities that experience
environmental injustices.
Issues of environmental justice are inevitably complicated by the abstract notion
of racism or classism coupled with concrete environmental hazards. Because the racism
in many cases is often evident from the unfair outcome of seemingly neutral policies, it is
more structural than blatant. Environmental justice has been easily dismissed from courts
and legislatures as no distinct legislation or method of dealing with the unique issues has
been established (Mahoney 1999). The marriage of civil rights and environmental law
necessitated by environmental justice cases has proven somewhat futile in courts, given
the disparity of successful cases in the movements’ 25 years (Eady 2007).
The high, positive correlation between being a person of color in the United States
and living in an area with toxic health threats demonstrates that environmental injustices
often do occur. Statistical evidence substantiates environmental justice claims, as
2
Page 3
“roughly forty percent of the total estimated landfill capacity in the United States, are
located in areas where the population is predominantly African American or Hispanic” 
(Tsao 1992: 1). Additionally, a 1983 report from the U.S. General Accounting Office
found that 75% of neighborhoods around toxic treatment, storage or disposal facilities
(TDSFs) were predominately black and, also, that every neighborhood with a TDSF was
“disproportionately poor” (Atlas 2002: 4; U.S. General Accounting Office 1983). The
landmark 1987 United Church of Christ Study found that populations sharing the same
zip code with a TDSF had twice the minority population than other zip codes, and that
populations sharing zip codes with two or more TDSFs had three times the minorities
(United Church of Christ 1987). A 1992 study of Detroit found that minority populations
increased the closer they resided with respect to TDSFs, and in 1993, a researcher found
that the facilities tended to locate in communities with little demonstrated political
activism (Mohai and Bryant 1992, Hamilton 1995). More studies study have found that
inequity still exists today, including the 2007 follow-up to the first United Church of
Christ study, which found conditions actually worsened for poor people of color in terms
of their likelihood to be subjected to environmental burdens (United Church of Christ
2007). 
In 1994, another study using different census data found that black populations
were no more likely than others to live in areas with TDSFs (Anderton et. al 1994). While
the United Church of Christ study used the larger, more hazardous TDSFs in its
calculations, the Anderton et. al study used any and all facilities. The follow-up study
considered facilities governed by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA),
which, according to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), “control[s] hazardous
3
Page 4
waste from the ‘cradle-to-grave,’” (EPA 2007). The study found that these facilities were
located in mostly white, working class areas with low levels of education, high industrial
employment and modest housing; additionally, in non-urban areas, populations
surrounding TDSFs regulated by RCRA had a higher percentage of black residents
(Anderton and Davidson 2000). Out of many studies on the demographics of those
overburdened by environmental hazards, these two remain the strongest opposition to the
general belief in environmental inequity and injustice espoused by most academic
literature. While other studies have found low-income to be a greater factor than race
when considering likelihood to suffer from environmental injustices, most researchers
agree that disadvantaged neighborhoods are most vulnerable[URL: "#Page4"] 1[URL: "#Page4"] ,2[URL: "#Page4"] ,3.
Because the majority of studies demonstrate the inequitable placement of TDSFs
and hazardous industries near poor or minority communities, one can assume that they
attract perilous industries for various reasons. Businesses may find the path of least
resistance[URL: "#Page4"] 4 in placing toxic industries near communities that lack political clout, whether
be for the color of their skin, cultural heritage, income, age or location. Thiele, a
professor of environmental ethics and policies explains the path of least resistance
through business and politics, as “economic practices are grounded in business efforts to
maximize profits and in the marketing logic that supply creates demand. Politics, 
1 Boer, J. Thomas. et al. “Is there environmental racism? The demographics of hazardous waste in Los
Angeles county.” Social Science Quarterly. 78.4, 1997: found that a higher percentage of minorities, rather
than those with low income resided near TDSFs. 
2 Yandle, Tracy., & Burton, Dudley. “Reexamining environmental justice: A statistical analysis of
historical hazardous waste landfill siting patterns in metropolitan Texas.” Social Science Quarterly. 77.3, 
1996: found low income, white communities live in closest proximity to TDSFs in Texas.
3 Been, Vicki. “Locally undesirable land uses in minority neighborhoods: Disproportionate siting or market
dynamics?” Yale Law Journal, 103.6, 1994: found Hispanic communities to be overburdened by TDSFs, 
and that population levels are comparatively low in these areas
4 The “path of least resistance” is a metaphor for an option that requires the least effort on behalf of an
agent in pursuing goals. It comes from the idea in physics that matter always travels in the way that avoids
struggle, like water flowing downhill. 
4
Page 5
notwithstanding its enduring ideals, often reduces itself to a pandering to the powerful,”
leaving disadvantaged communities with little political power open to exploitation
(Thiele 2000:540) While this “path” may not display racism or classism explicitly, it puts
certain demographics of people at risk more than others. A white, rich, suburban
community may have better opportunities or knowledge in how to organize against these
facilities coming into their neighborhoods; perhaps access to lawyers and politicians
would make such a siting nearly impossible from the beginning. Yet the status quo
permits the continuance of this pattern.
Arguments against environmental racism cite lack of political power and market
forces as the factors that determine where TDSFs will locate (Fisher 1995). Other
hypothesize that perhaps people of color are attracted to industrial areas with low rent, 
areas which tend to also attract landfills, incinerators and other environmental hazardous
industries (Been 1998). More racist claims indicate that people of color are more likely to
smoke, drink, and lead unhealthy lifestyles, thus dooming them to unhealthy lives
anyway. While a plethora of responses could combat such thinking, it is important to
know what opposing sides may think concerning environmental justice.
The rest of this paper will explore environmental justice as a social movement, 
and the legal and political options participants can utilize to achieve equity. Before
discussing the possibility of environmental rights or environmental justice as a legal
concept, one must understand the history and scope of the movement itself. 
Considered “the father of environmental justice” by many, sociologist Robert
Bullard’s work concerning the location of landfills, first in Houston in the late 1970’s and
later in Warren County, North Carolina, became the breeding grounds for a global
5
Page 6
movement (Dickum 2006; Bullard 2000:xiv; Bullard 2004). His book, Dumping in
Dixie, epitomizes the first generation of environmental justice scholars and activists. First
published in 1994 and now in its third edition, the work examines environmental justice
through the lens of racism, and explicates concepts by marrying social and environmental
equity (Bullard 2000). His research in Houston, conducted for the class-action lawsuit
Bean v. Southwestern Waste Management, sought to understand why the landfill would
be located in an unlikely neighborhood of single-family homeowners (482 F. Supp. 673, 
1982). Bullard found that “six of the eight incinerators and fifteen of the seventeen
landfills in Houston, Texas were located in predominantly African-American
communities, even though African-Americans constituted only twenty-eight percent of
Houston's” population, and that the best indicator for why the city chose the particular
neighborhoods probably had to do with its population’s race (Gardenstein-Ross 2003, 
Bullard 2004). The lawsuit was brought forth by residents who claimed that the state’s
issuance of a permit that would allow the landfill to locate in their neighborhood was
somewhat motivated by racial discrimination, in violation of section 1983 (42 U.S.C.S. §
1983); this section, dubbed the “Ku Klux Klan Act,” essentially makes it a crime for
anyone to deprive another person of the rights and privileges granted by the Constitution
(Forsythe)[URL: "#Page6"] 5.
While the Court found that issuing the permit was an inconsiderate act, the case
failed, as the plaintiffs did not cite violation of state law and could not concretely prove
that racial discrimination was behind the state’s decision to permit a waste disposal
facility in proximity of their residences. No state laws existed that would protect
communities from racial discrimination in the state’s placement of noxious industries. 
5 See Bean vs. Southwestern Waste Management Corp., 482 F. Supp. 673 (S.D. Tex. 1979)
6
Page 7
Yet, Bean vs. Southwestern Waste Management Corp. was the first of many
environmental justice cases to come. North Carolina Courts would soon be facing a
multitude of cases of a similar nature (Bullard 2004).
While the case in Houston identified race as a factor in where noxious facilities
might locate, a dispute concerning a landfill in Warren County, North Carolina defined
environmental justice as a social movement (Bullard 2007). Officials connected with the
Warren County PCB landfill could not have anticipated the decades long struggle that
would follow a decision to dump toxic waste gathered from 210 miles of highway
roadsides onto 142 acres adjacent to a primarily black neighborhood in 1982. The highly
toxic PCBs, or polychlorinated biphenyls, originated from "the Raleigh-based Ward
Transfer Company. A Jamestown, New York, trucking operation owned by Robert J. 
Burns obtained PCB-laced oil from the Ward Transfer Company for resale"(Bullard
2000:30). Because the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) had recently imposed a
ban on the resale of such chemicals, the trucking operation faced an economic loss and
decided to dump tens of thousands of gallons of the substance along North Carolina
highways. James B. Hunt, the Governor of North Carolina, dealt with the problem by
burying the waste in the 84% black community of Afton in Warren County (Bullard
2000). While the site selection did not meet scientific and public health criteria as the
landfill was shallow and near local drinking water wells, it also failed to meet public
approval. Over 400 protesters arrived only two weeks after dumping began, and the
project went forward despite that the land use was locally unwanted (Bullard 2004). If
PCBs were to leak into the well water, the community would be faced with daily intake
of a chemical that is persistent and prone to bioaccumulation, meaning the toxics
7
Page 8
persevere and add up through all levels of the food chain, from bacteria, to fish, to
people.
Unfortunately, clean-up of the landfill did not commence until 2002, 20 years
after the dumping started. The safety of the land that once hosted the PCBs remains
questionable, and the government has not provided any reparations to Afton residents
(Bullard 2004). Yet the protests that sprang from the Warren County PCB landfill set the
foundation for a national environmental justice movement. 
From the injustices suffered by those in Warren County, activism blossomed
elsewhere—environmental justice became known as both a civil rights and human rights
issue, and grassroots movements across the country began advocating for those who are
poor, of color, and politically powerless. Groups like West Harlem Environmental Action
Council and the United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice formed, the latter
of which issued a landmark study showing the correlation between race and the proximity
of waste facilities (Huang 2007; Lazarus 1997).
While the Houston landfill case and the situation in Warren County share some
contextual similarities, the strategies used by the respective communities represent
different approaches to achieving environmental justice. In Texas, the neighborhood
received no solution through the law. The case failed in court, and the waste facility
remains in its original location. In North Carolina, the affected citizens engaged in a two-
decade long political protest that resulted in a half-hearted solution. In the coming years, 
other communities would face similar struggles and try different paths toward equitable
solutions. In each case, the scope and lengthiness of the fight brought more attention to
their struggles. While individuals in Afton and Houston suffered from exposure to
8
Page 9
pollutants, their resistance alerted others to environmental inequity, providing language
and a framework with which others could analyze their own unique situations (Bullard
2000). 
Groups located in New York City have defined how the area reacts to
environmental justice claims. Using the language provided by the cases in Afton and
Houston, organizations in Brooklyn and Harlem fought against environmental hazards
located in their neighborhoods beginning in the 1980’s. These two case studies represent
different ways in which communities have fought for their environmental safety while
also demonstrating the somewhat unorganized nature of environmental justice as a social
movement. While Brooklyn and Harlem may appear relatively close on a map, their
struggles remained alarmingly separate, perhaps mirroring the lack of institutional
support on a regional level for instances of environmental injustice. When speaking to
members of the organizations, neither revealed information about environmental justice
beyond their own culturally-defined neighborhood spaces. 
Not related to Bullard’s efforts, a group of concerned citizens of West Harlem in
1987 formed the West Harlem Environmental Action, Inc. (WE ACT) in response to
New York City’s proposal to build a sewage treatment plant by their densely populated
neighborhood’s waterfront. Also opposing a diesel bus depot just yards from a local
school, the group organized grassroots protests and community meetings regarding the
environmental integrity of their neighborhood. Comprised mostly of black women with
multi-generational roots in Harlem, WE ACT used protests to engage activism and public
participation. Several of the areas political representatives were arrested. While group
members attempted to work with officials about the plant’s environmental assaults, they
9
Page 10
eventually realized they had to take legal action, and sued the City of New York. The
lawsuit was not settled for sometime, and residents dealt with foul odors and respiratory
problems from the plant and the bus depot. Incidences of asthma in children rose after the
plant’s opening, while the sewage plant spouted flammable methane gas from pipes. In
1993, the lawsuit reached a settlement of over 1 million dollars, which has been used by
the community to address issues of environmental inadequacy. In this case, legal action
brought some level of justice to the community, giving them the funds with which they
could fight future abuses and remedy the current situation (Huang 2007).
Like in many other environmental justice cases, no legal action employed by WE
ACT and their lawyers prevented the opening of the disputed toxic facilities. The bus
depot deposits fumes into the nearby elementary school continually, and the waste water
treatment plant still functions. As a sort of concession prize, the City built a multi-use
park directly on top of the plant; pipes spouting smelly gases come up from the park
grounds. Now fully ensconced in the principles of environmental justice, other groups
use WE ACT as a model for community involvement and action (Huang 2007).
Meanwhile, a Puerto Rican neighborhood in Brooklyn faced its own environmental
struggles. 
Williamsburg, Brooklyn is just one bridge away from the Lower East Side of
Manhattan, but in the 1980’s it was a world different from its neighbor. Riddled by gang
violence, the now gentrified community found itself also plagued with environmental
hazards. Children from the area were found to have elevated levels of lead in their blood
while asthma and cancer rates rose. A graduate of both a seminary and Harvard Medical
School by the name of Luis Garden Acosta founded El Puente, a community center
10
Page 11
focused on peace and justice, education, environmental justice, medical access, and a
plethora of other human rights issues. Volunteers from El Puente have sought to right
many environmental injustices suffered by community members in the past 20 years, 
winning several struggles through political activism (Garden Acosta 2007).
The organization successfully blocked the construction of a 55 foot tall
incinerator in the Brooklyn Navy Yard in collaboration with the New York Public
Interest Research Group, who provided resources and filed a lawsuit meant to stop the
city from obtaining special permits that would allow its construction. Garden Acosta
organized thousand-person marches and called on the area’s Puerto Rican politicians to
join them in solidarity; these state congressmen, influenced by Garden Acosta, introduced
legislation that would prohibit incinerators like the one proposed from opening within a
designated distance from schools. Meanwhile, government officials tried to find a way to
continue its construction, despite the new Clean Air Act provisions soon to take effect in
1992. The incinerator was so large in scope that it was expected to significantly worsen
air quality in the area, despite an already elevated level. The case screams environmental
injustice, as its planned location was surrounded by dense residential areas, and several
schools. The combination of physical, take it to the streets activism with strategic
lawsuits and political measures meant a success for the teams of El Puente. New York’s
Governor Pataki signed a bill into law in 1996 that would prohibit the incinerator’s
construction—the same bill that Garden Acosta’s allies in the state legislature drafted
(Garden Acosta 2007).
The use of multiple avenues of action resulted in the favorable outcome of the
incinerator debacle. Since that victory, the crew of El Puente has been fighting Radiac, a
11
Page 12
radioactive chemical storage facility located in Williamsburg. Although located within
the community since 1969, its threat came to the forefront of community consciousness
when children from the El Puente after school program found barrels of chemical waste
in what they thought was an abandoned building next door to their apartment building
and on the same block as their school. Since New York City Mayor Bloomberg’s closure
of the nearest fire station, the potential for danger has risen. The constant presence of
extremely poisonous and combustible barrels in reach of children has provided the
community with ammunition against the company’s location. The community now awaits
a New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) hearing that
will decide whether or not Radiac will remain open (Garden Acosta 2007).
WE ACT and El Puente represent community action organizations comprised
mostly of minorities who are concerned about their living environment. By coupling
street protests with legal (and in El Puente’s case, also legislative) action, and by joining
forces with more powerful, established public interest groups that have access to
attorneys, the groups have managed to rectify several environmental injustices. Both
operate from the grassroots, questioning the placement of hazards in their neighborhoods; 
they have a point—the potential for an incinerator or sewage treatment plant to locate on
the Upper East Side is close to nothing. 
While the Warren County PCB landfill epitomizes the struggle faced by
disadvantaged communities in combating hazardous and locally unwanted land uses
(LULUs), the examples of WE ACT and El Puente express the potential for community
organization and action. Even small bits of progress reduce injustice. It is important to
note that in the cases presented, political or legal action was used to achieve justice. WE
12
Page 13
ACT and El Puente managed to obtain pro-bono lawyers from larger public interest
groups. Questions of access to justice rise when considering that poor or otherwise
disadvantaged communities might not know how to find legal help, let alone contact the
most appropriate groups. 
Principles and Philosophy behind Environmental Justice
The principles and philosophy behind environmental justice were very much
shaped by Bullard and the activism inspired by the happenings in Warren County in the
early 1980’s. Scholars and activists working with Bullard held a conference completely
devoted to environmental justice in which individuals could present their work, share
their stories, and work together to solidify the movement as a national force (Bullard
2000). 
That conference, the First National People of Color Environmental Leadership
Summit (FNPCELS) of 1991 composed environmental justice principles, providing a
framework for the social movement (See Appendix 1 for the full list). The principles
acknowledge “the interdependence of all species, and the right to be free from ecological
destruction” first and foremost, indicating ecology and environmental sanctity as their
priority, while the second principle calls for respectful and just policies that are “free
from any form of discrimination or bias” (FNPCELS 1991). While these two principles
summarize the core of environmental justice concerns, the others go into more detail
about sustainability, wastefulness, protection from nuclear testing, hazardous waste and
toxic work environments, and “the fundamental right to clean air, land, water and food” 
(FNPCELS 1991). Additionally, some principles stray from strict environmental justice
issues to offer support to other issues, as they oppose medical testing on people of color
13
Page 14
and military occupation. I believe the framers added these peripheral principles so that if
society were to implement them, any form of environmental injustice would be
impossible to achieve. 
These principles center on notions of sustainability equality, nonviolence, 
tolerance, accountability and the right to a clean environment. The demand to halt all
production of noxious chemicals establishes that those at the Summit did not wish to
place an environmental burden on anyone else and that cultural appreciation and respect
should go both ways. While I believe the collective writers could have assumed a
chastising, vengeful or otherwise negative tone, the principles remain committed to
human rights for all. The principles inspire empowerment rather than evoke
victimization. Their belief in justice does not stop at political or geographic boundaries, 
either. 
In referencing the UN and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the main
beliefs propose that international principles have already designated environmental rights
as valid, unalienable rights, thus suggesting that domestic law should adapt to and respect
these rights; the right to a livable environment transcends the law and exists despite its
nonappearance in legal doctrine. It seems to me that the lack of references to laws in the
United States illustrates the real absence of legal protection from environmental
discrimination. The existing laws that do tackle related issues are also omitted, thereby
showing that the legal status quo does not fully attend to environmental inequities. 
Interestingly, the thirteenth principle regards informed consent for medical
testing. While seemingly unrelated to environmental justice from the surface, the
movement’s marriage with social and human rights must have given the drafters a sense
14
Page 15
of obligation to consider racial discrimination in medical testing. According to Anthu
Huang of WE ACT, birth control researchers in conjunction with some doctors
performed early tests of birth control on many unknowing black women during its
developmental stages (Huang 2007). Basically, black women were used as lab rats by
their doctors, uninformed and unaware that they were taking birth control. While this
incident exposes racism in terms of how doctors view black women’s reproductive
habits, it also represents the lack of self-determination experienced by minorities, thus
affirming the fifth principle.
The principles are not law. They have no power on their own. Their strength is in
that disadvantaged people can look to them as a framework for evaluating one’s own
context. Additionally, their pronouncement that everyone has a right to a healthy
environment backs up those who fail in environmental justice cases based on failure to
cite specific violated statutes and laws (Mahoney 1999). If courts recognized the right to
a healthy environment, environmental injustices could probably win more cases.
The Right to a Healthy Environment?
The possibility for the right to a healthy environment is questionable; might these
rights already covered under the right to life? Is it appropriate to add environmental rights
as a consideration now, or might other potential new rights be more important? What are
the advantages and disadvantages of recognizing environmental rights?
An environment that poses health threats to those who reside in it can interfere
with right to life. If one’s environmental conditions are so hazardous that it can cause a
terminal illness, it violates one’s right to lift. However, many health issues caused by
poor environmental conditions simply agitate the quality of life. These would not be
15
Page 16
accounted for under the right to life, and thus that right alone is not sufficient to ensure
environmental health. While some academics do indeed “contend that high pollution
levels violate an individual's right to bodily integrity …others claim that U.S. citizens
have a constitutional right to enjoy a clean environment. Although courts have repeatedly
rejected the contention that the Constitution provides citizens with environmental rights, 
the arguments supporting the constitutional claim also provide policy support for the
rights-based justification” of federal intervention in environmental matters (Gardenstein-
Ross 2003). 
Providing our society with constitutional environmental rights would
accomplish several tasks, including “recognition of the importance a society attaches to
environmental protection…, promote[s] the coordination of environmental protection
measures within a jurisdiction [and]…between states (Hayward 2005:6).” An additional
advantage “that follows from addressing environmental concerns at the constitutional
level is that environmental protection need not depend on narrow majorities in legislative
bodies…[and] it can help foster citizen involvement in environmental protection
measures” (Haywood 2005: 6). These benefits would aide in the governance of
environmental policies while making a symbolic statement about environmentalism’s
role in our society. Meanwhile, it would make justice easier to achieve in environmental
equity cases, as plaintiffs would need to show their environmental rights were abused, 
rather than find specific state and/or federal statutes that had been violated. Additionally, 
such a measure would require corporate and governmental accountability for
environmental insults, no matter who bears the burden. Other justifications for using
environmental rights as a tool of intervention include protecting bodily harm, maintaining
16
Page 17
environmental standards for future generations and protecting groups from discrimination
(Gardenstein-Ross 2003).
When considering the possibility for the inclusion of new rights, its existence as a
genuine right must be proven. Two theories for analyzing the true, legitimate need for
rights. First, there is the concept of fundamentally moral rights that exist for all humans
whether or not they are codified into law (Haywood 2005: 36). The First National People
of Color Environmental Leadership Summit of 1991 viewed environmental rights in this
manner as evidenced by their statement of their existence without being legally
recognized. The second theory espouses that rights can only be judged from the context
of human institutions. Without rights being signed and implemented by jurisdictions, they
cannot exist and remain rhetorical ideas rather than natural law (Hayward 2005: 36). This
is the stance the courts have taken in environmental justice cases in the past, citing the
lack of any existing law. If no codified law was broken, environmental justice plaintiffs
could not win. Therefore, constitutionally protecting environmental rights would bring
the concept of the right into a valid form for most theorists, law practitioners and courts, 
thereby giving communities and individuals the tools needed to find legal remedies for
their specific environmental issues (Haywood 2005).
While protecting environmental rights via the Constitution would inevitably bring
challenges in its implementation into the real world, the advantages of its protective
capacity could seriously and significantly aide those who are overburdened by
environmental assaults while ensuring the preservation of our surroundings for future
generations. Some legislative and organizational actions have been taken in order to
protect citizens from unclean environments, but none of date has achieved an adequate
17
Page 18
level of environmental equity. Victories still happen, but they require action from the
ground paralleled with political and legal initiatives.
Because small, local struggles, embedded in their region’s social and political
structures generally comprise the environmental justice movement, activists and citizens
have explored a variety of methods of achieving justice. Unfortunately, most approaches
do not speak to the fundamental causes that contribute to environmental injustice, 
including, as Mahoney, one time editor of the Cardoza Law Review reveals, “ingrained
and often unconscious racist attitudes influence decisions involving site cleanup, burdens
of proof in environmental justice lawsuits, and the focus and scope of environmental
legislation. In addition, economic considerations lead to complex trade-offs for affected
communities, forcing a difficult choice between improved environmental quality and
economic development” (Mahoney 1999:364).
Environmental Justice Strategies
Several litigation strategies have been developed by environmental justice
lawyers (Roberts 1998). Groups have used Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 in
bringing corporations and governments to court. Title VI prohibits federal funded
programs from discriminating against race or national origin, and theoretically could be
used in preventing toxic waste facilities or other environmental harmful industries from
locating in predominately minority areas. However, in the case of Guardians v. Civil
Service Commission of New York (463 U.S. 582, 1983) “a 5-4 majority of the Supreme
Court held that a private party could bring suit for prospective relief to enforce Title VI
regulations that prohibited disparate racial impact” (Fisher 1995). The Court has not ruled
on what constitutes adequate burden of proof, but lower Federal Courts have used very
18
Page 19
strict evidentiary approach based on Title VII, which is only arguably applicable to VI
(Fisher 1995). In order for an environmental justice plaintiff to successfully use Title VI, 
he or she must prove disparity, prove impact, and provide the least restrictive, feasible, 
non-discriminatory alternative for the industry in question. While Title VI provides
declarative and injunctive relief, plaintiffs may not receive damages unless they can
prove intentional discrimination. Communities exposed to environmental burdens must
also choose between filing and administrative complaint and filing a lawsuit on the basis
of Title VI. Lawsuits, while more effective in settling disputes, are more expensive to
employ. Conversely in filing administrative complaints, the EPA can revoke funding
from the agency in question, but cannot pay relief, damages or attorney fees (Meyers
2000). While minority grassroots groups may have mistrust in the legal system, Title VI
can provide them with an opportunity to forge a connection between social and
environmental rights (Fisher 1995).
Others have used the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment in
environmental justice litigation. While the clause has been used as the basis for many
racial discrimination cases, those that deal with environmental justice have not seen much
success (Roberts 1998: 236). In Washington v. Davis, the Supreme Court ruled that the
plaintiffs must show discriminatory intent to succeed in racial discrimination cases using
the Equal Protection Clause (426 U.S. 229, 1976). Because many environmental justice
cases are the result of inherent or structural racism rather than overt discrimination, the
use of the Equal Protection Clause is rendered nearly useless. While multiple cases have
been able to show that certain decisions would disproportionately effect poor
19
Page 20
communities or communities of color, few have been able to prove intentional
discrimination in court (Roberts 1998).
Some cases have found success using the Fair Housing Act (Title VIII of the Civil
Rights Act) when public housing and environmental hazards collide. Prior court decisions
have demonstrated that plaintiffs need only show the discriminatory effect of a proposed
plan, at which point the burden shifts to the defendant to disprove the effect. In Houston
v. City of Cocoa, the court allowed a complaint from plaintiffs that commercial zoning
brought noises, odors and noxious gases to a predominately black residential area (89-82-
CIV-ORL-19, Meyers 2000).
While uses of the Equal Protection Clause, Title VI and Title VIII have brought
limited success in court, newer statutes and regulations could provide legal relief to
sufferers on environmental injustice. Then Senator Al Gore (D-TN) and Senator John
Lewis (D-GA) introduced legislation in 1992 that targeted environmental justice by
incorporating minority participation and “enforcement resources” in “high impact” areas
subjected to certain environmental strains. While determined, and certainly on the right
path, the legislation failed early in debated given its unique nature at the time (Meyers
2000). 
Two years later, President Clinton’s implementation of environmental and social
statutes aimed to aide those fighting environmental justice causes. His order 1994
Executive Order 12898, Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority
Populations and Low-Income Populations, required federal agencies to make
environmental justice part of their strategy and mission, and also demanded that the EPA
create a Working Group on Environmental Justice (Steinberg 2000). By explicitly stating
20
Page 21
that environmental justice must be considered by agencies, Clinton removed the
opportunity for biased environmental impact statements required by 42 U.S.C. § 4321. 
This section, established in 1969 by President Nixon, required agencies to consider the
environmental effects of new strategies and policies. While the statue demanded
environmental responsibility of government projects, it does not account for social or
public health ramifications (Steinberg 2000). Clinton’s Order not only demanded
government accountability for class and race in environmental issues, but also brought
these inequity issues to the attention of the mainstream environmental public interest
groups. Additionally, the Executive Order stresses the importance of diversity and
community participation in environmental justice issues, catering to the First National
People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit’s 17 principles. 
After the implementation of Clinton’s 1994 Executive Order, organizations like
the Sierra Club followed the government’s course of action and incorporated
environmental justice into their missions and created their own departments. Though it
took over 10 years for their formation, these departments can provide legal counsel and
services to communities. Some of the most successful environmental justice victories
(like El Puente’s success in halting incinerator construction) utilized these resources. Of
course, with the notion of representation come issues of access to justice. While some
well-organized communities no doubt can find and use these resources, many rural
communities may not know of their existence. Even for those who find and utilize legal
resources, environmental justice is rarely a specialty of either environmentally or
socially-oriented organizations (Bullard 2007).
21
Page 22
The marriage of environmental and social issues once again becomes problematic
concerning issues of legal representation. Earthjustice (formerly the Sierra Club Legal
Defense Fund) is a non-profit, pro-environment public interest firm founded by two
lawyers who worked for the Sierra Club (Earthjustice.org 2007). While their website lists
environmental justice as a concern, under their “victories” section in which successful
cases are documented and displayed, only one environmental justice case appeared. Most
cases from the firm that dealt with public health issues concerned large-scale facilities
proposed to open in less vulnerable communities than those that typify environmental
justice cases. The victory provided by Earthjustice referred to the passage of an
amendment to the EPA’s budget that would prevent funds from being spent in a manner
that could conflict with the Executive Order No. 12898; while the amendment indeed
facilitates environmental justice, it does not involve a court case, meaning that one of the
nation’s most powerful environmental law firms has yet to win an environmental equality
case in court (Earthjustice.org 2007).
I assume the prestige associated with a firm like Earthjustice is probably greater
than that of other environmental non-profit firms. Because the environmental protection
movement, aside from environmental equality stream, has been spearheaded by white, 
upper-middle class people, perhaps it lowers the chances for poor people of color to have
access to legal services from such firms. While big environmental firms would probably
not be overtly racist, their policies and traditions might not cater to the communities
affected by environmental burdens and injustices. Or perhaps the members of vulnerable
communities might not be comfortable working with prestigious environmental lawyers. 
Either way, I think the rather white, homogeneous history of the environmental protection
22
Page 23
movement might not mesh well with the ethnically and racially diverse neighborhoods
that could use legal assistance. Others, including Yang, a professor at Vermont Law
School argue that organizations like the Sierra Club have expressed blatant racism at
times, as anti-immigrant political positions demonstrate “strong nativist and racist
overtones” that “might be explained by self-interested concern for the environment over
other people” (Yang 2002: 152). Now, however, it is becoming less acceptable for
organizations to blatantly favor their issues over the wellbeing of the public (Yang 2002).
Perhaps organizations that have roots in social matters first would be better equipped to
handle issues of environmental equality.
The Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights under Law, which describes itself as “a
private, nonprofit, nonpartisan legal organization formed at the request of President John
F. Kennedy in 1963,” names environmental justice as one of its six project areas. The
environmental justice department was formed in 1991, before the passing of Clinton’s
Executive Order, indicating that as a nonprofit law firm, it was ahead of the trends (Yang
2002). This committee also participates in a newer form of resistance to environmental
injustice: altering the political and legal climate that allows disproportionate locations to
occur (Roberts 1998). By commenting on the EPA’s drafts of environmental justice
policy and sending in amicus briefs to relevant court cases, the committee helps foster a
climate receptive to the needs of poor and low income communities, rather than reacting
to cases after incidences occur. The committee also successfully reached a settlement
with a housing project and the EPA that facilitated the relocation of 160 primarily black
families from a housing project located on a superfund site (or a land parcel designated
by the government as extremely toxic and hazardous to one’s health) to new housing. 
23
Page 24
While the Lawyer’s Committee has achieved some successes, it is important to note that
their website includes a plea for donations. 
Because many communities facing environmental burdens are poor, they are often
disadvantaged in court, as their relative lack of resources compared to their polluting
opponents renders them less powerful. While companies who own and operate polluting
industries and businesses (TDSFs) have money to bring expert testimony and expensive
lawyers to court, burdened communities generally find whatever legal help is available, 
but can use their numbers of people to bring the protest to the streets (Cole 1992).
Luke Cole, a lawyer for the California legal Assistance Foundation argues that
protests on the streets may actually be in vulnerable communities’ interest, as their sheer
amount of people might be their most powerful tool, as opposed to the industry’s money. 
By inciting greater public interest in specific instances of environmental injustice, 
communities may be able to achieve their goals through political activism better than
through the courts (Cole 1992). Cole is one of the few true environmental justice cause
lawyers that focus on the dual issues of social and environmental justice. He is devoted
enough to have press releases concerning his temper at meetings of the National
Environmental Justice Action Council, a group of concerned agents consisting of mostly
lawyers, and the EPA (Hansen 2000). His work focuses on bringing justice through
empowerment of low-income and minority communities; with power comes the ability to
better fight against those with money (Cole 1992). Neighborhoods are rich in manual
labor, so Cole argues they should utilize their most prevalent resource in acting against
polluting agencies. This seems somewhat intuitive, but given the general resistance of
lawyers to activism on the streets, Cole is a unique cause lawyer. He has a multitude of
24
Page 25
books concerning struggles for environmental justice, as is often cited by his colleagues. 
If Robert Bullard is deemed “the father of environmental justice”, than I would deem
Cole the “father of environmental justice lawyering”.
Ultimately, communities who experience disproportionate levels of environmental
hazards will face many obstacles if they decide to fight in the courts or on the streets. If
faced with the prospect of an environmental burden moving into one’s community, action
should be taken at all levels. The experiences of WE ACT in West Harlem and El Puente
in Brooklyn demonstrate that a multi-faceted approach to activism will probably get the
best results. Using Cole’s ideas of public interest and resources on the streets in
conjunction with more targeted political pressure and lawsuits using the statutes best
suited for a local context would provide the most cohesive response to an environmental
threat. Because no singular agency regulates the environmental justice movement, 
communities can expect to find some level of difficulty acquiring legal resources and
aide. The movement’s lack of solidarity beyond the academic realm provides challenges
for those who experience environmental injustices. While older legislation has curbed
some effects and has pointed public interest to the matter, environmental justice has been
largely untouched in today’s political arenas and courts. For groups to get the protection
they need to retain a healthy environment, legislation that effectively bridges
environmental and social justice law must be drafted and passed. Until there is some legal
precedence for environmental equity, groups will continue to suffer. 
Works Cited and Principles of Environmental Justice attached.
25
