Attack of The Pod Monster! 
In 2005 the term “podcast” was crowned Word of the Year by the New Oxford American Dictionary. According to the New Oxford American Dictionary, podcasting is defined as “a digital recording of a radio broadcast or similar program, made available on the internet for downloading to a personal audio player.” The expression was originally fashioned by journalist Ben Hammersley and evolved from marrying the terms “broadcasting” and “iPod.” The first appearance of this term was in the February 12, 2004 edition of The Guardian. Hammersley used the word “podcast” as a synonym for audio blogging or amateur internet radio, and the work really stuck.
The rising success of the podcast can be linked to the fact that anyone can produce one as long as they have an idea, microphone, computer, the proper software, and access to the internet. In an article in published by the Pew Internet & American Life Project in April of 2005, Madden found that “more than 22 million American adults own iPods or MP3 players and 29% of them have downloaded podcasts from the Web so that they could listen to audio files at a time of their choosing.”  The current booming popularity of podcasting owes a lot of its credit to blogs. Soon after the birth of the internet, weblogs began to appear. Blogging became a popular way for people to express their thoughts and feelings on the internet in a very casual format. Blogs have surfaced on anything from daily diaries to politics. In the past few years blogging has truly earned its status as a very fashionable and legitimate medium. Blogs have allowed for anyone to turn into a professional social commentator. Sharing your thoughts with the world is just one click away with a blog. Podcasting was a natural evolution from this online forum.
With the creation of news feed technology called RSS, the capability to transfer large chunks of information and rapid connection speeds led some bloggers to launch audio blogs. Instead of typing out their rants and raves, they recorded themselves speaking and posted it to their blogs as an MP3 file. The fact that you could actually hear someone speaking their thoughts really added a new personal element to the blogging medium. I really believe that these very first audio blogs were some of the first podcasts in history. 
According to how-to-podcast-tutorial.com, the issue with audio blogs was that listeners had to inconveniently check for new mp3 files on a regular basis, download them from the website, and then manually sync them to their mp3 players. A man named Adam Curry eventually made this process a little easier. He wrote the first podcatcher software which checked for new updates, read the file enclosure to see where to go, and automatically downloaded the audio file. The MP3 was then automatically transferred to an iPod. MP3 players have played a real role in the natural progression of podcasting as well. MP3 players have allowed for the compression of audio files small enough to be transferred on-line and stored on small devices. Due to the popularity of the iPod, I can’t walk five feet to ten feet through campus without seeing another student locked and loaded with their MP3 files! 
Podcasts have generally met the needs of anyone wanting to share their creativity with the world along with listeners who want something new and different to load their MP3 players with. With a quick internet search you can pretty much find a podcast on literally anything you want. According to findpodcasts.com, the most popular podcasts include categories such as arts, business and finance, comedy, computers and internet, education and learning, entertainment and movies, health and fitness, home and hobbies, kids and teens, music, news and media, politics and government, radio, religion and philosophy, society and culture, and last but not least sports and leisure. 
Of these categories, I found that networks have really jumped onto the podcasting bandwagon and for good reason too. In an article published by the American Journalism Review titled “iPod, You Pod, We All Pod” published in March of 2006, “National Public Radio and its member stations offer almost 200 different podcasts, from short newscasts to long-form programs” (Potter, p.1). CBS offers features and commentaries, ABC offers highlights from “Nightline” and “Good Morning America”, and NBC offers the “Nightly News” and “Meet the Press” commercial free. Broadcasters aren’t the only ones who have begun to dabble into the podcasting world. Many of America’s newspapers have joined the technology frontier as well. For example, according to the Potter (2006) article, The Denver Post offers a podcast that is produced and voiced by college journalism majors who provide a summary of the paper’s top Web stories.
I love and am a big fan of podcasts. What better way to listen to your favorite shows on the run? I found the variety of podcasts available to us with just a few key strokes away mind-blowing! According to an article titled “Podcasts to Hatch” published in the February 2007 issue of Media Week, there are around 90,000 podcasts available on the Web and close to 90 million iPods in the market. In doing my research I came across a variety of very interesting and different podcasts. For example, according to NASA.gov, one day before landing the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS-114 Mission Specialist Steve Robinson transmitted the first podcast from space. If you visit the website you can listen to the podcast, read the manuscript of the podcast, and even view pictures of the mission. 
Another interesting podcast that I came across was a paranormal podcast from ghostvillage.com. In digging deeper into this podcast I found that Apple iTunes offers more than one thousand paranormal podcasts. For example, there is a podcast of the San Fransisco Ghost Society talk show that is led by the group founder Tommy Netzband. Following the same type of podcast genre, I ran across a podcast titled “Mondo Bizarro: Reports From Our Weird Wide World.” This podcast can be found at johnnyanonymous.podomatic.com. The weekly show provides you with “bizarre news, amazing useless facts, and reports that you won’t find in any of our mainstream Radio, Newspaper, or TV.” Their website claims that all the presented news, reports and facts are 100% true and genuine, but after listening to bits and pieces of the shows myself, like all other things you find on the internet many of the claims should be taken with a grain of salt. Nonetheless, the show is very entertaining and is a great light hearted alternative to the daily news.
Last but not least, in doing my research I came across a podcast in which I found very commendable. According to the July issue of The Asha Leader Online, in June of 2007 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and ASHA collaborated to produce a podcast about early hearing detection and intervention. The podcast can be found on the CDC and ASHA websites. The podcast stresses the importance of having every child who doesn’t pass the newborn hearing test screening to seek a diagnostic hearing evaluation within three months of birth. The podcast includes information for both parents and health providers on the importance of early diagnosis and intervention service. I thought this was a great idea on behalf of both of the producers. It’s a great way to get the word out for a good cause by taking advantage of a hot new medium. 
I have to admit that before I actually started doing my research on podcasting I thought I knew everything there was to know about the topic, and boy was I wrong! I was completely unaware of the multitude of new users and categories of podcasts available. Podcasting is the hot new medium and as communication scholars it is our duty to stay informed and on top of the game with any new media sources available to us. After doing my research I’ve found that podcasting has a lot more depth and information that meets the eye. I’ve yet to formulate my own podcast, but after listening to some of the “Mondo Bizarro” podcast I believe something has definitely sparked my interest! 
Jody Elrod
Topic Paper #1
Podcasting 
1 | Page
