Community Impact Newspaper; January 2007
Deregulation diversifies consumer energy choices
Written by Mandy Hobby Sunday, 07 January 2007 
Costs rise since competitive market inception
As of Jan. 1, customers in the Electric Reliability Council of Texas’ servicing area, including Round Rock and Pflugerville, will not see the “price to beat” at the top of the competitive retail market’s price ceiling.
The state’s electric restructuring law dissolves the “price to beat,” the benchmark for competitive electricity retail pricing.
According to Terry Hadley, the Public Utility Commission of Texas communications director, previously there was a price ceiling setting the maximum rate for residential customers, but now, electricity prices will be completely deregulated. 
Competitive Retail Energy
In 1999, Texas legislators passed a law to deregulate energy costs and create a competitive energy retail market beginning Jan. 1, 2002. ERCOT, based in Taylor, is a nonprofit council that operates the electric grid or highway of electricity delivery. The council is subject to oversight by the PUC and the Texas legislature. According to Hadley, it is designed to ensure electricity gets to where it is needed. ERCOT’s grid covers 75 percent of Texas over 200,000 square miles. 
The council was created to be the central registration agent for retail choice when legislators initiated the competitive retail market in 1999. 
Hadley is one of the many employees at the PUC working to ensure that energy customers in areas like Round Rock and Pflugerville are protected in the competitive retail energy market.
Round Rock and Pflugerville are in ERCOT’s jurisdiction and have a choice of retail electric providers. Austin and San Antonio, on the other hand, are still part of a regulated entity with fixed electricity rates.
“Before 2002, all electricity in Texas was fully-regulated by an entity with a fixed rate,” Hadley said. “By giving customers a choice, you can create better prices than regulated prices. It’s just like gas or clothes; you need to go to different places to get the best value.”
Hadley advises consumers to be aware of the terms of service, the length of the contract, the level of reliability and customer service. 
“The challenge is to get people to make that first leap and shop around,” Hadley said. “For deregulation to work, you have to shop just like you are shopping for a cell phone.”
Retail electric providers like TXU and Reliant are able to compete for business by offering lower prices, renewable energy options and benefits or incentives. Hadley reminds that even though customers have an option when shopping for electricity, they still receive the same service and reliability during a blackout or problem because one entity manages the service. The only thing that is different is the providers’ costs.
Renewable Energy
Even though only about three percent of the state’s total power consumption comes from renewable energy like wind, sun and landfill gas, 90 percent of that renewable energy is generated from wind power. The majority of Texas’ electricity comes from plants that burn natural gas or coal, but since the first commercial wind farm was built in West Texas in 1995, the demand for alternative energy has grown with the population.
“Renewable energy generally costs more,” Hadley said. “When you choose an energy retail provider that uses renewable energy, it doesn’t mean that that’s what you are getting sent to your house.”
Hadley explains that choosing Gexa Energy or Green Mountain Energy Company means the provider guarantees to purchase a specific amount or percentage of non-polluting energy.
Wind Turbines Manufactured Locally
TECO/Westinghouse, a leading manufacturer of electric motors and generators, signed a Strategic Alliance Agreement with Composite Technology Corporation Nov. 27. The partnership calls for TECO to begin manufacturing wind turbines in Round Rock for distribution in the North American market and will create 150 new jobs. 
The alliance provides for local manufacturing in Texas, the state that now generates the largest amount of wind power.
“It is an important day when one of the city’s employers is able to expand and diversify their business,” Round Rock Mayor Nyle Maxwell said. “This advanced product will cause there to be no interruption in the transmission of electricity; it will transfer directly to the power grid.”
Round Rock’s Support
The Round Rock City Council approved a resolution at their Dec. 7 meeting to support new power plants built in Texas that use advanced technology to reduce emissions. 
Round Rock is participating in the Early Action Compact, an agreement to reduce ozone pollution and bring the region into compliance with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency air quality standards. The city’s economic development depends on the EPA for cooperation when building additional roads and highways.
“The resolution affirms our commitment that we do need good, reliable energy for our continued economic viability, but we also need clean air as well, and they [EPA] have got the technology to do this,” Alan McGraw, Mayor pro tem, said.
ENERGY rates for residential consumers using 1000 kwh/month
TXU price to beat
Lowest Market Competitor
Austin Energy
Dec. 2001*
$91.78
$80.67
Dec. 2002
86.60
$80.00
71.59
Dec. 2003
100.60
88.00
76.50
Dec. 2004
109.80
88.50
81.81
Dec. 2005
150.00
129.00
81.81
*Before deregulation.
In 2002, energy costs were deregulated for more than 75 percent of Texas consumers, including Round Rock and Pflugerville. Cities like Austin and San Antonio still operate energy services under a regulated municipality with a fixed rate. The chart compares the price to beat rates of TXU, a deregulated provider, lowest market rates and Austin Energy, a regulated provider.
Municipalities vs. the Competitive Market:
According to the Public Utility Commission of Texas, the price to beat is by design a high price because it gives retail energy providers the ability to offer competitive prices. A municipality like Austin Energy typically has lower rates because of government subsidies and tax abatements.
How to shop online for a retail electric provider:
Step 1: Log onto  [URL: "http://www.powertochoose.org"]www.powertochoose.org 
Step 2: Enter the zip code of your home or business 
Step 3: Select search for residential or business rates 
Step 4: While shopping remember to look for the terms of service, the price per kwh and renewable energy options
Winter Energy-Saving Tips
what you can do
to save up to
Install a programmable thermostat
$100 a year
Take short showers instead of baths
$28 a year
Close vents in unused rooms
$100 a year
Clean dryer lint filter every time you use the dryer
$66 a year
Cover windows on winter nights with insulated curtains
$24 a year
Wrap the hot water heater in an insulation blanket
$20 a year
other tips
Set your thermostat at 68 degrees in the winter. 
Use compact fluorescent light bulbs. 
Lower the thermostat on your hot water heater to 115 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Wash only full loads of dishes and clothes. 
Clean and replace filters on furnaces once a month or as needed. 
Caulk and weather-strip windows and exterior doors. 
Set ceiling fans on reverse to re-circulate heat that would otherwise build up near the ceiling.
Understanding Your Electricity Bill
Charges most likely to appear on your bill:
Customer charges: flat fee applied monthly regardless of amount of kilowatt hours used. Fee covers meter reading, equipment and customer service. 
Recurring charges: itemizes any recurring charges other than for electric service. 
Non-recurring charges: late fees, returned check fees or restoration of service fees. 
Total current charges: balances from the preceding bill, payments made since the preceding bill, total amount due and a checkbox for customer to voluntarily donate money to bill payment 
assistance program. 
New services or products: obvious notice of any new products or services being provided to the customer since the previous bill. 
Changes in rates: any change in the customer’s rates or charges due to a variable rate feature in the Terms of Service contract. 
Fuel charge: charge that allows the electric retail provider to recover the cost of fuel used to generate electricity. This charge is regulated by the Public Utility Commission for retail providers. 
Late payment penalty: a one-time penalty not more than 5 percent may be charged on a delinquent bill. 
City sales tax
Source: Public Utility Commission of Texas
