Oct 11, 19:56
Iran's state English language Press TV
"The Islamic Republic of Iran has rejected U.S. accusations of the country plotting to assassinate the Saudi envoy to Washington as a prefabricated scenario."
Oct 11, 22:25 (Tehran time)
Islamic Republic News Agency called the plot a “US new propaganda campaign against Iran”
Oct 11, 15:30
Foreign Ministry spokesman Ramin Mehmanparast 
“These old-fashioned behaviors are based on the long-standing hostile American-Zionist policies and are ridiculous show in line with scenarios to provoke division" 
“Designers of such prefabricated scenarios seek to create divisions and help the Zionist regime get of isolation."
Oct 11, Night
Mohammad Khazaee, Iran's permanent representative to the United Nations
"shocked to hear such a big lie"
"insult to the common sense"
Decried the United States' "warmongering and propaganda machine against Iran," which he said threatened stability and peace in the Persian Gulf.
"The Islamic Republic of Iran strongly and categorically rejects these fabricated and baseless allegations, based on the suspicious claims by an individual”
Oct 11
Ramin Mehmanparast, spokesman for Iran's foreign ministry
Said U.S. allegations were baseless, noting that Iran's relations with Saudi Arabia are "based on mutual respect."
"Making such false allegations will not get anywhere and will not influence public opinion." 
Oct 11, in China
Ahmadzadeh Kermani, head of Iran's Cultural Heritage, Handicrafts and Tourism Organization
"We are Eastern [countries] not Western ones, but we believe in dialogue with the West and believe that we outweigh them in civilizational and cultural matters."
Added that Iran, China and India could be good representatives for introducing the cultural capacities of the East.
Oct 11, Tehran, 11:55 gmt
Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi
new anti-Iran scenario initiated by the US was "clumsy." 
"Of course, our friends in the Persian Gulf region are familiar with these devilish conspiracies"
Added that Washington for its unfounded allegation against Iran will be compelled to apologize to Tehran
About Tehran's relations with Riyadh, Salehi said: "We enjoy good ties with Saudi Arabia." He added that if there were differences between the two countries' views, they would be related to the international issues not bilateral relations.
Further warned the West of its anti-Iran policies, underlining that the Islamic Republic of Iran is well capable of making good on them. 
Oct 11
Iranian Foreign Ministry Spokesman, Ramin Mehmanparast
Such ´ludicrous´ claims hinged on the hostile joint stances adopted by the US and Israel against the country.
"These threadbare attitudes, which are based on the age-old and hostile American-Zionist policies, are a ridiculous show in line with certain [instances of] scenario fabrication of divisive ends on the part of the enemies of Islam and the region."
Washington was employing the legerdemain to divert attention from the growing domestic protests it was facing.
“Plotters of such manufactured scenarios seek to sow division and help the Zionist regime [of Israel] out of its current isolation.”
Emphasized that the Islamic Republic of Iran was a establishment founded on Islamic ethics and values and that the country had always warned that the enemies of the region were plotting against it.
"Such shabby treatments which are in line with the US and Zionist regime’s hostile policies are charades which go in line with specific scenarios followed by the enemies of Islam and the region."
“Writers of such scenarios aim at sowing discord and saving the Zionist regime from the current isolation."
“The Islamic Republic of Iran has been established based on Islamic virtues and moralities and has always warned on the danger of regional enemy plots.”
“Such US and Zionist regime’s repeated scenarios have been brought up since American logic and policies inside the region had faced serious failure and widespread national and international protests.” 
“Iran-Saudi Arabia relation has been based on mutual respect and that raising false claims does not help them obtain their objectives and affect the public opinion.”
Oct 11, 15:20 gmt 
Shamsedin Hoseyni, Iranian Economy Minister 
"Since the interests of private companies are separate from the interests of governments, western governments' efforts to initiate new sanctions and on Iran will not stop Iranian national resolve to move forward." 
Oct 11, New York
Letter by H.E. Mr. Mohammad Khazaee, Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary General of the United Nations on the baseless allegations made by the United States authorities over the assassination plot targeting a foreign diplomat in Washington 
Excellency,
I am writing to you to express our outrage regarding the allegations leveled by the United States officials against the Islamic Republic of Iran on the involvement of my country in an assassination plot targeting a foreign diplomat in Washington.
The Islamic Republic of Iran strongly and categorically rejects these fabricated and baseless allegations, based on the suspicious claims by an individual.  Any country could accuse other countries through fabrication of such stories. However, this would set dangerous precedents in the relations among States.
Iran has always condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. Iran has been a victim of terrorism, a clear recent example of which is the assassination of a number of Iranian nuclear scientists in the past two years carried out by the Zionist regime and supported by the United States.  
The Iranian nation seeks a world free from terrorism and considers the current US warmongering and propaganda machine against Iran as a threat not just against itself but to the peace and stability in the Persian Gulf region. The Islamic Republic of Iran warns against the implications of this horrible scenario and submits that the continuation of such divide-and-rule policies could have detrimental effects on peace and security.
The US allegation is, obviously, a politically-motivated move and a showcase of its long-standing animosity towards the Iranian nation. The Islamic Republic of Iran categorically and in the strongest terms condemns this shameful allegation by the United States authorities and deplores it as a well-thought evil plot in line with their anti-Iranian policy to divert attention from the current economic and social problems at home and the popular revolutions and protests against United States long supported dictatorial regimes abroad.
The Islamic Republic of Iran underlines its determination to maintain its friendly relations with all regional countries, particularly with its Muslim neighbors, and invites all to be vigilant against the vicious campaigns targeting stability and peace and friendly relations among States in our region.
As the Secretary-General of the United Nations you have an important responsibility in enlightening the international public opinion about the dangerous consequences of warmongering policies of the United States Government on international peace and security.
I am sending identical letters to the President of the Security Council and the President of the General Assembly. It would be appreciated if this letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly under the agenda item 83 and of the Security Council.
Please accept, Excellency, the assurance of my highest consideration.
Mohammad Khazaee
Ambassador
Permanent Representative
Oct 12, 10:58
Ali Akbar Javanfekr, spokesman for Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad 
"They [U.S. authorities] want to take the public's mind off the serious domestic problems they're facing these days and scare them with fabricated problems outside the country." 
Oct 12
Ali Akbar Javanfekr, a press advisor to Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad
"This is a prefabricated scenario to turn public attention away from domestic problems within the United States."
"The US government and the CIA have a lot of experience in diverting public attention from domestic problems in the United States."
Oct 12, 12:41:27 PM ET
Parliament speaker Ali Larijani (during parliament in a speech broadcast live on state radio)
Said the allegation was a "mischievous, foolish" attempt to fuel tension between Tehran and Riyadh.
"These claims are vulgar ... It is a childish and amateur game ... We believe that our neighbors in the region are very well aware that America is using this story to ruin our relationship with Saudi Arabia." 
Oct 12 (Not exactly related to the plot but may be relevant)
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, during a rally Wednesday in the western Iranian city of Kermanshah, speech was broadcasted on Iran state television.
Said that the wave of protests spreading from New York's Wall Street to other U.S. cities reflects a serious crisis that will ultimately topple capitalism in America. Khamenei claimed the United States is now in a full-blown crisis because its "corrupt foundation has been exposed to the American people."
He predicted what he called the demise of American capitalism and corporate favoritism.
Commended the Occupy Wall Street protests in New York, Washington and other American cities, calling them a consequence of “the prevalence of top-level corruption, poverty and social inequality in America.” 
Denounced what he called “the heavy-handed treatment of the demonstrators by U.S. officials” and said that such treatment “is not seen even in underdeveloped countries with dictatorial regimes.”
“They may crack down on this movement but cannot uproot it,” Ayatollah Khamenei said. “Ultimately, it will grow so that it will bring down the capitalist system and the West.”
Oct 13, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, in at a military base in the western province of Kermanshah
Said ineffective plots hatched by Western politicians to promote Iranophobia will certainly fail.
Stated that the growing power of the Islamic Republic was the main reason behind continued efforts by arrogant powers to promote Iranophobia and Islam phobia.
"The arrogant American regime is grappling with problems and [is stuck in] quagmires as a result of its own wrongful policies and performance." 
"Materialistic means, arrogant attitude, and aggressive spirit will not help the United States out of such quagmires as Afghanistan and the answer is the Islamic Republic of Iran's solution which is [a combination of] logic, wisdom and spirituality."
Added that strong resolve and the victory of the Iranian nation in the eight-year Iraqi-imposed war proved to the world that invading Iran is not without a cost.
Oct 12, 2011 12:46PM
Head of the North America Bureau of the Iranian Foreign Ministry (will try to get his name)
Iran's Foreign Ministry has summoned the Swiss envoy to protest US allegations of Tehran's involvement in a plot to assassinate the Saudi ambassador to Washington. 
During the meeting, head of the North America Bureau of the Iranian Foreign Ministry said since the victory of the Islamic Revolution Iran has been among the main victims of the terrorist activities of terrorist groups sponsored by the United States. 
“Iran, therefore, condemns the baseless claims made by the US government… and warns against the repetition of such politically motivated allegations,” a Foreign Ministry statement said on Wednesday. 
Oct 12
Iranian Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Salehi
"This is an unwise scenario and they will offer apology to Iran soon because of the allegation," he added. Also regarding Iran-Saudi Arabia relations, he said, "Iran-Saudi relations are good and if there is any disagreement it is related to international issues not bilateral ones."
 "We are not seeking confrontation; our policy is cooperation and interaction. If they want to impose a confrontation upon the Iranian nation, the consequences of this issue will be more severe for them." 
"We do not want confrontation. (But) if they want to confront us and impose something on us, it will be the end of them. If they have the power to throw a punch, we have the power to smack (them) in a way that they would not be able to stand up.” 
Salehi claimed there had been "many cases" the West had blamed on Iran but which later turned out to be "a mistake."
"Over the past 32 years, there have been many identical accusations. For example in the Lockerbie case, they first accused Iran but it became clear later that that was not the case.”
"You have seen the hyperbolic way their officials act. They talk as if a global, nuclear explosion has occurred. They have made such a hue and cry about it.” 
Oct 12
Mohammad Hosseini, Minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance of Islamic Republic of Iran (he had his name included in the EU list of sanction)
“It is apparent that Americans are trying to make dispute in our relation with regional countries particularly with Saudi Arabia. Arab officials should be vigilant and know that all the allegations are baseless."
Oct 12
The semi-official Fars published an article with the headline: “U.S. Accusations Against Iran Aim to Divert World Attention from Wall Street Uprising.” The article quoted a senior member of Iran’s Parliament, Alaoddin Boroujerdi, as saying he had “no doubt this is a new American-Zionist plot to divert the public opinion from the crisis Obama is grappling with.” The Iranian government had previously referred to the Occupy Wall Street protests as a nascent American version of the revolutionary wave that has swept through the Middle East this year, dubbing the protests an “American spring.”
Oct 12, 13:57 
Iran's parliament speaker, Ali Larijani
Dismissed the U.S. charges as a "childish game."
"We have normal relations with the Saudis.”
"There is no reason for Iran to carry out such childish acts."
Oct 13
Ali Larijani again (remarks made in a meeting with visiting Sudanese top Presidential Adviser Mustafa Osman Ismail in Tehran)
Described the plot as a mere fabrication, that Americans try to put blames on others to justify their own failures in the Middle East region and they even never hesitate to mastermind seditions to attain their sinister goals.
The US has lost its allies due to the uprisings in the region and has resorted to seditions and masterminding plots to put the blames on others to justify its failures resulting from Islamic awakening among people of the region. 
Oct 13, 3:52 AM
Saeed Laylaz, a political analyst who was imprisoned in a crackdown on anti-government protests following Ahmadinejad’s disputed 2009 reelection.
“Whoever is behind it — inside or outside the country — is determined to create an international front against Iran.” 
The U.S. is gradually paving the way for a confrontation with Iran.”
Oct 13, 10:08 GMT
Iran's former president Mohammad Khatami (told the opposition website Rahesabz)
Warned the government of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of a possible US military attack, following the charges made by the US.
“Our political officials should be careful not to give the US any pretext to target our security and territorial integrity”, Khatami.
“I am worried because the pretexts for starting campaigns against Iran are constantly increasing, and escalation of the current pretext and use of any hostile language could have consequences that eventually only harm the Iranian people”.
'We should all stand united with regards to any possible threats against our land and people, but at the same time also be more careful not to give any pretexts to others to raise such charges against us.” 
Oct 13
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Supreme Leader of the Islamic Revolution (in a meeting with families of provincial war-time martyrs as well as war veterans and disabled)
Said that people play a key role in protecting the country from conspiracies. 
“People’s vigilance is a must for saving a nation from conspiracies and defending its identity and dignity.” 
“Iran’s establishment is an Islamic Republic which is tantamount to an Islamic democracy.”
Given the current complicating developments, Ayatollah Khamenei urged that further vigilance of people and their sense of responsibility were necessary to confront present worsening situation.
Oct 13
Ali Ahani, Iran's deputy foreign minister in charge of Europe and America affairs
"I am asking Saudi Arabia not to fall into the trap, because any disturbance in relations between countries in the (Middle East) region will only benefit the United States and the Zionist regime." 
Ahani was quoted as saying that "we hope that Saudi Arabia will understand the aims of this plot" which he said was mounted by the United States.
"This pathetic and conspirational scenario is so clumsy that even American media and political circles are looking at it with doubt.”
"The instigators of this scenario have to say what benefit Tehran could extract from the assassination of the Saudi ambassador to the United States." 
The deputy minister repeated the message of other Iranian officials that the US accusations were likely an attempt to distract attention from America's economic woes and foreign policy setbacks in the Middle East.
He also said that the idea that Iran "is reinforcing its role in the region" and was "handling the nuclear issue without problems and that the sanctions aren't having an effect... certainly pushed (the United States) to use this scenario" to try to weaken Tehran.
Oct 13, 12:57AM
Sadegh Zibakalam, political scientist critical of the government.
Iranian analysts agreed that even if U.S. charges of official Iranian involvement were true, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and his government probably had nothing to do with the scheme. “There are those within the Guards with some degree of independence,” said Sadegh Zibakalam. “But I cannot point any fingers in this bizarre plot that only hurts Iran.”
Oct 13
President Mahmud Ahmadinejad (during a meeting with visiting Qatari Foreign Minister Adviser Khalid Mohammad al-Atiyeh in Tehran)
Once again the enemies seek to dominate the Middle East region in order to plunder its wealth and oil resources to ease their economic crisis, he said.
The blatant interference of aliens and bullying powers in the affairs of regional countries only make the situation more complicated, Ahmadinejad said, adding that countries of the region should expand cooperation and understanding to prevent the enemies from interfering in their affairs.
Oct 14, 03:38 gmt
Iran's Public Relation office at the UN has denied reports about Susan Rice's meeting with Iranian permanent representative to the UN Mohammad Khaza'i, IRNA reported. According to the report, the Associated Press reported on Thursday that Rice and Khaza'i were scheduled to meet. However, Iran's Public Relation office denied the report saying "there has not been any meeting between the two countries' officials and we are not aware of such a communication", the report added.
Oct 14, 04:49gmt
Mohammad Hoseyn Salami, Deputy Commander of Iran's Islamic Revolution Guards Corps (IRGC). (at a ceremony organized to commemorate martyrs in the Iranian city of Qom)
"The US and Zionist regime are in the most vulnerable position and witnessing that their regional and international policy has gone haywire." 
"Thanks to the Islamic awakening, today the series of international and regional policies of Israel and America have been defeated." 
"Today we can see that the enemies have become so weak that every day they are holding rituals of political funeral." 
Commenting on the ongoing unrest in the Arab countries and protest movements in the US and other Arab countries, the IRGC commander said: "The Islamic awakening, which has been influenced by the Islamic Revolution [of Iran], has engulfed the US also and we are witnessing people's protests against the policies of the rulers of this country."
"The model of Islamic resistance, which the people of Iran have been experiencing for past 32 years, has entered the regional and Western countries and has shaken the corpse of the West's political power like a powerful storm."
Oct 14, 20:05
Iran's Ambassador to Saudi Arabia Seyed Mohammad Javad Rasouli
Rasouli met with the Saudi Interior Minister to declare Tehran's protest at the frequent problems created for the Iranian pilgrims in the Arab country, including the fingerprinting of Iranian women. 
"We have held two meetings with Saudi Interior Minister Prince Mohammed bin Nayef and the Head of the country's High Council for Hajj and conveyed the Iranian pilgrims' complaints to the Saudi side." The Hajj attracts some two million visitors to Saudi Arabia every year.
Oct 14
Dawud Salahuddin, Tehran (American fugitive who in 1980 was the last – and only – US citizen known to have killed on behalf of Iran's revolutionary regime, on US soil
Both strategically and operationally, in terms of Iran's worldview and its way of doing business, the information made public so far about the assassination plot does not add up, says Mr. Salahuddin, a black American convert to Islam, who was born David Theodore Belfield.
"For all the noise that comes out of this country, the Iranians know full well they are no military match for the Americans; they know that better than they know their names," says Salahuddin, who spoke to the Monitor by telephone from his home west of Tehran. "So the notion that [the Iranians] are going to bring that down on them, that just makes no sense at all."
"Why would the Iranians blow up embassies in Washington DC? The last thing the Iranians want is a war with the Americans," he adds. "This regime: They're interested in staying in power."
