Page 1
TERRORISM AND INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 
(WORKING PAPER) 
by
Gary A. Knight
College of Business
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL 32306-1110
USA
Tel: 850-644-1140
Fax: 850-644-4098
e-mail: gknight@cob.fsu.edu
and
Michael R. Czinkota
The McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
318 Old North
Washington, D.C. 20057
USA
Tel: 202-687-4204
Fax: 202-687-4031
e-mail: czinkotm@msb.edu
© Copyright by the authors. Be sure to cite this paper if you reference or quote from it. 
August, 2008 
1
Page 2
TERRORISM AND INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: THE CORPORATE RESPONSE 
ABSTRACT 
Terrorism increasingly poses risks to the international activities of the firm. It involves the threat or use of violence
to attain a political goal or communicate a political message by intimidating organizations and the public. Terrorism
has become more destructive and more salient in recent years. However, little is known about how international
firms respond to the effects or threat of terrorism. In this paper, we provide background on the relationship between
terrorism and international business. We then present descriptive results of a large-scale survey on U.S. firms, their
perceptions and responses about terrorism. Finally we develop a taxonomy of corporate response to terrorism. The
taxonomy reveals three major clusters of firms and organizational responses. The first cluster consists of well-
resourced firms that apply resources to respond to the effects or threat of terrorism. The second cluster includes
firms that strongly perceive terrorism, but which lack substantial resources and have acted relatively little to deal
with terrorism. The third cluster reflects companies that do not substantially perceive terrorism, have relatively few
resources, and which have not responded to terrorism. These findings are discussed with regard to their scholarly
and practical implications. Suggested public policy ideas for addressing terrorism are offered. 
2
Page 3
TERRORISM AND INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: THE CORPORATE RESPONSE 
Terrorism can be defined as the systematic threat or use of violence, often across national borders, to attain a
political goal or communicate a political message through fear, coercion, or intimidation of non-combatant persons
or the general public (Alexander et al 1979). Terrorism holds important implications for business, and international
business in particular. Terrorists direct their attacks against businesses far more than any other target (European
Commission 2001). The most common type of event is bombing, followed by armed attack, kidnapping, arson, and
vandalism. Most victims are randomly-targeted civilians. In our discussions with practitioners, and based on the
results of a large-scale empirical study, there appear to be three categories of firms when it comes to perceptions
about and responses to the effects and threat of terrorism. 
Actors and other key constructs in terrorism research are summarized in the conceptual framework in
Figure 1. The figure highlights the major actors in terrorism. Terrorists target firms who employ managers who
devise approaches to deal with terrorism. Consumers reflect all buyers of goods and services whose purchasing
behavior may be affected by terrorism. State, national, and supranational governments, as well as other public and
semi-public entities (e.g., port authorities, trade associations, the United Nations), may respond to terrorism in
various ways. Overall, firms, consumers, and governments are influenced by, and will usually respond to, the
actions of terrorists. 
There are several distinct phases to a terrorist attack. In the preincident phase, the intelligence needed to
plan the event is gathered by a cell charged with this task. This information is communicated to the command cell
for target selection and a plan of attack is developed and rehearsed. In the initiation phase, after a target has been
chosen and an attack plan has been devised, the tactical cell is activated. The members of the tactical cell may travel
to the target using different routes, coming together only at the last minute. The climax phase is when the attack
takes place, the bomb goes off, the victim is assassinated, or the hostage event is concluded. At this point the
terrorists either escape or are captured or killed (Czinkota, Knight, and Liesch 2003). 
3
Page 4
FIGURE 1
A General Model of Terrorism and International Business
General and Business Environment
Facilitating Factors:
- urbanization
- media
- modern communications systems
- modern transportation systems
- suicide bombing
- weapons of mass destruction 
Terrorist Groups
- non-state supported
- state sponsored
- state directed
Direct Effects 
Phases
- preincident
- initiation
- climax 
Direct Effects
Indirect Effects
Producers  Consumers  Governments 
Processes: Government Policies and Laws *  Supply *  Demand *
Macroeconomic Phenomena *
Nature of Relations among Countries *
* Components of Uncertainty
Source: Czinkota, Knight, and Liesch 2003 
4
Page 5
Terrorism’s Facilitating Factors
Several key factors have affected the way terrorists can operate today. Among them, urbanization and the resultant
concentration of people, government offices, businesses, and industrial facilities, facilitate the efforts of terrorists. 
Cities bunch people into confined spaces, usually providing them with fewer means of escape, while terrorists can
find more places to hide and plan their violent activities. 
The media also has seemingly increased the payoff from terrorism, with rapid, widespread global reporting
bringing to the world the fear and ever-present possibility of a local attack. The global reach of a message is now
more easily achieved, since television and other instant communications allow people worldwide to learn about a
terrorist incident within minutes of its occurrence. Competition among media outlets also encourages the broadcast
of information that again facilitates diffusion of terrorist messages, sometimes inciting support that might not
otherwise have eventuated. By putting terrorism on a global stage, the media also may provide the means to inspire
and instruct other terrorist groups, leading to further or escalating terrorism. 
Today, terrorist group members communicate with each other with great efficiency, using modern
communications systems, such as international telephony and the Internet. They allow terrorists to plan and activate
attacks with unprecedented efficiency and maximum impact. Alternatively, terrorists may circumvent detection by
using primitive communications, such as runners or motorcycle couriers. Many communications between terrorists
remain impervious to detection. 
Modern transportation systems provide the means for terrorists, in a timely manner, to arrive at, and depart
from, the sites of attacks. Sophisticated transportation also facilitates the often unaccompanied movement and
delivery of weapons and other supplies used in terrorist attacks. 
Today, various new techniques and technologies are available to terrorists. Suicide bombing is a relatively
new trend that has increased the stakes of terrorist attacks. Perhaps most worrisome is weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), including nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons that hold the potential to kill thousands of people in a
single event. Today, terrorists can use WMDs and suicide bombing to wield higher levels of derivative influence
than ever before. 
5
Page 6
Terrorism’s Direct and Indirect Effects
Terrorism poses both direct and indirect threats to the operations of the firm. Direct effects comprise the immediate
business consequences of terrorism, as experienced by individual firms. For example, the bond-trading company
Cantor Fitzgerald was destroyed and lost 658 of its 960 employees in the 9/11/01 attacks (“9/11”). While the harm
is clearly tragic for individually affected people and firms, in terms of the U.S. and world economy, the direct effects
of even the 9/11 attack were relatively small. 
In terms of the impact on business, indirect effects are the most important outcome of terrorism. These
include declines in consumer demand; unpredictable shifts or interruptions in value and supply chains; new policies, 
regulations and laws; as well as harmful macroeconomic phenomena and deteriorating international relations that
affect trade. It is these indirect effects that pose the greatest potential threat to the activities of countless firms. 
Declines in consumer demand result from the fear and panic that that ensue following terrorist acts. Unable to
predict future events, consumers may delay or discontinue purchases. Industrial demand is derived from retail
consumer demand. A widespread psychological response of individuals, therefore, may trigger a decline in demand
for industrial goods. Fear may also impact the behavior and reactions of managers. Firms experience reduced
revenues from falling consumer demand and may attempt to recoup decreasing sales by reducing prices or via
increased advertising and other communications activities, all of which engender reduced revenues or unplanned
expenses. 
Unpredictable shifts or interruptions in the supply of needed inputs, resources, and services is another
indirect effect of terrorism. They hold the potential to induce serious problems for the firm’s value-chain operations
and other activities. For multinational firms, interruptions may result from delays in the supply chain as increased
security measures and other factors lessen the efficiency of global transportation and logistical systems. Short-term
shortages of input raw materials, parts, and components may occur if, as a result of attacks, certain externally-
obtained resources are delayed or become unavailable. Shortages are also associated with higher costs of input
goods, which can contribute to higher prices for consumers. 
Policies, regulations, and laws are enacted by governments in response to terrorist events. While intended
to improve security conditions, such actions may have unintended consequences of hindering efficient business
operations. They can increase business costs and alter the business environment in ways more harmful than the
terrorist events that provoked them. Government actions make the terrorist intent come true by transmitting effects 
6
Page 7
far beyond the industries and regions that were the original targets of terrorist acts. Public remedies may not reduce
risks by a degree commensurate with the severity of the original terrorist events. 
For example, provisions of the Patriot Act dissuades international travelers from visiting the U.S. 
Increased inspections of containers used in international shipping, new security programs to protect ports, and other
new policies decrease the efficiency and effectiveness of international shipping and logistics. Policies generated by
governments and by firms themselves in response to the threat of terrorism substantially increase friction in
international business, as well as the costs of value-chain and supply-chain activities. 
Macroeconomic phenomena, such as (real or perceived) declines in per-capita income, purchasing power, 
or stock market values, are exacerbated by terrorism. Such trends affect the extent of consumer uncertainty about
the state of national economies. In the long run terrorism can induce declines in international trade, with associated
consequences for GDP, tax revenues, and living standards (Czinkota, Knight, and Liesch 2003).
Development of Hypotheses 
For our purposes, an international venture is defined as any commercial activity comprising risk that the firm
undertakes in a foreign market with the objective of generating profits or other types of returns. International
ventures primarily consist of attempts by the firm to launch and sell a product or service in foreign markets, source
goods or services from suppliers located abroad, or undertake manufacturing or assembly activities abroad by
building a factory or some other production facility. In order to maximize organizational performance, companies
leverage resources of various types. It might be expected that firms with many resources, that is, “well-resourced
firms” are better positioned to deal with risks, such as the effects and threat of terrorism. One type of resource is
knowledge gained from substantial international experience. More experienced firms have managers who better
understand how to deal with the various risks associated with the international environment. Accordingly, 
internationally experienced firms which perceive the effects or threat of terrorism and which have acted to deal with
terrorism. 
Accordingly, we argue that the ability to respond to terrorism is a function of the extent and nature of
organizational resources. Better resourced firms are better able to respond to terrorism, and are more likely to
respond to terrorism. Moreover, more internationally experienced firms are better able to respond to terrorism, and
are more likely to respond to terrorism. This perspective can be modeled within the resource-based view of the firm, 
7
Page 8
which implies that differential endowment of organizational resources is an important determinant of strategy and
performance. Resources include all assets, capabilities, organizational processes, information, knowledge, 
technologies, and so forth, controlled by the company and enabling it to conceive and implement strategies that
improve its effectiveness and efficiency in foreign markets (Barney 1991; Wernerfelt 1984; Collis 1991; Porter
1991). 
Strategic behavior theory posits that firms transact business by whichever mode maximizes profits through
improving their competitive position vis-à-vis rivals (Hofer and Schendel 1978; Porter 1991).  Strategy reflects the
firm's short and long-term responses to the challenges and opportunities posed by the business environment. 
Companies execute strategies in order to attract customers and deal effectively with a myriad of environmental risks. 
Strategic behavior theory can be used to predict the international efforts of firms under threat of terrorism. 
Accordingly, companies develop and apply strategies to maximize organizational performance. Strategic behavior
theory helps to explain why certain firms might emphasize particular responses when dealing with the reality or
threat of terrorism. Company success in the face of terrorism depends in large part on the formulation and
implementation of strategy. 
Many types of resources are highly tangible (e.g., plant, property, and equipment) or are largely comprised
of financial and human resources. However, many important resources are also intangible and consist primarily of
special knowledge about specific strategies and approaches for international business, such as strategies and tactics, 
as well as general managerial expertise and the collective experience of the firm. In international business, the
international experience level of management is a factor in company performance. The more international the firm, 
the greater its international experience tends to be. Because terrorism is an increasingly salient risk in the
international environment, we argue that the likelihood of responding to terrorism increases the more experienced
the firm is in international business. The more involved the firm is in international business, the more sensitive it is
likely to be to terrorism, and the more likely management is to enact strategies or other types of responses to deal
with the effects or threat of terrorism. 
Risk is an important business concept and reflects the extent of the firm’s exposure to the possibility of loss
or failure. Internationalizing firms are constantly exposed to risk. Broadly speaking, management incorporates risk
into decision-making about strategy, tactics, and the structuring of the firm. The direct and indirect effects of
terrorism are a type of systematic risk that occurs in the macro-environment and affect firms within a geographic 
8
Page 9
area, sector, or industry similarly. Management is usually powerless to influence systematic risk, just as
management is usually powerless to influence the effects of terrorism. On the other hand, residual risk is the risk
that occurs at the micro-level of the firm and is generally attributable to factors within management’s control. 
Residual risk is a factor for firms that fail to develop appropriate strategies, or develop poor strategies, or implement
developed strategies poorly. By the same token, firms that devise appropriate strategies, such as preparing for the
effects or threat of terrorism, could expect to increase their performance, particularly in the face of increasing
terrorist threats. In general, as international business is characterized by uncertainty and various types of risk, firms
should devise specific strategies in order to minimize risk and thereby maximize company performance. 
It is expected that firms which respond to the effects or threat of terrorism will perform better than those
that largely ignore such risks. Just as with any other environmental threat, to the extent that terrorism is perceived to
impact corporate well-being, management is likely to respond by modifying strategies and other approaches. 
Organizational responsiveness is characterized by management initiatives to modify business strategies, tactics, 
supply-chain structures, and general expedient maneuvers. To the extent that the salience of terrorism’s direct and
effect increase, international activities are less likely to produce desired results unless the firm proactively prepares
in advance. Advance planning has often been regarded as important to the success of business ventures (e.g.,
Chakravarthy and Perlmutter, 1985).  Such planning is especially important in international ventures, where the
business environment can be relatively complex and risky (Chakravarthy and Perlmutter, 1985; Bloodgood, 
Sapienza and Almeida, 1996). Preparing to deal with terrorism’s effects involves being attuned to conditions in the
macro-environment, committing human, financial, and other resources to supporting the international venture, and
developing and applying appropriate strategies and other approaches to minimize terrorism’s potential effects. 
The above discussion leads to the following hypotheses. 
As the salience of terrorism increases, better resourced firms… 
H1a. Are more likely to prepare for the threat of terrorism; 
H1b. Are more likely to invest money in order to minimize or thwart the effects of terrorism; 
H1c. Are more likely to include terrorism in those factors that they consider when developing or revising business
strategy. 
As the salience of terrorism increases, more internationally experienced firms… 
H2a. Are more likely to prepare for the threat of terrorism; 
9
Page 10
H2b. Are more likely to invest money in order to minimize or thwart the effects of terrorism; 
H2c. Are more likely to include terrorism in those factors that they consider when developing or revising business
strategy. 
As the salience of terrorism increases, more international firms… 
H3a. Are more likely to prepare for the threat of terrorism; 
H3b. Are more likely to invest money in order to minimize or thwart the effects of terrorism; 
H3c. Are more likely to include terrorism in those factors that they consider when developing or revising business
strategy. 
METHOD
The hypotheses were assessed through development of a taxonomy. Because there has been little empirical research on
the relationship between international business and terrorism, a two-phase research design was adopted in which
qualitative interviews were conducted to develop a broad understanding of terrorism and to uncover issues of particular
interest to managers. In the second phase a survey-based study was conducted on large sample of international firms
based in the United States to validate findings from the qualitative phase via the development of a taxonomy. 
Specifically, in the summer of 2005, we conducted an online survey of U.S. firms. The purpose of the survey was to
isolate processes in domestic and international business that are vulnerable to terrorism, and to understand what
types of responses firms are making to these challenges. The case studies and survey were conducted to provide
input for the formulation of national policy regarding these important issues. Some of the interviews were
conducted by telephone, with the remainder conducted at the company sites. The survey questionnaire was
developed in several stages, following procedures suggested by Fowler (Fowler 1988). The unit of analysis was
defined at the level of the firm. 
RESULTS
Results were received from 527 randomly selected firms from around the U.S. In the sample of firms, 58 percent
had between 100 and 499 employees, 29 percent had 20 to 99 employees, and the remainder had fewer than 20
employees. In terms of annual revenues, 65 percent had revenues of $2.5 million to $100 million, 20 percent had 
10
Page 11
less than $2.5 million, and the remainder had greater than $100 million. Sixty three percent of the respondents had
been in business for over 20 years, 20 percent for 11 to 20 years, and the remainder for less than 11 years. 
Regarding international operations, 71 percent got up to 20 percent of their total sales from international sources, 19
percent got up to between 20 and 39 percent of their sales internationally, and the remainder got over 39 percent of
their sales from abroad. In other words, most of the firms are only moderately international in their business
dealings. 
Exporting was by far the most popular form of international entry (59 percent of firms), and about a third of
the firms shipped their international offerings by sea, while a smaller proportion (21 percent) shipped by air. Very
few of the firms engaged in foreign direct investment. About one-third of respondents cited Europe as their most
important international business location, and another third cited North America (Canada and Mexico); 20 percent
cited Asia. Very few of these firms (less than 4 percent) cited other locations (e.g., South America, Russia and
former USSR, Middle East, Africa) as their most important international targets. Very few of the firms (20 percent
or less) did business with countries prone to terrorism, such as Colombia, Indonesia, Israel, and Yemen. 
Major Results
Nearly all respondents (88 percent) said their businesses had not been directly threatened by terrorism. We asked
the firms if they had been affected by indirect effects of terrorism. The most important effects, experienced by
about one-quarter of all firms was increased insurance costs.  The second greatest effect (18 percent of respondents) 
was a tendency to place greater importance on the integrity of international business partners. The third most cited
effect (16 percent) was more delays in international business activities. This was followed by less trust in
international business (15 percent of respondents). Five to seven percent of firms reported experiencing the
following: unpredictable shifts or interruptions in supply chains, decreases in consumer demand, deteriorating
international trade relations. 
While nearly 50 percent of firms were concerned about the effects of terrorism or threats of terrorism, only
a quarter had prepared a terrorism contingency plan. Only about one-third said they were prepared to deal with the
effects or threats of terrorism. Only 8 percent said they were considering moving critical operations or branching
out into less sensitive areas due to terrorism. Less than 20 percent stated that they included terrorism as a factor in
selecting or designing supply chains and distribution channels, or in developing and revising marketing strategy. 
11
Page 12
Only 18 percent said anti-terrorism expenditures were seriously considered in their firm. Only 12 percent said
shareholders reward corporate efforts to prepare for terrorist threats. On the other hand, two-thirds of respondents
were concerned about the effects of rising oil prices. 
In terms of international shipping of input and finished goods, since the attacks of 9/11, about 50 percent of
respondents felt they had experienced no significant delays. Nearly one-third had experienced international shipping
delays of one to six days. Eighteen percent had experienced international shipping delays of over one week. Fifty
four percent said their supply chain costs had gone up since the attacks of 9/11, but only a quarter had raised their
prices in response to terrorism risks. 
We also asked about the corporate response to terrorism. Forty three percent of the firms replied they had
not responded at all; They did not revise company operations or devise any strategies at all to deal with the threat of
terrorism. Of those firms that did respond, almost half (27 percent of the total sample) had done so largely on their
own, with little prodding by government mandate. One-third of the responders (19 percent of the total sample) 
replied that nearly all of their response was due to government mandate. About one-quarter of all respondents had
spent over $50,000 in new technology and systems upgrades to comply with post-9/11 federal antiterrorism
mandates. Only eight percent had spent more than $200,000 for such upgrades. Fully 77 percent of the respondents
had not pursued such upgrades, or had spent less than $50,000 on them. Only 21 percent stated that government
policies towards terrorism had substantially slowed their international business operations. Only 16 percent stated
that their international growth had been curtailed by governmental antiterrorism policies. 
CLUSTER ANALYSIS: DEVELOPMENT OF THE TAXONOMY 
To develop the taxonomy, responses to various questions were used to form groupings of firms in cluster analysis. A
hierarchical technique, Ward's method with squared euclidian distances, was used to establish the appropriate number
of clusters and the cluster solution (Punj and Stewart 1983; Hair et al. 1992; Arabie and Hubert 1994). The final
number of clusters was determined by examining dendrogram and agglomeration distance coefficients generated by the
hierarchical method. They revealed pronounced changes in cluster tightness, suggesting the most efficient number of
clusters (Aldenderfer and Blashfield 1984; Hair et al. 1992; Arabie and Hubert 1994). The two-, three-, and four-,
cluster solutions were assessed for interpretive clarity. Based on these criteria, the three-cluster solution was chosen. 
To confirm the validity of this outcome, discriminant analysis was performed next. Of the firms classified by the 
12
Page 13
cluster analysis, the discriminant functions correctly predicted 87 percent of the membership of cluster one, 94 percent
of cluster two, and 93 percent of cluster three. These results suggest that reasonable discrimination was achieved in the
four clusters (Singh 1990; Hair et al. 1992; Arabie and Hubert 1994).
Cluster differences on each variable were assessed via a multivariate analysis of variance. Results showed
that, on each variable, at least two clusters were different at the .05 level. Next, Duncan Multiple Range tests were
performed in one-way ANOVA. Results of these tests are provided in Table 1. The primary focus of this study is to
compare the resultant clusters of firms regarding their perceptions of, and responses to, terrorism, and to assess the
study hypotheses. In general, Table 1 implies that cluster one firms have more resources, have perceived the effects
and potential threat of terrorism, and have responded more to terrorism than the other two clusters (p < .05). In
addition, the table reveals that while cluster two firms perceive the effects of, and feel threatened by terrorism, they
appear to be less well-resourced to deal with terrorism and that have responded less to terrorism. Cluster three firm are
the least sensitive to terrorism and they have responded the least to it. Overall, these differences reveal significant face
validity and support the overall validity of the taxonomy (Aldenderfer and Blashfield 1984; Miller and Friesen 1984; 
Arabie and Hubert 1994). To more specifically understand how the clusters differ, each is described next. 
********************
Insert Table 1 here
********************
CLUSTER ONE: Aware and Prepared for Terrorism
Cluster one contains 141 firms. It has the largest number of employees and sales, significantly greater than the other
two clusters. These firms have also been engaged in international business longer, and obtain a greater proportion of
total sales from abroad, than the other two clusters. In general, terrorism is significantly more salient for Cluster
One firms (p < .05).  This is indicated by the fact that, compared to the other clusters, these firms have perceived
terrorism threats, and believe that their firm will be affected by terrorism within the coming 10 years. In general, 
compared to the other clusters, Cluster One firms are relatively more concerned about the effects and potential threat
of terrorism (p < .05). 
13
Page 14
Of the other hand, when it comes to actual effects of terrorism, Cluster One firms rank in the middle
between Clusters Two and Three. Cluster One firms have only moderately experienced unpredictable supply-chain
shifts or interruptions to their sourcing activities as a result of terrorism. They score only moderately high when it
comes to delays in their international business activities to terrorism, as well as management's degree of trust in
international business, concern about access to raw materials, and the extent to which their supply-chain costs and
time needed for international shipments since the events of 9/11 (p < .05).
But, as compared to the other two clusters, Cluster One firms are significantly more prepared to deal with
the effects and threat of terrorism (p < .05). They have made preparations for disruptions in their supply chains. 
They are much more likely than the other clusters to have prepared a terrorism contingency plan. Compared to the
other clusters, they are significantly more likely to have increased their safety stocks of inventory and supplies from
abroad(p < .05). In addition, compared to the other clusters, Cluster One firms are more likely to spend money to
deal with terrorism. Antiterrorism expenditures are considered seriously in these firms. Shareholders are more
inclined to reward corporate efforts to prepare for terrorism, and in fact these firms have invested financial resources
accordingly (p < .05).
Finally, compared to the other two clusters, Cluster One firms are significantly more likely to devise and
revise their business strategies in order to deal with the effects and threat of terrorism. They are more inclined to
structure their supply chains to minimize terrorism threats and to develop marketing strategies with terrorism in
mind. Finally, in general, management in Cluster One firms have given thought to relocating value-chain activities
or revising business activities in order to minimize the potential threat of terrorism (p < .05).
CLUSTER TWO: Affected but Less Prepared for Terrorism
Cluster Two has 152 firms, and the second highest level of resources after Cluster One in terms of number of
employees and annual sales revenues (p < .05).  Cluster Two firms are also significantly less involved in
international business than Cluster One, implying that management is relatively less experienced international
business (p < .05). In general, terrorism appears to be less salient for Cluster Two than for Cluster One (p < .05).
This is reflected by the fact that Cluster Two firms are less likely to believe they will be affected by terrorism within
the coming decade, are less likely to have experienced specific terrorism threats, and are generally less concerned
about the effect or threat of terrorism (p < .05). 
14
Page 15
By contrast, however, Cluster Two firms are the most likely group to have experienced direct or indirect
effects of terrorism (p < .05). Relative to Clusters One and Three, Cluster Two respondents indicate they have
experienced unpredictable supply-chain shifts and interruptions in their international sourcing activities, more delays
in international business, and felt more concerned about disruptions to sources of input goods(p < .05). In addition, 
these firms have experienced more rising supply-chain costs and longer delays in international shipments since the
9/11 terrorism event (p < .05).  In general, Cluster Two firms feel less trust in international business as a result of the
effects or threat of terrorism (p < .05).
In terms of their preparation for terrorism, however, Cluster Two firms are relatively less prepared than the
companies in Cluster One (p < .05). Respondents in group two indicate they are less prepared for disruptions in
access to raw materials (p < .05).  Compared to Cluster One, Cluster Two firms are less likely to have prepared a
terrorism contingency plan, and they are less likely to have established a safety stock of inventory from international
sources (p < .05). In addition, compared to Cluster One, the companies in Cluster Two are less inclined to expand
financial resources in order to prepare for terrorism (p < .05). Antiterrorism expenditures are considered relatively
less seriously in these firms, and they have spent little or no money on technology and systems upgrades in
preparation for terrorism, since the events of 9/11. Similarly, compared to Cluster One, the firms in Cluster Two are
less likely to have developed strategies or structures to prepare for the effects or threat of terrorism (p < .05). They
are less likely to have considered moving critical operations in response to 9/11 (p < .05). However, management in
these firms is equal of managers in Cluster One firms in having considered branching out into business areas
relatively less sensitive to the threat of terrorism. 
CLUSTER THREE: Not Concerned and Not Prepared
Cluster Three is the largest grouping, with 234 firms. These companies are similar to Cluster Two with respect to
number of employees and total annual sales, both of which are significantly lower than the companies in Cluster
One (p < .05). Cluster Three firms have also been engaged in international business for a similar period of time as
those of Cluster Two, and they derive a similar proportion of total sales from international business, although
significantly less than Cluster One (p < .05). That is, compared to Cluster One, the businesses in Cluster Three have
15
Page 16
relatively fewer resources with to respect to number of employees and annual sales revenues, and they are relatively
less experienced in international business (p < .05).
In terms of the salience of terrorism, the companies in Cluster Three appear to be the least affected among
the three clusters (p < .05).  They are much less likely to have experienced terrorism threats, much less likely to have
experienced international business delays or interruptions in international supply chains, and substantially less
concerned about the effects or threat of terrorism (p < .05). In general, these companies have been least affected by
terrorism and are similarly least concerned about its potential effects (p < .05).
Is perhaps not surprising then that Cluster Three firms have prepared the least to deal with terrorism. They
are the least likely of the three clusters to have increased safety stocks of inventory, and they are similar to Cluster
Two in terms of having given little or no attention to preparing a terrorism contingency plan (p < .05).  Cluster Three
firms also score lowest in terms of the seriousness with which antiterrorism expenditures are considered by
management (p < .05). Cluster Two, they also score relatively low in terms of the amount of funds management has
spent in upgrading technologies or other systems to prepare for the threat or reality of terrorism (p < .05).
Finally, Cluster Three firms are the least likely among the three groupings to have developed or revised
strategies, tactics, and structures that take terrorism into account. Management gives little or no consideration to
terrorism in the development of marketing strategies and other approaches. They have given little or no thought to
revising operations or offerings in light of possible terrorism threats. 
DISCUSSION
In summary, many of the respondents to the survey of international firms experienced rising insurance costs, higher
supply-chain costs, delays in international business activities, and put greater importance on the integrity of
international business partners.  Results suggest that the majority have responded little to terrorism, or not at all, and
among most of the respondents there is relatively little stakeholder support for such responses. Most have been little
affected, or not at all, by government-sponsored antiterrorism policies. A large proportion believes firms should
carry terrorism insurance. They tend to be much more concerned about rising oil prices than terrorism or other
possible emergencies. Older, more internationally involved firms were more concerned about terrorism and more
likely to prepare for it. 
16
Page 17
How should the firm deal with the effects or threat of terrorism. One approach may be to diversity
international activities across not just a range of nations within a given region, but diversifying across a range of
regions as well. In other words, to avoid the macro-environmental events that occur across entire regions, the firm
should operate globally. One also could argue that the covariance problem could be addressed by diversifying
across industries as well. By operating accordingly, the firm could theoretically achieve considerable risk
minimization. 
Terrorism has become increasingly salient and poses new or larger threats to the performance of the firm. 
To survive and succeed in such an environment, management must plan well and devise optimal courses of action. 
Risk results from poor conception or execution of business strategy. The threat of terrorism is can be reduced by
developing and implementing appropriate strategies. Managerial response is particularly important in international
business because of the international character of terrorism. Haphazard or unplanned actions usually lead to failure. 
Thus, managers pursue international business via the development of strategy. Strategy emphasizes the planning-
based actions that managers take in order to achieve the goals of the firm that, in turn, are generally aimed at
maximizing performance. Strategic decision-making determines the direction, future, and ultimate viability of the
firm in the face of the effects and threat of terrorism. 
Firms must make needed changes to marketing and other business strategies. Research and attentiveness to
the macro-environment is a critical component for preparing to meet the challenge of terrorism. Appropriate
resources should be committed for international success. Foreign markets are distinctive in many ways from the
home country. Because of their smaller size, many small and medium enterprises (SMEs) may lack the often
substantial resources that are required to be successful abroad. Activities such as researching foreign markets, 
devising appropriate supply chains, and developing foreign channels, pose considerable challenges to the resource-
poor SME. Yet finding and applying appropriate resources is an important prerequisite for minimizing the risks
associated with terrorism. 
Considerations For Policy Development 
Results suggest that most firms are largely indifferent about and unprepared for terrorism and other major threats. 
This culture of indifference is somewhat understandable – the only major event in recent memory was the 9/11 
17
Page 18
attack, which occurred more than four years ago. Yet terrorism can impact the nation is very substantive ways, 
particularly in terms of its indirect effects. 
The taxonomy revealed that many firms lack adequate resources, and this may prevent management from
responding appropriately to the terrorism threat. A key challenge is that firms, especially SMEs, have both limited
resources and competing priorities. Managers may be disinclined to plan for contingencies that (1) may occur at
some distant future time (e.g., not this quarter); (2) involve high levels of uncertainty and are therefore difficult to
measure and plan for; (3) shareholders and stakeholders view as relatively unimportant. A key challenge for
policymakers, therefore, is to stimulate managers to invest time and money in dealing with the threat or possible
effects of terrorism. 
Ultimately, it may not be terrorism itself that poses the greatest threat. Rather the greatest threat may be the
fear that terrorism incites. The panic and psychological impact of terrorism can be more harmful to the interests of
the firm than the event itself.  For instance, the 9/11 attacks triggered a decline in construction of high-rise buildings
and other vulnerable structures. It stimulated widespread fear among consumers that triggered or aggravated
declining economies worldwide. It is critical to restore confidence and maintain order as early as possible following
terrorist events. This goal is logically within the scope of responsibility of government. National and local
governments can play a key role in rapidly restoring public confidence in the economy and business systems. 
Government may be best positioned to take steps to ensure that businesses continue “business as usual” as quickly
as possible in the wake of a terrorist event. 
Public Policy Ideas for Addressing Terrorism 
•  Strengthen the partnership between the private and public sectors.  There are certain things that government
does especially well, and others that the private sector does especially well. In many countries, the federal
government is strong at intelligence gathering, national defense, and coordinating certain types of recovery efforts. 
The private sector is a potential fighting force of doctors, scientists, managers, and venture capitalists. Companies
are spending hundreds of billions of dollars on homeland security – insurance, workplace security, logistics, and
information technology. A strong public-private partnership helps each side compensate for the weaknesses of the
other. Examples include the Pentagon’s directed funding to private-sector ventures that address new strategic and
tactical needs for dealing with disasters. 
18
Page 19
•  Provide educational programs for firms. Workshops, seminars, and other educational programs might be
offered on topics such as disaster avoidance, analysis of weak links in value chains and corrective steps, security
planning, scenario and contingency planning, disaster insurance, best practices for crisis management, emergency
response, and business recovery. Some private firms already offer programs in these areas. However, they are often
expensive or otherwise inaccessible to companies with limited resources. Government might play a role to provide
widespread training on emergency planning, responses, and recovery. Firms need to become more aware of the
indirect effects of terrorism. Business continuity preparation and planning are critical for a growing number of
firms. Companies need to learn how to ensure their own safety and survival. The more rapidly businesses recover
from emergencies and the more of these firms that survive, the stronger the national economy will be and the faster
it will recover. Governments might devise a systematic program of educational programs, directed particularly to
the most vulnerable firms, that are cost-effective and proven for disaster response and recovery. 
•  Expand disaster recovery loans and loan guarantee programs. Perhaps the largest problem that companies
face following an emergency is recovery. Following a major harmful event, capital for rebuilding and restarting is
in short supply. The firm may be out of business for days or weeks, with no revenue during this time. The problem
can be addressed via low-interest loans and loan guarantees. The need for government-sponsored loans emerges
because while many firms may need capital to jump-start their businesses following a disaster, many such firms may
be unable to obtain or to afford loans from conventional sources. Moreover, private banks may lack the ability to
service all companies affected by a large-scale disaster. One model is the Export-Import Bank of the United States,
a government agency that provides direct loans or loan guarantees to exporters or importers for risky international
sales that require financing. The Bank also provides insurance to cover non-payment by foreign customers. 
•  Provide better intelligence support. Better intelligence should be made available to the private sector, to assist
them in preparing for, and dealing with the aftermath of, terrorist events. The Internet is one possible outlet for
providing such information, because it is less vulnerable to failure than some other information sources. The web
can be a major resource that businesses consult to obtain current information on the state of any emergency, or
threatened emergency, that may pose consequences for the firm. The news media currently play the major role in
providing information to the public about emergent events. However, media are not always reliable and inclined to
sensationalize news stories or focus on negative, anecdotal information. Thus, the federal government has a role to
19
Page 20
play in ensuring that the public obtains news and information which are factual and genuinely helpful about possible
threats or evolving situations. 
•  Strengthen the information and communications infrastructure.  Technology is helping clear many of the
obstacles once faced by firms in their business dealings. Recently developed technologies facilitate intelligence
collection and business continuity. For example, highly developed back-office systems and emergency response
plans helped many firms recover very quickly following the 9/11 attacks in New York. State-of-the-art information
and communications systems enable firms to maximize their productivity and manage crises with maximal
efficiency at reduced costs. The Internet and e-mail hold special promise because of their efficiency and cost
effectiveness for information dissemination and exchange. Information and communications technologies provide
many of the answers to the problems that terrorism poses. They can be applied to (1) detect or prevent terrorist
attackes; (2) maximize the efficiency with which firms can prepare for, and deal with, terrorism; and (3) help
minimize the costs of preparedness and post-event recovery. 
In terms of the public-private partnership, several positive trends have emerged in recent years. For
instance, the Technical Support Working Group at the Pentagon coordinates and funds numerous private sector
R&D initiatives aimed at enhancing homeland security. The federal government must take stronger efforts along
these lines. Steps should be taken to improve and institutionalize the information and communications infrastructure
to help ensure a dynamic business environment capable of withstanding interruptions and turbulence caused by
disasters. The public sector, in its partnership with the private sector, must encourage R&D and innovative
behaviors that lead to the development of leading-edge technologies that ensure early detection of, and rapid
recovery from, catastrophic events. 
•  Encourage more economic resiliency and dynamism. The flexibility and dynamism of national economies
encourages continuous innovation and entrepreneurship. It also allows firms to recover more rapidly from disasters. 
Flexibility, dynamism, and resiliency result in large part because businesses enjoy relatively free trade and are
largely unencumbered by government intervention, regulations, and bureaucracy. This type of business
environment must be encouraged and continued. Governments can encourage a strong, vibrant economy and
business environment. It might support an economy and business systems that are strongly resilient to, and capable
of recovering quickly from, terrorism and similar events.  Most solutions to dealing with threats will come from the
private sector. Thus, government should facilitate the flexibility, dynamism, and innovativeness of private firms. 
20
Page 21
•  Encourage free trade and economic development worldwide. Governments and institutions such as the World
Trade Organization should continue to encourage and stimulate free trade and economic development around the
world. Free trade is an effective means for alleviating poverty in developing countries. Poor countries, with high
unemployment rates, are fertile ground for the recruitment of future terrorists. Their economic health and national
stability depend to a large extent on economic development that is stimulated by international trade. For example, 
Pakistan, a strategically important ally in the war on terror, employs over half of its industrial work force in textiles
and apparel manufacturing. Openness of Western markets helps maintain Pakistan’s stability and rising living
standards. In general, the less poverty worldwide, the lower the likelihood of terrorism. Empirical evidence for the
success of free trade and for the tendency of protectionism to impede progress on economic indicators can be seen in
the contrast between various countries. In the years following World War II, Germany, Japan, Singapore, and South
Korea adopted policies based on export-oriented industrialization. By contrast, China, India, Russia, and several
eastern European countries adopted anti-trade policies, shutting themselves off from the world. History reveals that
the free-trading group of countries performed much better in terms of economic growth and living standards. 
Firms that believe themselves to be immune from the effects described above are asking for trouble. 
Proactive efforts to deal with terrorism and other disasters are needed. Such efforts have become more salient in
recent years. The indirect effects of disasters hold the potential for massive harm to the interests of the nation and
the world. Panicked efforts to deal with suddenly unfolding events are less likely to sustain company performance
in the absence of preparation. But we cannot expect those without resources to battle disasters on their own. Rather, 
it has to be those who possess the wherewithal, the imagination and the drive to lead the charge and make our lives
safer and better. 
Resource- and capabilities-based perspectives highlight that firms’ foundational resources are especially
critical in diverse business environments because they provide a stable basis for the development of approaches that
engender superior performance (e.g., Tomer 1987; Teece, Pisano, and Shuen 1997; Luo 2000). Development of
appropriate strategies is critical resources to ongoing success in risky international environments. The development
of anti-terrorism approaches is particularly useful where they become embedded in the firm’s culture via ongoing
replication of routines, producing a unique configuration of resources. 
21
Page 22
TABLE 1
Three-Cluster Solution: Means
Variable
Number of firms
Number of employees
Annual Sales
Age of firm
Time firm has been engaged in international business
International business as percent of total sales 
Cluster
One
141
5.72 a
5.86 a
4.73
3.92 a
1.93 a 
Cluster
Two
152
4.76 b
4.46 b
4.61
3.59
1.53 
Cluster
Three
234
4.55 c
4.45 b
4.45
3.62
1.79
There have been specific terrorism threats to my business
Concern about effects/threats of terrorism on my firm
My firm will be directly affected by terrorism within next 10 years
We’ve had unpredictable supply chain shifts or interruptions due to
terrorism
We’ve had more delays in international business due to terrorism
We’ve felt less trust in international business due to terrorism
We’ve been concerned about our firm’s access to raw materials
Since 9/11, our supply chain direct costs have gone up
Since 9/11 how much time does it take for international shipments? 
2.79 a
3.92 a
3.38 a
2.61 b
2.92 b
2.62 b
2.71 b
3.54 b
2.45 b 
1.82 b
3.56 b
2.50 b
3.11 a
3.65 a
2.92 a
3.59 a
3.94 a
3.85 a 
1.37 c
2.40 c
1.83 c
1.76 c
1.84 c
1.76 c
2.27 c
2.72 c
2.31 b
We are prepared to deal with the effects/threats of terrorism
We are prepared for disruptions in access to raw materials
Our company has prepared a terrorism contingency plan
We have increased our safety stock for international supplies
We have increased our safety stock levels by XX percent 
3.66 a
3.40 a
4.02 a
3.05 a
1.77 a 
2.47 c
2.85 b
2.52 b
2.66 b
1.31 b 
3.13 b
3.05
2.56 b
2.20 c
1.00 c
Anti-terrorism expenditures are seriously considered in my firm
Shareholders reward corporate efforts to prepare for terrorist threats
How much has your firm spent on new technology and systems
upgrades to comply with post-9/11 federal antiterrorism mandates? 
3.64 a
3.00 a
3.54 a 
2.57 b
2.37 b
1.40 b 
2.03 c
2.17 b
1.26 b
We consider terrorism in selecting supply chains and dist. channels
We’ve designed our supply chain to resist effects of terrorist attack
We consider terrorism in developing/revising our marketing strategy
We are considering branching out to areas less sensitive to terrorism
We’ve considered moving critical operations as a response to 9/11 
3.51 a
3.22 a
3.51 a
2.52 a
3.03 a 
2.61 b
2.49 b
2.66 b
2.52 a
1.98 b 
2.20 c
2.59 b
2.01 c
1.84 b
1.61 c
Note: Small letters following mean values indicate significant differences between individual means at
the .05 level; ‘a’ reflects the highest mean in a row, ‘b’ the second highest mean, and so forth. Mid-range
means in the same row not significantly different from the next highest nor from the next lowest mean are
left blank are left blank as regards the small letters. 
22
Page 23
REFERENCES
Aldenderfer, M. S. and Blashfield R. (1984), Cluster Analysis, Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications
Alexander, Yonah et al (1979) Terrorism: Theory and Practice. Boulder, CO, Westview Press
Arabie, P./Hubert L. (1994), “Cluster Analysis in Marketing Research,” in Advanced Methods of Marketing
Research, R. Bagozzi, ed., Blackwell Publishers, Cambridge, MA
Barney, J., (1991), “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage,” Journal of Management, 17, 1, pp. 99-
120. 
Bloodgood, J., H. Sapienza and J. Almeida (1996), "The Internationalization of New High Potential Ventures: 
Antecedents and Outcomes." Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 20, Summer, pp. 61-76
Chakravarthy, B. and H. Perlmutter (1985), "Strategic Planning for A Global Business," Columbia Journal of World
Business 20, Summer, pp. 3-10
Collis, D. (1991), “A Resource-Based Analysis of Global Competition,” Strategic Management Journal, 12, 
Summer, Special Issue, pp. 49-68
Czinkota, Michael, Gary Knight, and Peter Liesch (2003), "Terrorism and International Business: Conceptual
Foundations." In Terrorism and the International Business Environment: The Security-Business Nexus. Ed. Gabriele
Suder. Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar 
European Commission (2001) Overview of EU Action In Response to the Events of 11 September and Assessment of
their Likely Economic Impact, Brussels, Commission of the European Communities, European Union
Fowler, F. (1988), Survey Research Methods, Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Hair, J. F. et al. (1992), Multivariate Data Analysis with Readings, 3rd ed., New York: Macmillan Publishing
Company 
Hofer, C. W. and Schendel D., (1978), Strategy Formulation: Analytical Concepts, St. Paul, MN: West Publishing 
Luo, Y. (2000), “Dynamic Capabilities in International Expansion,” Journal of World Business, 35, 4, pp. 355-78
Miller, D. and P. Friesen, (1984), Organizations: A Quantum View, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall
Porter, Michael (1991), “Towards a Dynamic Theory of Strategy,” Strategic Management Journal, 12, Winter: 
Special Issue, pp. 95-117. 
Punj, G. and Stewart D. W. (1983), “Cluster Analysis in Marketing Research: Review and Suggestions for
Applications,” Journal of Marketing Research, 20, May, pp. 134-48
Singh, J. (1990), “A Typology of Consumer Dissatisfaction Response Styles,” Journal of Retailing, 66, 1, 1990, pp. 
57-99
Teece, D. J., Pisano G., and Shuen A. (1997), “Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Management,” Strategic
Management Journal, 18, 7, pp. 509-33
Tomer, J. F. (1987), Organizational Capital: The Path to Higher Productivity and Well-being, New York: Praeger 
Wernerfelt, B. (1984), “A Resource-based View of the Firm,” Strategic Management Journal, 5, 2, pp. 171-80 
23
