Page 1
STATEMENT ON DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION
The Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID) and the U.S. Agency for
International Development (USAID) are to expand their work in partnership to address global
development challenges. The following initiatives are to be pursued under the U.S.-Australia
strategic partnership on international development, established in 2010. 
All Children Reading: A Grand Challenge for Development 
AusAID and USAID, in partnership with World Vision U.S. and World Vision Australia, 
will launch All Children Reading: A Grand Challenge for Development on November 18, in
Washington DC. The program will focus global attention on finding ground breaking, scalable
innovations that improve early grade reading outcomes for all children in poor countries during
the first three years of primary education. The four partners are providing a combined total of
more than US$20 million to launch the program. The initiative will begin with two important
activities: 
·  All Children Reading Fund – Through a competitive selection process, the All Children
Reading Fund will provide catalytic seed grant funding to successful applicants to undertake
their activities. We will support pioneering thinking and implementation which offer
sustainable and scalable solutions for early grade reading that can be brought to national
scale. 
·  Mobiles for Reading – This activity will convene experts and educators to support reading
attainment through the use of mobile devices. Through Mobiles for Reading and the
mEducation Alliance, the partners will speed up the identification and evaluation of new
technologies that take advantage of the rapid development of mobile applications, utilizing
infrastructure that already exists in many poor countries. 
GSMA mWomen Global Development Alliance 
USAID and AusAID are to partner with the GSMA (GSM Association) and Visa, Inc. 
through a Global Development Alliance (GDA) to close the mobile phone gender gap and
accelerate women’s empowerment and leadership opportunities. The partnership will improve
women’s access to life-enhancing services including financial inclusion, education and
healthcare via the mobile phone. Total funding under the Global Development Alliance is
almost US$10 million over three years. The GDA is part of the GSMA mWomen Program, a
global public-private partnership between the worldwide mobile industry and the international
development community. 
Building on their previous commitments of $500,000 each, AusAID and USAID are
contributing an additional approximately $7 million to this program. That will be augmented by
contributions from Visa and GSMA to reach a total budget of around $10 million over three
years. Key activities under this expanded program include: (a) technical assistance grants to
mobile operators to help them implement mWomen opportunities and products; (b) a grant
mechanism for NGOs to work with mobile operators and design activities that address the
barriers to mobile uptake among women, particularly technical literacy and traditional attitudes
Page 2
surrounding women’s ownership of mobile phones; (c) research into women’s wants and needs, 
such as within mobile financial services; (d) pilot activities for bringing women into the retail
stream of the mobile value chain; and (e) focused attention on the mobile user experience of
women living on less than $2/day, to maximize life-enhancing benefits from mobile phone use. 
Anticipated outcomes include greater women’s empowerment, leadership, education, 
employment and entrepreneurship. 
Collaboration in South East Asia
AusAID and USAID are partnering in South East Asia to help close the development gap
between ASEAN member countries and are working closely together to support real outcomes in
economic growth and other key development challenges throughout the region. AusAID and
USAID are to work to: 
·  Help mitigate the effects of climate change, in countries such as Vietnam where programs
are being developed to help residents of the Mekong Delta adapt to changes in the
environment and climate; 
·  Combat trans-boundary threats in the Lower Mekong region including human trafficking, 
HIV and emerging infectious diseases, including resistant strains of malaria and tuberculosis; 
·  Raise awareness of human trafficking, through campaigns such as MTV Exit Foundation’s
documentary films and concerts which can reach hundreds of thousands of young people in
the region; 
·  Improve water resource management by assisting the region to develop transparent and rules-
based approaches to decision-making, for example on the development of dams on the
Mekong River; and
·  Improve the capacity of the region to respond to natural disasters and to build resilience and
reduce disaster risk. 
Cooperation in the Pacific Islands 
Australia is the largest development partner to Pacific Island nations, and the United
States re-opened a regional USAID program for the Pacific Islands in Port Moresby, Papua New
Guinea, in October 2011. In view of Australia and the United States’ shared interest in
promoting sustainable development and stability in the Pacific Islands, and Australia’s
longstanding program in the region, AusAID and USAID will explore possibilities for country-
level coordination between the two programs to enhance impact and effectiveness in the region. 
Cooperation in Afghanistan
Both Australia and the United States recognize the importance of encouraging stability in
fragile and post-conflict environments. In Afghanistan, AusAID and USAID staff work
alongside one another in the Uruzgan Provincial Reconstruction Team, and the agencies
collaborate closely on development policy and implementation of projects to encourage stability
in preparation for transition. Australia is providing more than A$5 million to support several
important U.S. assistance programs in Uruzgan and elsewhere in Afghanistan, including: 
·  A$1 million over one year to extend USAID’s rule of law program in Uruzgan Province, 
which will set up systems to support dispute resolution at the community level; 
Page 3
·  A$2 million over two years to augment USAID’s US$30 million Civilian Technical
Assistance Program, aimed at improving the performance of the public sector’s delivery of
essential services; and 
·  A$2 million to the U.S. municipal services program in Uruzgan Province to improve urban
services such as accessibility to local parks and wastewater collection and treatment. 
