Page 1
Call for Papers for a Special Issue on 
Institutions for Sustainable Development
Deadline for submission: 15 July 2011
Natural Resources Forum, a United Nations Sustainable Development Journal, a
quarterly journal issued by the Division for Sustainable Development of the United
Nations calls for papers for a special issue on institutional framework for
sustainable development, to be published in 2012.
This special issue seeks to take stock on progress made since the Earth Summit in 1992 in the
area of institutions for sustainable development at all levels. It looks as well to provide a view of
the obstacles and bottlenecks to the further implementation of sustainable development
principles or tools. Among others, angles of interest can include: 
•  Issues with the vertical integration of sustainable development decisions, commitments and
policies across different spatial scales (from the multilateral level to the local level), and role
of specific instruments in enhancing such integration (e.g. ISO 26,000);
•  Evaluation of the state of implementation of specific Rio Principles, including conflicts with
other principles or institutional practices and recommendations for further progress; 
•  Integration of sustainable development paradigm, principles (e.g. integrated perspective, Rio
principles) and concepts (e.g. public participation, institutional coordination, disclosure of
information, gender equality) in sectoral and economy-wide strategies, plans and policies at
the regional and national level ; assessment of the integration in decision-making and at the
implementation level, in relation to specific institutional setups and governance structures; 
•  Evaluation of policy review mechanisms (e.g. WTO, ILO, NEPAD, NSDS) and how they
could be used to promote better integration of sustainable development in national policy
documents; 
•  Assessment of international and national level monitoring systems in support of sustainable
development: technical, institutional gaps and possibilities for improvement
•  Assessment of the impacts of multilateral financing institutions and donors’ institutions and
delivery mechanisms on the take-up of sustainable development considerations in strategic
plans and investments in developing countries; 
•  Evaluation of local experiences in practical implementation of sustainable development
principles (e.g. participatory budgets, local Agenda 21);
•  Assessment of the role of international standards and voluntary practices (e.g. CSR, 
environmental reporting, fair trade) on sustainability. 
Articles should contain original material and should be between 6,000 and 8,000 words in
length. Contributions to the journal are accepted at the NRFs manuscript submission site at
http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/nrf. Questions and comments can be addressed to: 
Natural Resources Forum
A United Nations Sustainable Development Journal 
e-mail: NRFORUM@un.org
