Page 1
Concept paper for the international conference
Imagining the Worst: Foresight, Ethics, and Extreme Climate Scenarios
March 1-3 Bled/Slovenia
Authors: John Crowley and Romi S.Mukherjee
Introduction 
If foresight restricts itself to possible futures that are familiar, its interpretive and strategic value is
likely to be limited. The point of thinking seriously about possible futures is, presumably, to
confront alternatives that are in some way “extreme”: in the sense that they are highly unlikely –
but not impossible – or because they entail consequences that might radically alter the world
relevant to the planner, strategist or decision-maker. 
From the political perspective of collective risk management, the “worst-case scenario” is of
particular significance in this respect. Regarded as a set of background parameters, the worst case
offers an opportunity to test the robustness and strength of a strategy – “if we can cope with that
we can cope with anything”. Regarded as a hypothetical outcome, the worst case sets the terms of
a prevention strategy and by defining what is to be avoided at all costs, it clarifies a hierarchy of
values and thereby makes the decision problem tractable. 
1
Page 2
Worst-case planning has a strong intuitive basis. It has furthermore been formalized by various
kinds of decision rules and been given sophisticated philosophical expression, e.g. as the
“catastrophism” espoused by Jean-Pierre Dupuy. It is also implicit in many formulations of
“precaution” as supposedly distinguished from prevention. 
However, worst-case planning also raises a number of major difficulties: technical, methodological
and, more generally, ethical. The purpose of the proposed three-day conference will be to map
these difficulties and explore their implications, with particular reference to the problem of ethical
responses to climate change. 
Measuring the worst
The technical problems of worst-case planning are well known, although their broader ethical
significance is not always recognized. Four issues deserve to be mentioned here. 
First, even within a reasonably well structured universe of probabilities, assigning definite
likelihood to a highly unlikely event is extremely difficult. It is now well known that phenomena
that display generically bell-shaped frequency distributions do not necessarily behave “normally” in
the mathematical sense. Numerous specific examples, of financial markets and of physical
phenomena such as ocean waves, have demonstrated that extreme events (market crashes, 
“hundred-year waves”) are much more likely than familiar statistical models had assumed –
although exactly how likely often remains highly uncertain. 
Secondly, many actual and particularly hypothetical phenomena do not permit statistical analysis
based on observed frequency distributions. It is often judged that this gives them a radically
different character, leading to distinctions between “risk” and “uncertainty” and between
“prevention” and “precaution” that are in fact more problematic than often realized.1 However, 
regardless of one’s philosophical interpretation of likelihood or probability, it remains the case that
assessing how likely some unique or unprecedented event is to happen, and therefore what weight
one should give it in a decision calculus, is a technically fragile procedure. Rather than a calculation
to be conducted in a sprit of exactness, it is indeed rather a commitment to be entered into in a
sprit of responsibility. To this extent, weighing likelihoods (and then basing action on the weights) 
is inherently of ethical significance. 
Thirdly, catastrophic scenarios have consequences that potentially exceed our capacity to assess
them, and thus to compare them with the outcomes of alternative courses of action. Any response
operation carries an implicit set of assumptions. Because most things are unaffected, we can put a
price on repairing what is damaged. We plan, in other words, for incremental, not for existential
disasters. A disaster that changes “us” is a different matter entirely. “We” are called upon to plan
for something that someone else, not a future “we” will have to deal with. Extreme climate
scenarios have this feature. Lovelock’s “hot world”, with a carrying capacity of 200 million people, 
is not something “we” can plan for because it would no longer recognizably be “our” world. 
Hence the feeling, widely shared among those who take such scenarios seriously as things that
“might happen”,  that no cost would be too high to bear now if it offered a guarantee that
catastrophe might be avoided. From this perspective, the careful calculations of (say) the Stern
1 Such distinctions depend ultimately on an objectivistic approach to probability (as summarizing features of “the
world”) that is questionable in a number of respects. It is possible to offer an alternative, subjectivistic approach to
probability (generically termed “Bayesian”, as famously expounded in Savage’s Foundations of Statistics) in which the
distinction between risk and uncertainty essentially disappears in its familiar form. In the subjectivistic interpretation
probabilities are properties not of “the world” but of a form of knowledge displaying a certain structure. 
2
Page 3
report look like a spectacular case of missing the point. And once we start discussing not what we
can afford but who we want to be, we are on inescapably ethical terrain. 
Fourthly, even within the realm of calculable consequences, extended timescales, of the kind
notably associated with climate change, put enormous pressure on the ability to assess, to compare
and to weigh. Future costs and benefits are discounted to reflect the opportunity cost of capital: a
positive discount rate implies an assumption that the future will, other things being equal, have
greater capacity to “cope” than the present (because of the economic growth, technical progress
etc. derived from present investment). But in certain climate change scenarios, this assumption is
clearly not valid. Furthermore, even when it is at least arguably valid, it is very difficult to put a
figure on time-related differential ability to cope. Yet, because it is an exponential procedure, 
discounting has results that, over long periods, are extremely sensitive to small differences in the
annual rate. Choosing a discount rate and acting on it is in this sense an ethical as much as a
technical matter. 
Imagining the “worst” 
For the reasons given in the previous section, even if we have a worst-case scenario, we are likely
to face major technological challenges in dealing with it. But how would such a scenario be
developed in the first place? There is a complex set of connections between the worst we can think
of and the worst that might happen, and these connections require careful analysis. Foresight is in
this sense an exercise in imagination. Foresight conducted in a publicly accountable way for
collectively relevant purposes is thus an exercise in social imagination. By bringing into play ideas of
what counts as “bad”, by mobilizing fears and desires, by including some and excluding others, to
attempt to make the future intelligible for the purposes of the decisions of today is thus inherently
ethical. 
An example may help to bring out some of the key features here. After the events of September
11th 2001, the Pentagon, perhaps lacking in imagination or all too cognizant of the conjunction
between Hollywood, the American political unconscious, and the “war on terror”, solicited the aid
of a series of screenwriters and directors who were the masters of the Armageddon, apocalypse, 
and catastrophe genre. Thus, geopolitics came to merge with the Hollywood imaginary, its own
“cinematic desires” and self-interests. However, terror is, by and large, assumed to have a “human
face” and geopolitics is largely the province of all too human actors. And although terror cannot be
“mastered”, its contours and complexities do not necessarily move out of the closed circle of
human knowledge and self-understanding. The same can certainly not be said about “nature” and
“climate-change”,  those very non-human political actors that threaten the human species with
catastrophes and “ends” that remain mired in uncertainty and indeed exist on the frontiers of
socially and scientifically constructed knowledge bases. All the more reason then to take seriously
the Pentagon’s embrace of “imaginary foresight” and apply it to the question of climate change. 
In addition to the fairly familiar technical challenges summarized in the previous section, the
conference will need to also explore imagination, its limits and its implications. Climate change
confronts us with the challenge of imagining the unimaginable. Having done so, we also need to
examine what ethical tools exist or need to be forged in order to act in a space of uncertainty or
rather develop an “ethics of uncertainty”. In a more general sense, the conference might function
as an experiment whereby experts will be asked to imagine an anti-scientific realm and examine the
laws which preside over exceptions - an attempt to elucidate an imaginary cosmos which could
potentially become very real through developing a “science of imaginary solutions” that could
potentially provide the grounds for practical action. 
3
Page 4
Facing up to the unimaginable requires us to leave certain comfort zones of knowledge and science
and boldly examine those possibilities and probabilities that confound the very nature of our
foresight and strategic planning. In a more “extreme” sense, extreme scenarios demand human
knowledge to envision the extinction of the human species and to come to terms with a series of
cataclysms that indeed illustrate the limits of ethical and scientific knowledge, cataclysms where
philosophy, epistemology, and foresight actually stop. This is not to say that, faced with radical
uncertainty, one should cease to rely on scientific knowledge bases for insights and slip into despair
or nihilism. On the contrary, it is precisely through imagining those extreme scenarios where ethics
and science “stop” that ethics and science stand to be fortified. Within the play of knowledge and
non-knowledge (or uncertainty), new frames stand to be developed that are better equipped to
bring nature into knowledge and bring knowledge to also become more “natural”.
It might be worth summarizing very briefly how high are the stakes of such reflection and how
closely they relate both to the political and ideological fault lines of contemporary societies and to
certain key tensions within contemporary philosophy. 
For instance deep-green ecological perspectives offer one structured pattern of imagination and
value that leads to specific prescriptions for collective survival. However, their ultimate use-value is
all too often relegated to a series of rhetorical gestures that paradoxically reaffirm liberal humanism
while masquerading as radical anti-humanist provocation. Beyond these banalities, lies the moment
of reckoning with the catastrophe itself. 
The extremes we are concerned with are inherently both unlikely and catastrophic; at the same
time, they are, by assumption, tied to the very fabric of contemporary societies at least as
possibilities. This set of linkages has received considerable philosophical attention that deserves to
be reflected in the proposed conference. 
The key issue is to reflect on what science, ethics, and philosophy, can do in these circumstances
and how within the discourses on progress, mastery, breakthrough, and “creation”, there exists the
foreboding parallel process of degradation, alienation, breakdown, and destruction. In other words, 
hyper-modernity is the culture of the catastrophe, the culture of the accident and as Paul Virilio
argues: 
Every technology produces, provokes, programs a specific accident. The invention of the boat
was the invention of shipwrecks. The invention of the steam engine and the locomotive was
the invention of derailments. The invention of highways was the invention of three hundred
cars colliding in five minutes. The invention of the airplane was the invention of the plane
crash…[But] the negative side of speed and technology was censored. The technicians, by
becoming technocrats, tended to positivize the object and say “I am hiding it. I am not
showing it.” There’s a lot to be said about the obscenity of technology. That’s where you find
technophilia…I believe that the accident is to the social sciences what sin is to human nature. 
It’s a certain relation to death, that is the revelation of the identity of the object.2
Technology may therefore be pushing philosophy and science to the accident while these
disciplines themselves, absorbed in hyper-velocity, hide not only death, but their own pending
death. There is a false feeling of progress that covers the actual state of inertia. 
How to get past this and replace pessimism with a useful realism? One potential first step is to
envisage real “extreme scenarios” and examine how their “nature” can bring us to re-elaborate and
2 Paul Virilio, Pure War (with Sylvère Lotringer), New York, Semiotext(e), 1997, pp. 38-39 
4
Page 5
ethics of climate change with a view to final stage of socio-eco-bio-sphere and with a view to
creating ethical subjectivities that do not disavow their own very crepuscular status in a forgotten
Petri dish. Nonetheless, embarking on this exercise is certainly easier said than done. 
In a recent study entitled L’Humanité disparaîtra, bon débarras ! (Humanity Will Disappear, Good
Riddance!)  philosopher and ecologist Yves Paccalet offers a general foundation for thinking
through the “ethics of exception” and outlines 13 “modest” scenarios: 
1 - La météorite tueuse (the deadly meteorite) 
2 - Le nuage interstellaire amenant un hiver perpétuel (the interstellar cloud that brings eternal
winter) 
3 - Les volcans en furie (furious volcanoes) 
4 - Le destin de l’île de Pâques (general deforestation) 
5 - Les armes de destruction massive (weapons of mass destruction) 
6 - Gaïa défigurée (Gaia or the revolt of the Earth, the ocean, and the cosmos, against the human) 
7 - Le destin de la mer d’Aral (the drying up of water reserves) 
8 - Le sida du dauphin (pathologies of aquatic life and their repercussions on the human) 
9 - L’effondrement de la bio-diversité (the collapse of biodiversity) 
10 - L’explosion de nouvelles épidémies (an explosion of new epidemics) 
11 - Les moissons d’OGM (harvesting genetically modified plants) 
12 - Les trous dans la couche d’ozone (holes in the ozone layer) 
13 - Les climats en folie (climates gone mad)3
Such an inventory of extreme scenarios could easily be supplemented illustrating at once the
richness of the apocalyptic imaginary (and its perverse desire to become real – yes, humanity
dreams of its own demise) and the awareness of a series of very real crises that require the
immediate recalibration of already existing knowledge bases. 
What ethics? 
To summarize: without taking seriously the possibility of the “worst” we are unlikely to deal
adequately with the risk of the bad. Yet to imagine the worst is an imaginative and technical
challenge that we are poorly equipped to face. The Hollywood approach referred to earlier is, 
ostensibly, an attempt to think the unthinkable, to shock and to bring to attention. But in fact, it
replaces scientific rigour with narrative convention. The crucial concern to identify things that might
happen (and how they might) is replaced by the overwhelming desire to tell a story that makes sense. 
But the possibility that the future might be radically different is thereby immediately foreclosed. 
Even the apocalypses we imagine are still within the limits of our imagination. 
In addition, even if we assume for the sake of argument that we have identified a plausible worst-
case scenario (or a plausible set of catastrophic possibilities), there are major difficulties in dealing
with it (or them). Maybe focusing on the worst case simply distracts us from something else that is
nearly as bad and much more likely. In which case there might be something profoundly unethical, 
and ultimately morbid, in seeking to map catastrophes while immediate ills are left untended.4 The
worst-case planner, in this case, would have one eye turned inwards and the other turned upwards
towards the heavens. Not a recipe for clear vision. There is indeed a paradoxical comfort in
focusing on the (unlikely) worst case: by contrast, it erodes the difference between the good and
3 See Yves Paccalet, L'Humanité disparaîtra, bon débarras!, Paris, Arthaud (2006) 
4 Bjørn Lomborg famously argued this case against major financial commitments to combat climate change, before
reconsidering his conclusions in his latest book. 
5
Page 6
bad things that are likely to happen. Ethical responsibility to arbitrate between small but
meaningful differences is thus diluted. 
Climate change is a phenomenon clouded by both moral and scientific uncertainty, but one that, 
nonetheless, obliges us to act. Extreme scenarios further confound such action by virtue of their
unimaginability. Insofar as climate change immediately poses the question of “what is to be
done?”,  its contours are always-already ethical. However, as Michael Oborne, Pierre Lena and
Philippe Bordeyne have surmised, the reality of climate change penetrates consciousness little by
little and even more timidly in economic and political debate – part of the reason for this concerns
not only the great uncertainties that plague climate science, but rather the fact that the ethics of
climate change is animated by an ecological intuition which runs against the grain of normative
models of economic reason. Ethics, of course, is an ideal intellectual and practical rubric where
the poles of economic reason and ecological intuition may be potentially reconciled as the spirit of
ethics has been less about a rigid disciplinary orientation than the sustained effort to envisage the
best type of governmentality, delineate the rapport between subject, nature, and polis with a view
to the good, the virtuous, and the fine. Thus, ethics has always sought to unite what we now refer
to as political theory, philosophy, anthropology, economics, and theology. 
However, although ethics might overcome the antinomies between these disciplines, when grafted
on to extreme scenarios, a series of troublesome sociological and scientific problems inevitably
present themselves. In many ways, climate change functions as a kind of disavowed knowledge in
the world of the occidental middle class – an apocalyptic kernel of truth whose traumatic trace
(that of the potential extinction of the human species) – is registered (i.e. we know climate change
exists and it is bad) and simultaneously repudiated (we know not what to do in the face of climate
change and ethics hardly provides a powerful enough rubric for collective mobilization).  The
“extreme” only serves to magnify this site of forgetting and fear (due, obviously to its extremis).
The results here are manifold: while the immediately vulnerable in developing regions, coastal
regions, and islands, experience in real time the visceral effects of climate change they are further
abjectified or disconnected from the international process that claims to ameliorate their
conditions. Simultaneously, the new mendicant orders of NGOs and developmentalists rally for
more infrastructure and dissimulate their own collusion with the neo-liberal juggernaut. On the
other hand, those who can really act are also paralyzed by their incapacity to comprehend on any
real substantive level the stakes and repercussions of climate change and devolve into complacency
and apathy, or worse a dangerous cocktail of cynicism and hedonism. “Acting” ethically, again in a
concrete and day to day manner, is difficult when one is reminded of one’s finitude on a regular
basis – it is good to know that you and the human species are going to die, but you don’t need to
be told this every minute. The consequences are the radicalization of a thoroughly depoliticized
and deradicalized bourgeoisie through the ideology of the new ecology where, as Slavoj Žižek has
recently noted, ecologists are all the time demanding that we change radically our way of life, but
underlying this demand is its opposite, a deep distrust of change, of development, of progress: 
every radical change can have the unintended consequence of triggering a catastrophe. In other
words, contemporary liberal ecology presents itself in opposition to technological civilization and
progress creating yet another space of antagonism for any reflection on the ethical, one where the
over-determination of finitude in the new ecological ethical posture collides with capitalist infinity. 
Hence, contra Michel Serres who, suspicious of any political response to the problem, forecloses
governmental, institutional, and social action in favor of a pure environmental ethics of the
individual, insofar as climate change is buoyed by global capitalism, any ethical intervention must
take place on the level of social relations. Its first step is obviously to move beyond the childish
regression where one refuses to accept emotionally what one knows to be the case intellectually. 
6
Page 7
But what does it mean to know climate change intellectually and to, following from this, orient
one’s activity and agency towards it in an ethical manner? Until recently, “intellectual knowledge” 
of climate change was more or less the hegemony of what we call science whose ideological veneer
was an extension of the liberal cult of progress that emphasized that advances in science and
technology could adequately construct viable means of adapting and mitigating climate change. In
such a culture of scientism, revealing climate change to be an ethical, political, and social issue still
proves difficult. However, as the recent report of COMEST has made clear, the ethical
implications of global climate change must also seriously take into account the uncertainties
embedded in scientific knowledge. Furthermore, the fact that some of these uncertainties are
recognized to be irreducible heightens the need to clarify the ethical grounds of response. On the
one hand, in spite of scientific consensus that global climate change indeed exists, and that it is
contributed to by past and present human action, there are a number of scientific uncertainties that
make it difficult to form a clear picture of the ethical implications. On the other hand, in spite of a
growing consensus that global climate change is seriously affecting the well-being of the whole of
humanity living now and in the future, and also that it is affecting some groups more than others, 
it is unclear what exactly the ethical challenges of global climate change are, and on the basis of
which ethical considerations we should take what action to address these challenges. The question
of the ethics of science itself is ever-present here as well. 
Therefore, if we take seriously the notion of an ethics of uncertainty and cease to rely on the not
entirely sound logic of the precautionary principle, the ethics of climate change must be articulated
within a certain void, where, as Hans Jonas has rightly noted, no traditional ethical paradigm can
instruct us about norms of good and evil to which all institutional, political, and social structures
should be submitted. Hence, we need to understand the geopolitical and geo-philosophical world
that emerges with climate change to be something of a virgin ground for ethical theory and ethical
practice. And in this void, which is plagued on the one hand by the absolute relativism of values
which in the highest sense of post-modernism deems all normative frames to be contingent, and
on the other hand by religious absolutism and/or fundamentalism, we must ask “what ethical
theory?” – and how such an ethical theory can move beyond a simple discourse of fear and identify
and respond to extreme scenarios. 
Of course, there is an existing ethical framework to address climate change that is enshrined in the
authoritative agreements entered into by the international community. However, while the
efficiency and force of these principles should by no means be diminished or discounted, one
wonders whether the ecological crisis can simply be treated through the invocation of the ethical
maxims that emerge from an anthropology that is itself circumscribed within a certain type of
humanistic ideology. Such a frame moreover presumes a subjectivity that is capable of exercising
ethical imperatives – but the very idea of this subject is called into question in our contemporary
age where reason has given way to technology and subjectivity is no longer that which acts but
rather that upon which the world is inscribed. Can we still thus speak of the autonomy of reason
as the ground for the ethical and more importantly how do we reconcile this autonomy with the
supposed intrinsic value of nature, the cosmos, and the animal world, which are far from
reasonable? 
Nonetheless, the simple placement of nature at the center of ethical reflection carries within it a
whole other set of dilemmas, particularly if we attempt to reconcile ethics to the supposed entropic
nature of the universe or the extremities laden within the Gaia hypothesis. John Gray’s lament
about “homo rapiens” and the fact that humans are very “bad animals” should, in this context not be
interpreted as mere provocation. On the contrary, the very nature of agency and efficient ethical
action is confounded by the narrative that tells us that the catastrophe has already happened and
7
Page 8
that the question is not whether the species is going to die but what form its slow suicide will take
place. The extreme scenario in this regard is simply a magnificent coda. 
In addition, if climate is a political actor, we cannot say that it is necessarily an ethical one – in the
same manner that any ontological theory of substance, élan vital, or force is not in and of itself
ethical. But climate science and climate politics have yet to seriously take nature’s political status
into account and insist that climate change can and should be addressed with through the rubric of
really existing democracies and with an aim to creating more robust and inclusive policies
grounded in amongst other things human rights, equity, and greater emancipation from both
natural and manmade forces. However, we should also recall that really existing democracy when
understood as a moniker for the market forces of late capitalism is precisely what allows for states
such as India, Brazil, China etc. to effect and alter the course of policies that advocate an ethics of
climate change – leading thinkers such as Lovelock to exhort that climate change has created a
universal state of exception that is veiled by a certain faith that everything will nonetheless go on as
it always did. In Lovelock’s words, “one of the main obstructions to meaningful action is modern
democracy. Even the best democracies agree that when a major war approaches, democracy must
be put on hold for the time being. I have a feeling that climate change may be an issue as severe as
a war. It may be necessary to put democracy on hold for a while.” While some may interpret this as
just another conservative raving of a cranky old man, it again poses the question of what ethics and
does ask us to rethink our often instinctive reliance on ready-made democratic formulae
concerning, pluralism, equity, solidarity etc., formulae which themselves may have to be reassessed
in light of the new “extreme” stakes of the planet. 
What foresight? 
Hence the urgency of forging a “foresight of uncertainty” and a “strategy of the exception”.
Foresight and scenario-building are among the only tools available to us to envisage such
uncertainty and exception, but in this context, normative methods of foresight analysis have to be
pushed even further in their examination of: 
I.  key drivers
II.  societal needs
III. knowledge formation
IV. shifting ethical and scientific paradigms
V.  the limits of human and technological response
VI. societal mega-trends and their influence on extreme scenarios (and conversely mega-
trends of climate and their influence on societies) 
VII. geographic and regional shifts
VIII. criteria of vulnerability
IX. security
X.  human, non-human and natural actors
XI. “disruption” 
XII. globalization
At the same time as the extremes need to be better mapped, their ethical significance needs to be
better understood. In particular, the question of their weighting, and of the possibly perverse
consequences of the fascination they understandably exert, needs to be explicitly addressed. 
8
