Page 1
China: Peacekeeping and the Responsible Stakeholder
August 28, 2007 | 1815 GMT  PRINT Text Resize:
Summary
A Chinese national was appointed Aug. 27 to lead a U.N. peacekeeping mission for the first
time. Beijing first signed on to the international peacekeeping bandwagon only a few years
ago, and its desire to burnish its international image as a “responsible stakeholder” and fend
off pressure from international economic disputes is accelerating its move to center stage in
this multilateral sphere. This participation will not be enough to escape U.S. criticisms of self-
interested policing, though it will help polish Beijing’s credentials as a peaceful global
stakeholder.
Getty Images
Members of a Chinese U.N.
peacekeeping force from
Chongqing 
Analysis
A Chinese national, Maj. Gen. Zhao Jingmin, was appointed to head a U.N. mission for the
first time Aug. 27. Zhao will lead the U.N. peacekeeping mission in Western Sahara.
The appointment marks a big step for China, which only began sending observers and police personnel overseas a few years
ago. China is frustrated, however, that its attempts to answer U.S. calls for it to play the role of a “responsible stakeholder” via
participation in international peacekeeping operations have led anti-China factions in the U.S. Congress to express concerns
about Beijing’s expansionist ambitions in Africa.
China hopes to use the participation to gain experience, clean up its image, strengthen its internationalist credentials and
prove that China — not Japan — is the responsible international player in Asia. China first dipped its toe into U.N.
peacekeeping missions in 2000, but sent only a handful of police and observers. Three years later, China contributed troops; it
now has more than 1,500 troops deployed under U.N. auspices in five countries: Liberia, Sudan, Lebanon, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and East Timor.
As it expands its foreign investments, Beijing
has found it must expand its overseas activities
beyond economic and political engagement to
include a security component. This is especially
the case in regions where political involvement
does not always guarantee the safety of
Chinese investment interests, as in Ethiopia,
where an attack by 200 militants left nine
Page 2
Chinese workers dead and an energy
exploration facility damaged. Energy security
sits high on the Chinese leadership’s list of
priorities, explaining Beijing’s current spending
spree across the world’s top energy/resource
producers. And for the fruit of any overseas
energy asset acquisition to be reaped, security
is a must.
Beijing continues to use its political leverage to this end, engaging in both checkbook diplomacy and
more innovative economic packages (such as the China Development Bank’s recent purchase of a
stake in Barclays) to secure its investment interests overseas. But more than just political leverage is
needed.
The struggle to secure its interests has become especially urgent as other countries have started
following China in using money to strike up political friendships in energy-rich states. Japanese Prime
Minister Shinzo Abe’s ruling Liberal Democratic Party announced in June that Japan’s Africa budget will
be tripled over the next five years. Sensing the competition in aid monies, Beijing is keen to expand its
assistance in areas where Tokyo has less flexibility — namely, overseas troop deployment, which the
pacifist Japanese Constitution constrains. Japan is the second-largest cash contributor to the U.N.
peacekeeping budget, providing 17 percent of the fund, while China is the seventh-largest, giving 3
percent. In terms of troop contributions, however, China surpasses Japan by far: China is the 13th-
largest contributor of troops, while Japan does not even place in top 15.
Operating as part of a U.N. mission lends China’s expansion into international security operations a
more nonthreatening cast.
China already has security personnel stationed abroad to protect its interests in countries such as
Sudan, but these forces are privately contracted. By contrast, sending state-funded security personnel
overseas inevitably will spark U.S. criticism. Operating as part of a U.N. mission, however, lends China’s
expansion into international security operations a more peace-orientated, nonthreatening cast: it gives
the impression that China is spending its security budget overseas not just for itself, but for the world.
An enhanced global stakeholder reputation will help Beijing defuse the negative international public
relations China has been receiving on its other economic issues, such as substandard Chinese exports,
trade imbalances with the United States and European Union, or the yuan appreciation issue. It also will
help Beijing counter foreign criticism of its human rights track record. Beijing’s financial support to the
Sudanese government, for example, was mentioned during German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s visit to
China to lobby Beijing on the subject of climate change.
Ultimately, China hopes that its peacekeeping participation will enhance its credentials as a peaceful
alternative to the United States as a global police force. And with Japan busy extracting itself from its
pacifist constitutional chains, Beijing will be the only Asian alternative to the United States.
