Page 1
1 
Page 2
2 
Page 3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………............................ 3
HISTORY OF THE U.S.A. AID TO PAKISTAN………………………………..…... 5
THE PRINCIPLES OF AN ENGAGEMENT…........................................................... 6
MUTUAL INTERESTS OF THE U.S.A. AND PAKISTAN……………………...… 7
STRUCTURE OF THE BILL 1707………………………………………………….... 7
CONCERNS OVER THE KERRY-LUGAR LAW..............................................….... 8
§  GOVERNMENT………………………………………………………………... 9
§  OPPOSITION………………………………………………………………..... 10
§  DEFENCE……..……………………………………………………………..... 11
U.S. RESPONSE…..…………………………………………………………………... 12 
EUROPEAN UNION…………………………………………………………………. 13
CONCLUSION………………………………………………………........................... 13
REFERENCES………………………………………………………………………... 16
3
Page 4
KERRY-LUGAR LAW 
INTRODUCTION: 
The Kerry-Lugar Bill was introduced by Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman
John F. Kerry and ranking republican Richard Lugar, through which Pakistan would
acquire economic assistance of 1.5 billion US$ per year and 7.5 billion US$ over the next
five years. It is an aid package for social sector development to help stabilize Pakistan. 
The bill was passed by the U.S. congress on Sept 24, 2009 and signed into law by
President Obama on October 15, 2009. 
The KLL has become a critical issue in Pakistan. It got extreme criticism and less-echo in
favor. Its language, checks and balances, the U.S. influence over the state institutions and
requirement of certification on the utilization of aid are the causes of concern. For many
Pakistanis, the KLL smells a lot like the very controversial Pressler Amendment of 1985, 
which eventually led to layers upon layer of sanctions on Pakistan in the nineties. In nut
shell the U.S. involvement has been viewed as against the sovereignty of the state. 
On the other hand, the U.S. view is that the KLL is designed to show a longer term
commitment to the people of Pakistan. The provisos requiring annual certification were
included to address the concerns of many legislators about what they view as a previously
ineffective aid program of the U.S. in the past. Their view is that aid should be directly
tied to progress in key areas of concern related to the U.S. national interest and that there
should be no “blank cheque”.
According to the Senator Kerry “this legislation is the first time, we have made a longer-
term commitment, while governments may change it, I don’t  believe the country
(Pakistan) itself is about to fall apart.”1 He also added “it (KLL) was designed to have a
long-term engagement with the people of Pakistan and strengthen their bond with the
people of the U.S. with a desire to change wrong perceptions about America.”2 The U.S. 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on her visit to Pakistan said in the meeting with
President Asif Ali Zardari, “the U.S. was looking forward to a long-term sustained and
multidimensional partnership with the democratic government and the people of
Pakistan.”3
1Farah Stockman, “Kerry, Lugar aim to triple nonmilitary aid to Pakistan”, (May 5, 2009), available at
http://www.boston.com/news/nation/washigton/articles/2009/05/05/ 
2Baqir Sajjad Syed, “Kerry urges leaders to move on”, DAWN (Islamabad), October 20, 2009, available at 
http://www.dawnnews.net/wps/wcm/connect/dawn-content-library/dawn/the-newspaper/front-page/kerry-urges-leaders-to-move-on-
009 
3Baqir Sajjad Syed, “Hillary cautions against playing up US-Pak differences” DAWN (Islamabad), October 29, 2009, available at 
http://www.dawn.com/wps/wcm/connect-connect-library/dawn/the-newspaper/front-page/hillary-cautions-against-playing-up-uspak-
differences-909 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
4
Page 5
The KLL is the perfect illustration of why noted author Dennis Kux called Pakistan and
the U.S., “Disenchanted Allies” in his 1990s book of the same title. The truth of the
matter is that neither country truly understands the other and that both tend to evaluate
one another’s actions using their own political and social context. The result is that
everyone’s expectations of the other are typically not met, which leads to disappointment
and resentment. 
This paper is aimed to provide the brief summary of the KLL and highlight the views of
its supporters and concerns of its opponents, and to explore areas of common interest
between the U.S.A. and Pakistan along with remedies to meet the challenges. 
HISTORY OF THE U.S.A. AID TO PAKISTAN: 
Over the past half century, the U.S. assistance to Pakistan has been intermittent. As a
result of a 1954 mutual defense assistance agreement, the U.S. provided nearly $2.5
billion in economic aid and nearly $700 million as military aid to Pakistan, “between” 
1954 to 1964. The Indo-Pakistani conflicts of 1965-1971 led the United States to suspend
nearly all aid to Pakistan, as well as to India, assisting Pakistan almost exclusively with
economic aid for the next 15 years ($1.45 billion in economic aid, $26 million in military
assistance from 1965-1971; $1.1 billion in economic aid, $2.9 million in military
assistance from 1972-1979). In 1979, the Carter administration suspended all aid to
Pakistan--except for food aid--because of Pakistan’s development of a uranium
enrichment facility. With the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union, U.S. 
assistance again increased dramatically, and this high level of aid continued throughout
the 1980s as Pakistan became the intermediary and central staging ground for covert U.S. 
support to anti-Soviet forces in Afghanistan. Aid rose from around $60 million in
economic and development assistance in 1979 to more than $600 million per year in the
mid-1980s. In total, the United States gave $3.1 billion in economic assistance and $2.19
billion in military assistance from 1980 until 1990. Even while the United States was
pumping large amounts of aid into Pakistan and Afghanistan to help defeat the Soviets, 
concern within the United States about Pakistan’s nuclear ambitions led Congress in 1985
to pass the Pressler amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act. The Pressler amendment
required the president to certify that Pakistan did not possess nuclear bomb for the fiscal
year in which aid was to be provided.4 On March 28, 1984, the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee (SFRC) adopted an amendment offered by Senators Alan Cranston and John
Glen providing that no assistance shall be furnished and `no military equipment or
technology shall be sold or transferred to Pakistan' unless the President could first certify
that Pakistan does not possess a nuclear explosive device, is not developing a nuclear
device, and is not acquiring goods to make such a device. On April 3, 1984, the SFRC
narrowly voted to reconsider this amendment and adopted instead a substitute offered by
4Testimony Lawrence Korb Senate Foreign Relations Committee Sub Committee on International Development and Foreign
Assistance Dec 6, 2007 
Ref.No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
5
Page 6
Senators Pressler and two other Senators, which tied the continuation of aid and military
sales to two certification conditions: (1) that Pakistan does not possess a nuclear
explosive device; and (2) that new aid “will reduce significantly the risk” that Pakistan
will possess such a device. This text, which was enacted on another bill in August 1985, 
has come to be called the `Pressler amendment.'5 Throughout the 1980s, President
Reagan and George H.W. Bush certified that Pakistan did not; however in 1990 the elder
President Bush refused to confirm that Pakistan did not have nuclear technology, and as a
result most economic and all military aid was cut off. Aid to Pakistan dropped
dramatically from 1991 to 2000 to a mere $429 million in economic assistance and $5.2
million in military assistance. 
The best estimate is that since 2001, the United States has given about $10.6 billion
dollars in foreign assistance to Pakistan. It appears to be distributed as follows: 
60 percent of U.S. aid has gone towards Coalition Support Funds (CSF). These funds are
given to reimburse the government of Pakistan for its efforts in what the Bush
administration labels the “Global War on Terrorism” (GWOT). They are considered by
the US administration to be a repayment rather than assistance. However, since there has
been little accountability or transparency of this funding, it is uncertain if in fact these
funds were being used to fight the GWOT. 
15 percent, or close to $1.6 billion, has been spent on security assistance. The Pakistanis
have used the majority of these funds to purchase major weapons systems, such as F-16s, 
for possible use in a conventional war. 
Another 15 percent has gone toward budget support or direct cash transfers to the
Government of Pakistan. This money was supposed to provide macroeconomic Stability
and to free up funds for social spending, but few transparent accountability mechanisms
were made. 
The remaining 10 percent has been used specifically for development and Humanitarian
assistance.6
THE PRINCIPLES OF AN ENGAGEMENT: 
It’s important to acknowledge the principles of international rules while accepting the aid
packages and unilateral or bilateral assistance. The principles of an engagement are given
below: 
· The first principle relates to the protection of the interests of the donors and the
recipients, respecting the sovereignty of each other. 
· The second principle is about a monitoring apparatus. 
5 Senator John Glenn USA, “Testimony Report” July 31, 1992
6Testimony Lawrence Korb Senate Foreign Relations Committee Sub Committee on International Development and Foreign
Assistance Dec 6, 2007 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
6
Page 7
· Third principle is accountability and assessment of the results. 
· Fourth and final principle is to make periodical adjustments, qualitative and
quantitative in the light of results. 
Regarding the KLL these principles should be kept in view. This would help in
rationalizing the methods of evaluation and attaining cooperation over the law and
beyond. 
MUTUAL INTERESTS OF THE USA AND PAKISTAN: 
Both the U.S.A. and Pakistan are pursuing many geo-strategic common goals since 1953. 
And its phase accelerated when Russia invaded Afghanistan. Combating violent
radicalism got importance after September 9, 2001. Pakistan also became a front-line ally
of U.S. in the global war on terror. In this regard Pakistan has made tremendous
multidimensional sacrifices. 
Pakistan is more determined then any other state to get rid of terrorism. It is also a fact
that Pakistan neither has the resources nor the strength to do it alone. It needs foreign
assistance not only military and economic but political also, to confront gigantic
challenges posed by insurgencies within Pakistan which are supported by the
WARLORDS and other criminal groups based in the neighboring countries. Regional
actors are also maneuvering the situation in accordance with their interests. 
The smooth operating of life line (logistic supplies) to NATO forces is also one of the
mutual concerns. Pakistan’s role for stabilizing Afghanistan is also important because of
cultural ties of Pukhtoons of bordering areas. 
Land-route to energy rich counties, Central Asia with the rest of the world, regional
political and economic concerns of China, India, Iran and Russia are also the areas of
common interest. 
The U.S. administration is inclined to build mutual trust, sustainable long-term
multifaceted relationships and intend to strengthen the area of security, stability and
development. A cohesive environment and well integrated US-Pak approach can serve
the geo-strategic interest for mutual benefit. For that matter a destabilized Pakistan is
neither in the U.S. nor in regional interests. 
STRUCTURE OF THE BILL 1707: 
The overall accord of the Bill contains fourteen sections. The first section of the bill
contains short title as This Act may be cited as the ‘Enhanced Partnership with
Pakistan Act of 2009’ and reveal a table of contents. The second section is about the
definition. The third section entitled with Findings and there are total twelve findings. 
The fourth section is about the statement of principles. 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009 
7
Page 8
The bill’s three main parts further clarify the purpose and method that will define the
engagement of American power with Pakistan. The first is focus upon Pakistan’s
traditional development challenges, entitled “Democratic, Economic and Development
Assistance for Pakistan”. This part contains three sections; section 101 is about the
authorization of assistance in which ‘the President is authorized to provide assistance to
Pakistan. Section 102 exposes the authorization of appropriation for the purposes of
providing assistance to Pakistan. Section 103 is about the auditing which reveals that ‘the
Inspector General of the Department of State, the Inspector General of the United States
Agency for International Development, and the inspectors general of other Federal
departments and agencies (other than the Inspector General of the Department of
Defense) carrying out programs, projects, and activities using amounts appropriated to
carry out this title shall audit, investigate, and oversee the obligation and expenditure of
such amounts.’
The second part of the bill, entitled, “Security Assistance for Pakistan” does not specify
how much money is available, but does define a new era in US-Pakistan military
relations. This part contains five sections; Section 201 focuses upon purpose of
assistance. Section 202 reveals the authorization of assistance. Section 203 is about the
limitations on certain assistance. Section 204 is about the Pakistan Counterinsurgency
Capability Fund. And Section 205 deals with the requirements for civilian control of
certain assistance. 
The final section entitled “Strategy, Accountability, Monitoring and Other
Provisions”.  This section details a complex set of planning, reporting, auditing and
accounting documents that are designed to ensure that Pakistan uses the money it is given
in accordance with the wishes of the US Congress. This section comprises two sections. 
Section 301 is about the Strategy Reports while the section 302 is about the Monitoring
Reports.7
CONCERNS OVER THE KERRY-LUGAR LAW: 
Regarding this law there is significant division within the country; through the discourse
held on national level strong concerns have been expressed. But no one has suggested the
alternative solution in case of rejection and those who are in favor also didn’t come up
with the remedies and adjustment required for objectionable part of it. Surprisingly a
discourse is going on either in favor or against it without any logical end. 
The clauses related to Pakistan’s nuclear program, support for cross-border militancy, 
civilian government’s role in promotions and appointments of defense sector and
involvement of the U.S. authorities in micro level management in different affairs of the
7Adil Najam, “Text of the Final Version of the Kerry-Lugar Bill: Enhanced Partnership with Pakistan Act of 2009”, (October 7, 2009),
available at http://pakistaniat.com/2009/10/07/full-text-kery-lugar-bill/ 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
8
Page 9
state got extreme criticism. The U.S. dominating role over decision making process
especially in the political management and economic security domain are the significant
areas. The general perception of Pakistanis is that KLL impinges on Pakistan’s
sovereignty. 
Those who are Pro-KLL have views that Pakistan should accept it, because it would be
supportive for socio-economic development and a means to stabilize the state. The
assistance through KLL is our last chance and let us not blows it away. Conditionality
might hurt our pride but on the whole the system will be forced to move in the right
direction; and meeting the KLL criteria would even help Pakistan becoming peaceful
member of the comity of nations. 
GOVERNMENT: 
The ruling party, Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) strongly supported the KLL in the house
terming it as a success of the democratic government and the PPP. President Asif Ali
Zardari said 
The bill was the first Pakistan aid legislative which did not require U.S. 
presidential certifications every year. It only required certification by the
Secretary of State that Pakistan was moving on the path of democracy, nuclear
non-proliferation and drugs control. Who in Pakistan under the present
democratic dispensation would disagree with these goals?8
Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani defended Kerry-Lugar Law claiming it as a ‘big
success’. He said “the passage of the Kerry-Lugar Bill is a big success of the government
as it is for the first time that the United States has supported a democratic government in
Pakistan instead of dictatorship.”9 And on nuclear issue he viewed “we have brought
everything before parliament. No one would be given access to Pakistan’s nuclear
arsenal.”10…….Economic assistance may be our last breathing space, let us use this
money wisely and follow the conditionality faithfully for the betterment of national
interests. 
Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi very strongly defended the bill and
said “the bill supports all the stated policies of Pakistan. Governments will come and go
but the state’s interests must remain supreme.”11 Not only this, Foreign Minister
delivered a very emotional speech in favor of bill and U.S. administration on the floor of
8“Will the parliament’s outbursts of national pride lead to outright rejection of KL-Bill?” (October 9, 2009), available at 
http://thepakistanpolicy.blogspot.com/2009/10/will-parliaments-outbursts-of-national.html
9ibid. 
10Fahad Chaudhry, “Kerry Lugar Bill: Govt draws Senate, NA Opps ire” Weekly Pulse (Islamabad), October 15, 2009, available at
http://www.weeklypulse.org/pulse/article/4320.html
11“Qureshi bats for Kerry-Lugar bill in Pak Parliament”, (October 16, 2009), available at http://www.indianexpress.com/news/qureshi-
bats-for-kerrylugar-bill-in-pak-parliament/529853/ 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009 
9
Page 10
the house and said that supplementary statement following the KLL carries legal
authenticity. Where as its opponents have been claming that the supplement got no
legitimacy, which was affirmed by Information Minister next day. 
Information Minister Qamar Zaman Kaira said “what the United States is giving us is not
charity but compensation for the losses the country suffered in the war against terror.”12 
He also said “the contours of the bill will in no way harm our integrity, solidarity and
self-respect. Pakistan is not bound to fulfill the conditions attached with the Kerry-Lugar
Bill.”13 
However the members of Pakistan’s ruling aliens including Awami National Party
(ANP),  Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM) Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (JUI-F) and
members from FATA opposed various clauses of KLL. 
OPPOSITION: 
Anti-KLL forces have different perceptions as they believe that Pakistan should not take
step to accept the law. Second largest political party PML-N and other political parties
along with large segment of executives, member of civil society, intellectuals are with the
views that Pakistan should not accept aid or assistance with strings attached. 
The opposition senators expressed their rejection of Kerry-Lugar Law seeing it as a
means of targeting Pakistan’s nuclear weapons. Leader of Opposition in the National
Assembly Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan said “each and every page of the bill was against the
integrity and solidarity of Pakistan and termed the bill a deep-rooted conspiracy to take
control of Pakistan’s nuclear arsenal.”14 
As the President of the PML (Q), Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain has viewed that the “Kerry-
Lugar Bill was in reality ‘Kerry looter bill’ meant to plunder the asset of Pakistan.”
The PML-N leader claimed that most of the sections of the Kerry-Lugar Bill were against
the interests of the country. He said that “aid should not be accepted with such
conditions.”15 Raja Zafarul Haq declared “the monitoring of the Pakistan Army and
courts will pose a serious threat to national integrity.”16 The opponents believe that
accepting of KLL would mean that we are selling Pakistan and compromising the
12Asim Yasin, “Cabinet approves KLB”, The News (Islamabad), October 22, 2009, available at
http://www.thenews.com.pk/top_story_detail.asp?Id=25134 
13Asim Yasin, “Aid bill strings not binding: Kaira” (October 6, 2009), available at http://www.geo.tv/important_events/2009/kerry-
lugar_bill/pages/english_news_06-10-2009.asp
14Fahad Chaudhry, “Kerry Lugar Bill: Govt draws Senate, NA Opps ire” Weekly Pulse (Islamabad), October 15, 2009, available at
http://www.weeklypulse.org/pulse/article/4320.html
15Yousaf Ali, “Academic discussion on Kerry-Lugar Bill” The News (Islamabad), October 13, 2009, available at
http://www.thenews.pk/daily_detail.asp?id=202978
16 “Kerry-Lugar Bill targets Pakistan's nukes”, (October 3, 2009), available at
http://www.hipakistan.com/ss/2009/10/03/news/english/kerry-lugar-targets-nukes.html 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
10
Page 11
sovereignty of the state. They are in the view that even dealing independently with
provincial government and accommodating different political parties individually would
not serve the interests of Pakistan. To a certain extent it is direct intrusion in internal
affairs of state. 
Their claim is that the U.S. is increasing its influence on daily basis in the name of war
against terrorism. Through so-called Kerry-Lugar Law and assistance package the U.S. 
aims to expand its military footprint in Pakistan. They argued that they will not allow
anyone to cast an evil eye on our motherland. Kerry-Lugar Law is U.S. legislation and
since we don’t interfere in their matters, they should also refrain from poking their nose
in our affairs. KLL approach to rescue the rights and interests of Pakistani people is not
reflected as it has been claimed. 
DEFENCE: 
Corps-commanders meeting held on October 7, 2009, reviewed the KLL and observed
that some of its clauses posed a threat to Pakistan’s security and sovereignty. The
objectionable clauses were related to the area in which over-influence of external forces
within country’s vital domain like nuclear program, Pakistan’s so called support for
cross-border militancy, civilian government’s  role in military promotions and
appointments and micro management of government and civil affairs of the state. One
Pakistani parliamentarian said “the army is saying privately that despite everything, the
army remains the one rigorous, merit-based institution in Pakistan, and if the politicians
get their hands on promotions, that will be the end of it.”17 
Defense leadership evaluated KLL regional impact. Some of the clauses strengthen the
negative perception about Pakistan which has been propagated by neighboring countries. 
Such perceptions will undermine Pakistan’s efforts to engage and develop relations with
regional countries. The clauses endorse the perception of President Hamid Karzai and
Indian leaders on cross border infiltration of terrorism. 
Defence leaders too highlighted the public sentiments and negative concerns of political
parties along with large segments of executive, members of civil society, intellectuals, 
experts and analysts over the KLL. According to them in totality division on the issue
will further aggravate the trust deficit and would not help building the relationship rather
any future complication can further deteriorate the relationship of the U.S. and Pakistan. 
17Jane Perlez, “Pakistan Aid Places U.S. in the Midst of a Divide”, (October 12, 2009), available at
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/13/world/asia/13islamabad.html 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
11
Page 12
According to them the US footprints, direct interference in government’s internal affairs
and micro-managing civil institutions up to this extent is a revealing threat to Pakistan’s
sovereignty. Their observation is that Pakistan’s national security would be affected and
its strategic program would come under close inspection. The Law could even limit
Pakistan to use its national funds on nuclear capability which would result in stagnancy in
nuclear development, synonymous with a roll back of nuclear program. They are of the
view that by accepting the KLL, their planned military operations in Waziristan would
also be perceived, as to be at the behest of U.S. administration. 
U.S. RESPONSE: 
The U.S. is looking for stable relationship with Pakistan and wants to establish deeper
and long term bilateral partnership with Pakistani people. The assistance through KLL
would further enhance the relationship and would help to reinforce the economic
sustainability, development, democracy and the rule of law; and for combating extremism
and terrorism that threatens Pakistan and the U.S. 
The negative perceptions for the U.S. and KLL would damage what ever trust exists
between the U.S. and Pakistan. As the U.S Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said “so
many people in Pakistan think we are not helping at all and that’s incredibly frustrating to
us.”18 Hillary Clinton also stated “the aid is being given to Pakistan for the stability of
democracy and economic development and Pakistan could reject it if it wanted so.”19 She
also stated “take it or leave it, the assistance is not being imposed on Pakistan.”20 Senator
John F. Kerry on the opposition over the issue of KLL during his visit to Pakistan said
“we should not play to cheap galleries here. If you don’t want the money, say so. We’re
not forcing you to take it.”21 
Hillary Clinton on her three day visit to Pakistan said “our best information is that Al-
Qaeda leadership is somewhere in Pakistan. It is in the interest of Pakistan as well as our
own interest that we capture or kill Al-Qaeda leadership because that will give a very
serious blow to terrorists everywhere.”22 After her present visit to Pakistan, she also
mentioned that if Pakistan has some concerns about KLL, contrary U.S.A. also has some
concerns about Pakistan where most of the people have sympathy with Taliban.” U.S. 
President’s special envoy for Pakistan and Afghanistan Richard Holbrook said “those
18“US wants more interaction with people and civil society: Hillary”, available at http://pakistantimes.net/pt/detail.php?newsId=5528
19“Reaction on Kerry-Lugar Bill surprising, says Hillary”, (October 29, 2009), available at
http://www.paktribune.com/news/index.shtml?220694
20 “Hopes and Challenges”, The Nation (Islamabad), November 1, 2009, available at http://www.nation.com.pk/pakistan-news-
newspaper-daily-english-online/opinion_print/Opinions/Columns/01-Nov-2009/Hopes-and-challenges 
21 “Disappointed’ Kerry asks Pak to take or leave the $7.5 billion aid”, (October 20, 2009), available at 
http://trak.in/news/disappointed-kerry-asks-pak-to-take-or-leave-the-7-5-billion-aid/15644/ 
22Baqir Sajjad Syed, “Hillary cautions against playing up US-Pak differences” DAWN (Islamabad), October 29, 2009, available at
http://www.dawn.com/wps/wcm/connect-connect-library/dawn/the-newspaper/front-page/hillary-cautions-against-playing-up-uspak-
differences-909 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
12
Page 13
who oppose the KLL are the ones who either oppose the Pakistani government or support
the Taliban.”23 
Further the U.S. has made it clear that there is no clause in the KLL which would
impinge on Pakistan’s sovereignty and security. According to the explanatory note
attached to the Enhanced Partnership with Pakistan Act of 2009 “there is no intent to, and
nothing in this act in any way suggests that there should be, any U.S. role in
micromanaging internal Pakistani affairs, including the promotion of Pakistani military
officers or the internal operations of the Pakistani military.”24 
In response to the suspicions over the KLL Chairman of the Senate Foreign relations
Committee John Kerry said “Separate document would be attached with the bill to clarify
the elements of the 7.5 billion dollar bill.”25 
EUROPEAN UNION:
EU has also shown its stance that some political forces and large segment of masses of
Pakistan are not able to realize that militant and insurgents are the enemies of the state; 
they are not the Islamic worriers. The European Union also mentioned that all aid
packages have mechanism to ensure good governance, pro-democratic reforms and
curbing of corruption. For that matter it quoted the examples of Turkey, Croatia, 
Romania, and Bulgaria. And emphasized that Islamabad should accept the tight scrutiny
and the review of how the money would be spent. The friends of Pakistan are also
monitoring the situation as to how we are responding to the KLL. So it’s important to be
rational to analyze the KLL keeping in view our economic conditions and political
dimensions of international environment. 
CONCLUSION: 
The issue has come under great criticism and generated extensive debate within the
country, all the relevant corners legislatures, executives; defense forces and the civil
society have shown their grave concerns over the issue. Hence the government should
discus all issues and must consider their rational objections while responding to the KLL, 
23Sami Abraham, “Opponents of KLL supporting Taliban: Halbrooke” The News (Islamabad), November 5, 2009, available at
http://www.thenews.com.pk/daily_detail.asp?id=206939
24Lalit K Jah, “No Change in Kerry-Lugar Bill, Explanatory Note Attached”, (October 15, 2009), available at
http://news.outlookindia.com/item.aspx?667817 
25“White House blames ‘vested interests’ in Pak for creating chaos over KL Bill”, (October 14, 2009), available at
http://www.thaindian.com/newsportal/south-asia/white-house-blames-vested-interests-in-pak-for-creating-chaos-over-kl-
bill_100260499.html 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
13
Page 14
and encapsulating Pakistan’s national security, national interests’ imperative and nation’s
morale. Consensus among the stakeholders is vital for future relationship with U.S.A. 
The assistance under KLL must be based on the principles as mentioned under the
heading “The Principles of Engagement.” Evaluation of the assurance of consistency in
Kerry-Lugar Law needs to be addressed. In this regard required measures should be
formulated to enhance the cooperation between the two. 
Although the KLL is a step to strengthen economic conditions and democratic process, 
the vague area is the accountability and appraisal of the project progress (Certification).
Adopted procedures and different measures are neither appropriate nor practical for
accomplishment of the tasks; not even supportive for long term relation. The tight
monitoring procedures are highlighting the element of distrust. The analyses of previous
aid packages of three decades and the objections of the Americans against the inadequate
spending are the major causes. The U.S.A. has the right to focus on utilization of funds to
achieve its foreign policy objectives but should also realize that coherent engagement
with Pakistan on its strategy is vital. 
Conflicts between the internal forces and disintegrated approach would eventually harm
the relation between the two countries. Aggressive and irrational reaction against KLL is
also not giving good impression across the world. While on the other hand Pakistan is
asking the world to rescue the state from the aftermath of WTO and the effects of
uncertain regional strategic environment. 
Pakistan should adopt well calculated futuristic approach to KLL because other financial
organizations and economic forums are assessing its responses, monitoring the internal
dynamics and implementing mechanism of the state institutions. So, as a responsible and
sovereign country Pakistan’s response should reflect an accommodative stance to the
world. 
Pakistan’s prime concern to provide security to its people and to ensure better and
accessible means of life– education, social equality, economic growth, provision of
justice, respect for the rule of law. Good governance and formulation of pro-people
policies would help for creating futuristic vision of the state which can assure socio-
politico-development. Due consideration and progress in these vital areas would
definitely give new orientation to the state; however these tasks can not be achieved
without having political wisdom, commitment and will. Absence of these vital
components will make Pakistan more vulnerable. 
The U.S. should invest and further extend its assistance with clear understanding to build
infrastructure and to enhance capacity of institutions. Support and extended cooperation 
in the areas like Educational scholarships, development of advance technologies, access
to U.S. market, and scientific management of agriculture sector are the areas in which
U.S. initiatives can play a central role to stabilize Pakistan and can win hearts and mind
of Pakistanis. Both governments should emphasize future oriented partnership and also
enhance and encourage people to people interaction and should respect each 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
14
Page 15
other’s sentiments which are imperative and a guarantee for long term sustainable
relations. 
Further more U.S. political forces, policy makers and prominent members of civil society
should have more visits and exchange programs with Pakistani counterparts. Present visit
of U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was a land mark in the enhancement of stable
relationship between the two countries. 
No bilateral relations and engagement can be successful or couldn’t be for long terms if it
wouldn’t encapsulate the interests of both sides. It shouldn’t be based on agenda but to
genuineness of cause. Besides offering the aid package US also needs to understand the
concerns of Pakistan in some of the clauses of KLL for developing better understanding. 
Fact of the matter is that both countries are facing trust deficit and trying to guard their
interests and simultaneously inclined to build long term relations. Where as no one is
coming up with clear and objective partnership, which eventually would be the solution, 
which is vital to craft long term partnership. 
Engagement on KLL with the conviction can define new dynamics of relationships, 
under which the geo-political contours of this region can be reshaped. Pakistan should
craft comprehensive strategy for de-radicalization which will not only enhance the soft
image of Pakistan to the world as well as the U.S. concerns. Stable, well designed, 
vibrant and integrated role of Pakistan can really serve the interest of first world. 
Now with the conditionalities and prevailing hard perception within Pakistan, it is
desirable to formulate a group including legislature, executives, and the prominent
members of civil society (Social scientists); to evaluate and monitor the progress of
projects to help the government for meeting the crucial part of KLL certifications for
smooth and successful execution of assistance. The group should coordinate with the
U.S. government and their monitoring Authorities to bring forth facts, so that any
disinformation and mischief done by the people or organizations involved in evaluation
mechanism is encountered. The group can also suggest required adjustments to avoid any
future complication between the governments. 
Further more the group can also play its role for successful execution regarding the aid
pledged by (FoDP) i.e Japan (2 billion US $) the credit facility offered by Saudi Arabia
(700 million US $) and even for better negotiation with EU where Pakistan is demanding
special trade/market access. EU is in the process of finalizing the negotiation on free
trade pacts with South Korea, Canada, Taiwan, India and Japan. 
No government whether military or civilian can afford to compromise on national nuclear
policy. Pakistan has established its National Command Authority to protect its nukes. But
the conditionality of KLL are restricting Pakistan from further development Government
should have clear stance in this respect. 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
15
Page 16
Uni-power is now depending on elected democratic forces on its new AF-PAK policy, 
although they are also interacting with defense leadership. It seems that the U.S. is
inclined to continue the role of Pakistan in its regional politics specifically related to
Afghanistan. Thus it is imperative that the both institutions should have ideological
harmony to protect interests of Pakistan and to counter the confronting challenges. 
Absence of cohesion will not serve the national interest rather would damage the image
of the state and also harm the relations with U.S. and the world. 
Besides it strengthens the anti Pakistan forces on the internal and external fronts. Both the
institutions of the state should stand together and not divided to build stable, secure, and
prosperous Pakistan. Integrated cohesive approach between the state institutions is vital
to solidifying the economic conditions and for crafting new political dimensions in
international arena. And should develop cogent argument on the KLL issue and then
finally show confidence in the government for managing and executing the coming
assistance. This would eventually help us build relation with the first world. 
By accepting conditions attached with the KLL, Pakistan can avail the US certification as
a guarantee for its purposeful engagement with the international community that
democracy is getting ground with the help of its armed forces and that it is determined to
deny militants its soil and bust their training networks as well as bar its citizens from
engaging in nuclear proliferation activities. To gain full benefits of its strategic
partnership with the U.S., Pakistan may draw a comprehensive strategy to block funding
to terrorist organizations both from inside and outside. 
REFERENCES: 
Abraham Sami, “Opponents of KLL supporting Taliban: Halbrooke” The New (Islamabad), November 5, 
2009, available at http://www.thenews.com.pk/daily_detail.asp?id=206939
Ali Yousaf, “Academic discussion on Kerry-Lugar Bill” The News (Islamabad), October 13, 2009, 
available at http://www.thenews.pk/daily_detail.asp?id=202978 1, 2009, available at
http://www.nation.com.pk/pakistan-news-newspaper-da 
Chaudhry Fahad, “Kerry Lugar Bill: Govt draws Senate, NA Opps ire” Weekly Pulse (Islamabad), October
15, 2009, available at http://www.weeklypulse.org/pulse/article/4320.html
“Disappointed’ Kerry asks Pak to take or leave the $7.5 billion aid”, (October 20, 2009), available at
http://trak.in/news/disappointed-kerry-asks-pak-to-take-or-leave-the-7-5-billion-aid/15644/ 
“Hopes and Challenges”, The Nation (Islamabad), November 1, 2009, available at
http://www.nation.com.pk/pakistan-news-newspaper-daily-english
online/opinion_print/Opinions/Columns/01-Nov-2009/Hopes-and-challenges
Jah K Lalit, “No Change in Kerry-Lugar Bill, Explanatory Note Attached”, (October 15, 2009), available at
http://news.outlookindia.com/item.aspx?667817 
“Kerry-Lugar Bill targets Pakistan's nukes”, (October 3, 2009), available at 
http://www.hipakistan.com/ss/2009/10/03/news/english/kerry-lugar-targets-nukes.html 
16
Page 17
Najam Adil, “Text of the Final Version of the Kerry-Lugar Bill: Enhanced Partnership with Pakistan Act of
2009”, (October 7, 2009), available at http://pakistaniat.com/2009/10/07/full-text-kery-lugar-bill/ 
Perlez Jane, “Pakistan Aid Places U.S. in the Midst of a Divide”, (October 12, 2009), available at
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/13/world/asia/13islamabad.html
“Qureshi bats for Kerry-Lugar bill in Pak Parliament”, (October 16, 2009), available at
http://www.indianexpress.com/news/qureshi-bats-for-kerrylugar-bill-in-pak-parliament/529853/ 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
“Reaction on Kerry-Lugar Bill surprising, says Hillary”, (October 29, 2009), available at
http://www.paktribune.com/news/index.shtml?220694
Stockman Farah, “Kerry, Lugar aim to triple nonmilitary aid to Pakistan”, (May 5, 2009), available at
http://www.boston.com/news/nation/washigton/articles/2009/05/05/ 
Syed Sajjad Baqir, “Kerry urges leaders to move on”, DAWN (Islamabad), October 20, 2009, available at 
http://www.dawnnews.net/wps/wcm/connect/dawn-content-library/dawn/the-newspaper/front-page/kerry-
urges-leaders-to-move-on-009 
Syed Sajjad Baqir, “Hillary cautions against playing up US-Pak differences” DAWN (Islamabad), October
29, 2009, available at http://www.dawn.com/wps/wcm/connect-connect-library/dawn/the-newspaper/front-
page/hillary-cautions-against-playing-up-uspak-differences-909
“US wants more interaction with people and civil society: Hillary”, available at
http://pakistantimes.net/pt/detail.php?newsId=5528
“White House blames ‘vested interests’ in Pak for creating chaos over KL Bill”, (October 14, 2009),
available at http://www.thaindian.com/newsportal/south-asia/white-house-blames-vested-interests-in-pak-
for-creating-chaos-over-kl-bill_100260499.html
“Will the parliament’s outbursts of national pride lead to outright rejection of KL-Bill?” (October 9, 2009),
available at http://thepakistanpolicy.blogspot.com/2009/10/will-parliaments-outbursts-of-national.html
Yasin Asim, “Aid bill strings not binding: Kaira” (October 6, 2009), available at
http://www.geo.tv/important_events/2009/kerry-lugar_bill/pages/english_news_06-10-2009.asp
Yasin Asim, “Cabinet approves KLB”, The News (Islamabad), October 22, 2009, available at
http://www.thenews.com.pk/top_story_detail.asp?Id=25134 
Ref. No. CPMS- KLL-002-2009
17
Page 18
18 
Page 19
19 
