~>~~~r~i~ L '~~~1 ~[~
~0V~~~~ 00 ~=~  ~~° ~`~~~~~C~ ~I~~`v~
~~  ~~1 D G~[~~~~
~a ~_~  ° ~U1~~ 1~~~~~c" ~1UJ~ ~~ ~~~~ C~~ ~0 '~~~~~'~~ ~1~~~~~~
~~~~~ ~D ~O~~ ~[~ ~1~~~~ ~00 D ~0~5
Page 2
14GI~EMENT
This AGREEP✓~l~'IVT, entered into by and between the Town of Framingham, of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, a municipal corporation chartered by said Commonwealth,
and hereinafter referred to as the "Town" and the Framingham Police Officer's Union,
"FPOU';hereinafter referred to as the "Union ".
WITNESSETH
NOW THERE~'~Il~E, in consideration of their mutual promises, the parties agree
as follows: 
ARTICLE 1
INTENT
Section 1.
It is the intention of the parties hereto to promote and improve the effective
administration and operation of the Town's Police Department and the well-being of the
patrolman (regular, reserve and provisional); to establish a basic understanding relative to
personnel policies, practices, procedures and matters affecting wages, hours, and other
condition of employment; and to provide means for amicable discussions and adjustment of
matters of mutual interest between the parties.
Section 2.
Nothing in the Agreement shall diminish the authority and power of the Civil
Service Commission, the Retirement Board or the Personnel Board. In the event that any part
or provisions of this Agreement is in conflict with any law or By-Law, such law or By-Law
shall prevail so long as such conflict remains.
ARTICLE 2
BARGAIlVING AGENT
The Town recognizes the Union as the exclusive representative for the purpose of
collective bargaining relative to wages, hours, and other conditions of employment, of all
Page 3
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
employees (regular, reserve, and provisional), in the service of the Town Police Deparhnent
but excluding the Chief and the Administrative Assistant of the Department and all ranking
officers. The Town and the Union agree not to discriminate against employees covered by
this Agreement on account of membership or non-membership in the Union.
ARTICLE 3
MANAGEMENT IZIGI~'~'~
The listing of the following specific rights of management in this Article is not
intended to be a waiver of any of the rights of the Town not listed herein. Such inherent
management rights shall remain with the Town except as they may be shared with the Union
by specific provisions of this Agreement.
A) Among the Management Rights vested in the Town are the rights, in
accordance with applicable law, to hire, promote, transfer, suspend, demote, discharge and to
relieve employees from duty, consistent with applicable Civil Service rules and regulations.
B) The Town shall have the freedom of action to determine the methods, and
means and the personnel for all operations, including the starting and quitting time. The
Town must take whatever action is necessary to carry out its work in emergency situations.
The Town shall select and determine the number and types of employees required and shall
assign work to such employees in accordance with the requirements determined by the Town.
C) No employee shall be reprimanded, suspended, discharged or otherwise
disciplined except for just cause. Just cause shall be interpreted consistent with G.L.C. 31.
ARTICLE 4
NO STRIKE PROVISION
It shall be unlawful for any employee to engage in, induce, or encourage any strike,
work stoppage, slowdown or withholding of services of such employees. 
2
Page 4
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
ARTICLE 5
~ItYEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 1.
A grievance shall be defined as any dispute arising out of the interpretation,
application, violation, or meaning of this Agreement, but shall not include any matter as to
which an employee shall have the right of appeal or review under Civil Service Laws.
Section 2.
Nothing in this Agreement shall be so interpreted as to require the Union to
process an employee grievance if the Union considers the grievance to be invalid ar without
merit. An attorney representing the Union may file a grievance for and on behalf of either the
Union or for an individual officer or officers, providing the Union in accordance with its by-
laws considers the grievance to be valid and with merit. If, at any step of the grievance
procedure hereinafter set forth, the aggrieved employee decides to accept the decision
rendered by a responsible official ofthe Town, the grievance shall be terminated. However, if
the Union feels that significant issue of the general application still requires resolution, the
Union may pursue the matter for afinal determination as provided under the provisions of this
Agreement.
Section 3.
Any grievance shall first be submitted orally by the grieving party to the
.employee's immediate supervisor within thirty (30) days of the event upon which the
grievance is based. The grieving party shall have the right to have a union representative
present at the time of the submission of the grievance. If no satisfactory resolution is reached
at this level within forty-eight (48) hours, the grievance shall then be submitted in writing to
the Chief within fifteen (15) additional days of the occurrence of the event upon which the
grievance is based. A written response must be given by the Town's representative within
fourteen(14) calendar days ofreceiptofthis written grievance. 
3
Page 5
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
If no satisfactory resolution is reached at this level, the grievance may be
submitted to the Town Manager. Such submission shall be in writing and shall be within ten
(10) calendar days from the answer of the Chief. The Town Manager shall meet with the
Union and give his response within ten (10) calendar days of said meeting.
Failure of the Town to respond at any step of this procedure within the time
limits set forth shall be taken to be a negative response and the Union may proceed to the next
step. 
By mutual agreement, time periods may be extended.
If the grievance cannot be settled satisfactorily, at this step, it shall be
submitted to arbitration as provided in Section 4.
Section 4.
A) When a grievance is not settled through the regular grievance procedure in
Step 3 above, the Town or the Union shall have the right to request that it be submitted to
arbitration. Such submission must be within fourteen (14) calendar days of the written answer
(or due date ofthe written answer if not furnished).
B) Either party may request the American Arbitration Association to provide a
panel of arbitrators from which a selection of a single arbitrator shall be made in accordance
with the rules ofthe American Arbitration Association.
C) The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the parties;
however, he/she shall make no decision which alters, amends, adds to, or detracts from this
Agreement.
D) Each party shall bear the expense of preparing and presenting its own case.
The parties shall bear equally the cost of the arbitrator's services. However, if the arbitration
hearing is held during the basic work week of Monday through Friday, the grieving employee,
the employee's witnesses and the members of the Union's Grievance Committee (not to
exceed three) shall be granted leave of absence without loss of pay while participating in
arbitration proceedings. 
4
Page 6
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
Section 1. 
ARTICLE 6
SENIORITY
The provisions of this Article apply to all questions of seniority except those
arising under the Civil Service Laws, as to which question the Civil Service Laws and the
rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission shall govern.
Section 2.
There shall be a seniority list established. Employees shall be placed on such
list in accordance with their date of first employment with the police department. In cases
where more than one employee begins work on the same day, the order of appointment shall
be governing. In the event two or more employees are appointed to the force on the same
day, seniority shall then be based upon the grades earned by each on the entrance examination
with the man having the highest grade being the senior. If such grades are tied or cannot be
obtained, the employee's academy score will govern seniority. Ifthe academy scores are tied,
seniority shall be based upon drawing of lots.
Section 3.
Shift assignments shall be determined by seniority with senior employees
having preference. Employees shall bid for any line position on each of the three (3) work
shi$s once each year. Bidding shall take place during the month of January. Bids shall close
at the end of the month. New shift assignments shall be posted by February 15. New shift
assignments shall go into effect on the second Sunday in March of each year. Shift
assignments shall remain in effect until the next bid cycle.
Section 4.
Should an opening occur on a shift, a notice shall be posted within seven (7)
days for seven (7) days to that effect on the bulletin board. Any officer wishing to apply for
the opening shall sign his/her name to the notice. At the end of the seven (7) day period, the 
5
Page 7
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
employee signing the notice who has the greatest amount of seniority shall be appointed to fill
the opening. Failure to sign the notice within a seven (7) day period will waive any rights to
the opening that a man with more seniority may have had at that time.
Section S.
With reference to changes in a shift assignment for a particular officer, at least
seven (7) days written notice must be given by the Chief to the officer in question with
reference to any change in his/her work shi$,except in an emergency situation.
ARTICLE 7
VACATIONS
Section l:
Vacation shall be awarded annually on January 1St
'Two (2) weeks vacation
shall be granted after one (1) year of service. Employees who have worked a minimum of one
thousand (1000) hours, may use one (1) week of this initial two week allotment. Three (3)
weeks vacation shall be granted after five (5) years of service and four (4) weeks after ten (10)
years of service. Vacation leave of five (5) weeks shall be granted to any employee who has
been employed by the Town for twenty (20) years and over. Subject to appropriate
administrative controls, up to one (1) week of an employee's vacation leave may be taken in
single days.
Section 2.
If a death covered by Article 8, Section 2 occurs in the family of a police officer
during his/her vacation, such bereavement days shall not be charged to vacation. The lost
vacation days must be taken at another time or the vacation may be extended by mutual
agreement.
Section 3.
Each employee is entitled one (1) week's vacation during the period from the
last week in June through Labor Day week.
Page 8
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
Section 4.
Choice of available vacation time shall be in accordance with shift seniority.
Section 5.
Employees who are eligible for 5 weeks of vacation leave per year shall have the
ability to sell back 1 week of vacation leave per year, with the employee's accrued vacation.
balance reduced accordingly. Notice by the employee must be provided to the Town by
December lst. The payment shall be made to the employee in January of the next year. The
value shall be for base pay only and not include Quinn educational incentive payments or any
other stipend not included in base pay. 
ARTICLE 8
i~OI,~DAYS
Section 1.
The following shall be the recognized holidays for all employees covered by
this Agreement. 
New Years Day
Independence Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Third Monday in February (Washington's Birthday)
Third Monday in April (Patriot's Day)
Last Monday in May(Memorial Day)
First Monday in September (Labor Day)
Second Monday in October(Columbus Day)
Veteran's Day
Martin Luther King Day
Section 2.
Holiday pay shall be computed as provided in Paragraph 1, Additional
Compensation, of Article 10. The holiday pay shall be computed on the basis of twenty five
percent(25%)ofa week's base payfor each ofthe above holidays. 
7
Page 9
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
Section 3.
Holiday pay shall be paid in the following manner: Five (5) holidays in the
pay week in which Independence Day falls. Six (6) holidays in the pay week in which
Christmas Day falls.
Section 4.
Deleted under the terms of the Award in JLMC Case No. 11-03P dated June 7, 2012
Section S.
With reference to this Article, Section 1, with reference to those seeking to
substitute Yom Kippur as a paid holiday for the Christmas holiday so stated in Section 1,
he/she shall have the option to do so.
Section 6.
Employees shall be allowed to elect to receive time off in lieu of holiday pay.
The choice between time off or pay may be made twice per year, at least thirty (30) days prior
to the pay period in question, i.e. thirty (30) days prior to the pay week in which
Independence Day falls, and thirty(30) days prior to the pay week in which Christmas Day
falls. Holiday pay shall be computed as twenty-five(25%)of a week's base pay for each
holiday. Time off in lieu of holiday pay shall be computed as one (1) shi$ off for each
holiday.
Section 7.
Monthly Cash Out Option: Employees who have accumulated compensatory
time shall have the option ofcashing out some or all oftheir accumulated time during the last
pay week of each month. Notice of an employee's intent to cash out must be given at least
seven (7) days prior to the pay period in question. Compensatory time that is cashed out shall
be computed based upon each officer's over time rate.
Employees may not opt to cash out more than 2times per year. Employees are limited
to a cash out maximum of $5;000.00 dollars per year. 
s
Page 10
Framingham Police OfFcer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
ARTI~~LIE ~
HOUIZ~
Section 1.
Scheduling ofPolice Officers will be the responsibility ofthe Chief.
The workday shall consist of eight (8) hours and twenty-five (25) minutes, subject to
extension to eight(8) hours and fifty-five (55) minutes per the May 12, 2010 Memorandum of
Agreement between the FPOU and the Town„ and the weekly hours shall average 38.32 hours
per week over the calendar year. Subject to and as modified by the May 12, 2010 MOA, the
standard shifts shall be:
7:45 A.M. to 4:10 P.M.,
3:45 P.M. to 12:10 A.M.,
11:45 P.M. to 8:10 A.M.;
provided that the Chief may schedule other shifts as he/she deems them necessary. At the
Police Chiefs discretion, there may be a "swing" shift which starts 1 hour earlier than the
above-listed standard shifts and nothing herein shall be considered a relinquishment of the
Chiefls right to schedule and assign work. Assignment to special shifts shall be equitably
distributed and except in unusual circumstances shall not exceed thirty (30) days duration.
All employees, except those having special assignments or duties, shall have their shift
arranged in such a manner that employees work five (5) days consecutively and then three (3)
days off. This schedule is repeated —work five (5) days consecutively and then have three (3)
days off, etc. 
Employees having a special assignment or duties will be scheduled in the
interest of effective operations and will receive the same number of days off in the year as
other employees.
Section 2.
There shall be a good faith effort made by management to have every
assignment properly covered.
Page 11
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
Section 3.
Any employee who works beyond the average workweek shall be compensated
at one and one-half(1 '/2) 
the straight time hourly rate for such hours worked.
Section 4.
No employee will be compelled to drive a motorcycle or bicycle when it is
raining, snowing or when the temperature is below 34 degrees Fahrenheit; except for purpose
of returning the vehicle to an appropriate place of shelter on Town property.
Section S.
Any employee who completes his/her regular shi$, then is recalled back to
work shall be paid for actual hours worked during the recall guaranteed a minimum of three
(3) hours of work at overtime rate of pay. With reference to any employee held over on a
particular shift, he/she should be paid a minimum of one (1) hour. If the time exceeds one (1)
hour, the officer shall be paid to the next one (1) hour held.
Section 6.
All officers shall have a thirty (30) minute lunch period. Within the confines
of a thirty (30) minute limitation, such lunch period may be taken at any place of the officer's
choice.
Section 7.
a.  In the event that the Commonwealth of Massachusetts funds less than 50% of its
approximate 50% share of payments made pursuant to G.L. c. 41 § 108L, the workday for
members of the Framingham Police Officers Union shall be extended from 8 hours and 25
minutes to 8 hours and 55 minutes and no additional compensation shall be paid the officers
for or in connection with the additional thirty (30) minutes worked per shift. Said workday
shall be extended by adding fi$een (15) minutes to the beginning and end of the workday, and
the weekly scheduled work hours presently in existence shall be extended accordingly and no
additional compensation shall be paid the officers on a weekly or annual basis for or in
connection with the additional thirty(30) minutes worked per shi$. 
10
Page 12
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
b.  In the event that the Commonwealth of Massachusetts funds only approximately half
(50%) or more of its 50% share, but less than approximately 100% of its 50% share of
payments made pursuant to G.L. c. 41 § 108L, the workday for members of the Framingham
Police Officers Union shall be extended from 8 hours and 25 minutes to 8 hours and 40
minutes and no additional compensation shall be paid the officers for or in connection with
the additional fifteen (15) minutes worked per shift. Said workday shall be extended by
adding fifteen (15) minutes to either the beginning or end of the workday, at the Police
Chiefs election, and the weekly scheduled work hours presently in existence shall be
extended accordingly and no additional compensation shall be paid the officers on a weekly
or annual basis for or in connection with the additional fifteen (15) minutes worked per shift.
The Police Chiefls election shall be the same for all officers and once assigned, shall not be
altered for as long as the right to make such election is effective.
c.  In the event that the Commonwealth of Massachusetts fully funds 100% of its
approximately 50% share of payments made pursuant to G.L. c. 41 § 108L, the workday for
members of the Framingham Police Officers Union shall revert back to the 8 hours and 25
minutes presently in existence.
d.  The Town shall be obligated to pay overtime under the CBA only when an
officer works in excess of the work hours as specified above, as extended by thirty (30) or
fifteen (15) minutes per shift, as the case may be. The extension of the work day by 30
minutes or 15 minutes as the case may be shall not lower the CBA overtime rate for any
officer, but rather, the CBA overtime rate will continue to be calculated on the basis of the
work week in existence immediately prior to March 7, 2010. Nothing in the preceding
sentence shall entitle any officer to payment or any additional compensation whatsoever for
the additiona130 minutes or 15 minutes worked per shift. 
11
Page 13
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-F'Y2015
WAGES
SEE ATTACHED WAGE SCHEDULES
Wage Adjustments for July 1, 2008 —June 30, 2011 Agreement:
FY2013 —effective Julv 1, 2012 -1
FI'2014 —effective Julv 1, 2013 —1
FY2015 —effective Julv 1, 2014 —1%,effective January 1, 2015 —1%
Effective July 1, 2011, a new step, Step 7, shall be added to the salary scale for all unit members
with 15 years or more offull-time service. Step 7shall be 1%greater than the rate set forth in
Step 6. Unit members who had 15 years or more of full-time service as of July 1, 2011, shall
receive retroactive pay at the new Step 7back to July 1, 2011.
Employees who have achieved 15 years of service and are at Step 7of the salary schedule, as of
July 1, 2012 or July 1, 2013, shall receive an additional 1%increase of base pay, retroactive to
July 1, 2013.
Effective July 1, 2014, the following stipends shall be eliminated in exchange for aone-time
base salary increase ofsix and one halfpercent(6.5%)for each officer. The intention ofthis
roll-in of certain stipends is that it be accomplished on a cost neutral basis. The stipends to be
rolled into salary on a one time basis include the following:
a. Fingerprint and photography (Article 10, Wages, Paragraph 4and Article 31)
b. Hazardous Duty Pay (Article 25, Hazardous Duty Pay)
c. Accreditation Pay (Article 37)
The FPOU agrees to to allow for implementation of direct deposit without further bargaining.
Section 1.
ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION FOR POLICE DEPARTMENT
PERSONNEL, which compensation shall not be used in computation of overtime payment or
for other benefits:
1. An a$ernoon/night differential of8% of base pay will be paid to Officers assigned
to the afternoon and night shifts continuously for a period of one (1) week or more.
2. A weekend differential of $2.00 /Hr. shall be paid to bargaining unit employees
who work Saturday and /or Sunday. 
]2
Page 14
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
3. Each employee covered by this Agreement will receive additional salary for each
of the eleven (11) recognized holidays as provided in Article 8.
4.
{~58~}. Deleted under FY2013-15 Memorandum of Agreement, paragraph 4.a. effective
July 1, 2014.
The Evidence/Detail Officer shall receive three thousand dollars ($3,000)
commencing on July 1, 2005 for performing these duties. On July 1, 2006, this amount will
increase to three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500).
5.  Up to fifteen (15) members of the Police Deparhnent designated by the Police
Chief will each receive three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) beginning July 1, 2005 through
June 30, 2006 additional salary for performing the duties of investigator. This amount will
increase to three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500) on July 1, 2006.
*Employees eligible for specialist pay shall receive the stipend quarterly. Payments
shall be made the first payroll period in January, April, July and October.
6.  Educational Incentives.
a.  The Town of Framingham agrees that it will remove and not seek to enforce the
"contingency" language related to the Quinn Bill from the CBA and it further agrees that it will
compensate existing qualified bargaining unit members as specified by G.L. c. 41 § 108E as of
March 7, 2010 (i.e., 10% for an Associate's degree, 20% for aBachelor's degree and 25%for a
Master's or Law degree),irrespective ofanyreimbursements) or lack thereoffrom the State.
b.  The Town also agrees that it will, as a contractual commitment independent of
Chapter 41, Section 108L, provide the following educational incentive benefits to qualified
Framingham Police Officers employed by the Town as of March 7, 2010, who are not entitled to
13
Page 15
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
benefits pursuant to G.L. c. 41 § 108L, solely because of the officer's date of hire, so long as said
officers have completed a program which meets all of the standards, requirements, and
qualifications set forth in G.L. c. 41 § 108L; as of March 7, 2010:
Bachelor's Degree $4,500.00 per year, divided by each pay period
Master's or Law Degree $7,000.00 per year, divided by each pay period
The Town may elect to extend this benefit to officers hired in the future.
c.  If for any reason the Town is legally unable to pay Quinn Bill benefits as set forth
in Section 6.a. above because G.L. c. 41 § 108E is repealed, amended, or if the Town is excused
from making payments under § 108L, the Town will, as a contractual commitment independent
of G.L. c. 41 § 108L, pay a Town educational incentive to all qualified Framingham Police
Officers who were eligible for Quinn Benefits as of September 30, 2009, the flat-rate amounts
equating to that paid out in the prior year, with said annual amount divided per pay peripd, for all
qualified Associate's, Bachelor's, Master's or Law Degrees.
d.  The Town may, in its sole discretion, as a contractual commitment, provide
Quinn or Educational Incentive Benefits to Patrol officers hired by the Town from another
agency through lateral transfer or from a layoff list, who were eligible for benefits under G.L. c.
41 § 108E in the municipality in which they formerly were employed.
7. Neither the Town nor any office or official ofthe Town shall withhold the payment
of wages of an officer for any reason without due process. This shall not be interpreted as
expanding or changing the definition of 
"ecnaveirg" 
as it appears in Article 5, Section 1.
8. In 1993, the Town of Framingham adopted the provisions of G.L.c. 41 § 108L.
These provisions will become effective during the first year in which the town is able to
certify credits for reimbursement to the state, but no earlier than the fiscal year commencing
July 1, 1993. 
14
Page 16
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
Any employee hired after July 1, 1993 must qualify under §108E in order to
receive educational incentive benefits.
Any employee hired prior to July 1, 1993, may qualify for educational
incentive benefits either under § 108E or under the July 1, 1991 contract provisions, but not
under both. 
The town will pay only for actual, physical attendance at classes. No
correspondence schools will be acceptable.
At no time will an employee receive less money under Quinn than he/she
would have received under the education provisions contained in the July 1, 1991 collective
bargaining agreement.
9. Any employee that notifies the Chief in writing of his or her intended retirement
two (2) years or more in advance of such retirement will receive atwo year salary increase of
seven-hundred and fifty dollars ($750). If the written notification is received one (1) year or
more in advance the employee shall receive aone-year salary increase five-hundred ($500).If
an employee fails to retire after providing such notification, the employee will be disqualified
from using this benefit in the future and the Town shall be reimbursed for any such salary
increases, within six (6) months of the original intended retirement date. The Town may
recover such funds via payroll deductions in equal monthly installments.
10. Effective and retroactive to July 1, 2007, all employees now and hereafter with six (6)
or more years of service but fewer than eight (8) years of service shall be moved to Step 5 of
the salary scale.
11. Effective and retroactive to July 1, 2007, all employees now and hereafter with eight
(8) or more years of service shall be moved to a new Step 6 on the salary scale, such Step to
be valued at two and one-half percent(2.5%)high than Step 5 after the increases to the salary
scale provided in paragraph no. 10, above.
12. Years of service for purposes of movement under paragraphs 10 and 11 shall be
measured from the employee's original date of hire as a police officer in the Town, or in the 
15
Page 17
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
case of officers who have transferred laterally from another city or town, from the original
date of hire as afull time academy trained police officer in such other city or town.
13. Effective July 1, 2014, any member of the bargaining unit who thereafter commences
his/her 25th year of service with the Police Deparhnent shall be eligible to receive a 2%
increase in his/her annual base salary on the date that employee begins his/her 25th year of
service with the Police Department. Each such employee shall receive an additional 2%
increase in his/her annual base salary on the date that such employee begins his/her 26th year
of service with the Police Department and an additional 2% increase in his/her base salary on
the date that such employee begins his/her 27th year of service with the Police Department.
Prior to ratification of the FY2013-FY2015 MOA and funding by Town Meeting,
employees may elect to receive sick leave buy back, as currently set forth by Article 26 of the
CBA, instead of the aforementioned base pay increases. Prior to ratification and funding, said
employees must notify the Aide to the Chief in writing of their election to participate in such
buy back and said election shall be irrevocable. Under no circumstances will an employee
who has not made an election prior to July 1, 2014 receive sick leave buyback payments and
no employee will receive both sick leave buy back and the aforementioned base salary
increases.
Article 29 (Longevity) of the Agreement between FPOU and the Town for July 1,
2004-June 30, 2014 shall be deleted in its entirety and unit members shall no longer be
entitled to receive longevity benefits as described in Article 29 of the July 1, 2004-June 30,
2007 agreement.
Section 2.
Effective July 1, 2014, accrued compensatory time shall be limited to no more
than 170 hours. The reduction of hours in excess of 170 shall be achieved through -a mandatory
buyout or attrition at the Town's option, after consultation with the Chief. 
[[.
Page 18
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
ARTICLE 11
ATTENDANCE IN COURT
Section 1.
Any employee covered hereunder, on duty at night or on vacation, furlough, or
on a day off, who is required to attend as a witness in any legal proceeding in his/her official
capacity will in lieu of any witness fee to which he/she would otherwise be entitled, receive
pay for the actual hours worked during which he/she was in attendance at such proceeding
which shall not be less than three(3) hours pay at time and a half or his/her regular base rate of
pay. 
Section 2.
Court time is subject to appropriate administrative reporting controls
established by management. 
ARTICLE 12
ATTENDANCE IN TRAINING PROGRAM
Section 1.
When an employee is required by the Chief of the Department to attend a
training program, time spent shall be considered the same as duty for pay purposes and the
employees will be paid provided in this Agreement.
Section 2.
When training time is in excess of the average work week, the officer shall be
compensated as provided in Article 9, Section 3.
Section 3.
T'he Chief, at his/her discretion, may reschedule temporarily any employee
from his/her regular full shift to another full shift during which the training program is
scheduled to enable the employee to take such training within his/her basic workweek. 
17
Page 19
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
AR'I'I~LE 13
LEAVE WITH PAY
Section 1.
Personal Day Off
Employees shall each receive one (1) day off annually of their own choice for
personal use without loss of pay. When requesting the personal day an employee shall not
have to give a reason except to state that he/she is requesting a personal day. Whenever
possible, the employee shall give at least two (2) hours notice prior to the start of the shift on
which the absence is to occur.
Section 2.
Bereavement Leave
In the event of a death occurring in the immediate family or family of his/her
spouse, that employee shall be granted a minimum of three (3) calendar days and a maximum
of five (5) days off without loss of pay. "Immediate family" shall consist of spouse, mother,
father, child, sister, brother, mother-in law, father-in law, step-mother, step-father, step-
brothers, step-sisters, grandparents; or persons living in the immediate household.
Section 3.
SickLeave
a. Employees covered by this Agreement shall be allowed sick leave with pay
for non-duty related injuries or sickness accrued at the rate of one and one quarter (1 '/4) days
per month (fifteen (15) days per year), accumulation unlimited. Accumulated sick leave shall
be accurately computed for each employee. The amount of accumulation shall be based upon
fifteen (15) days per year for the total years of service of each employee. Subtracted from
that are the actual sick days taken by each employee during his/her years of service. An
employee may use up to five (5) days per year of his/her accumulated sick leave to care for a
member of his/her "immediate family" which, for the purpose of this section, shall consist of
spouse, mother, father, child, sister, brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law; step-mother, step- 
1s
Page 20
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
father, step-brothers, step-sisters or grandparents. T'he administrative controls set out in
Section 3.b shall not apply to such use.
b. The Chief may require a physician's certificate when an employee is absent
for three (3) consecutive days or is absent on five (5) separate instances in a contract year.
The Chief may require that the certificate be from a physician designated by
the Town. In such case, the Town shall pay for the examination and the report. If the Chief
accepts a certificate from the employee's physician, the employee shall pay for the
examination and the report.
c. Properly reported job-related sickness or injury shall not be charged against
accumulated sick leave. An employee disabled under the so-called heart or lung law who
receives a medical determination that he/she will be unable to return to work shall apply for a
disability retirement. In cases involving job-related sickness or injury, the Town may require
an employee to be examined by a doctor of the Towri's choosing.
d. Effective July 1, 2014, once an employee accrues 200 unused sick days,
his or her sick leave accruals shall cease unless and until the employee's sick leave balance
drops below 200 days. At the beginning of an employee's eighteenth year of service, his or
her sick leave accrual rate shall be reduced from 1.25 days per month to /12 
day per month (6
days per year). The 6 days of sick leave per year that are accrued by employees at the
beginning of the eighteenth year of service shall include the five (5) sick leave days set forth
in Art. 13, Section 3.a. which can be used by unit members for family sick days. By way of
example, if an employee during the eighteenth year or more of service uses 5 family sick days
in a given year, the unit member would have only 1 sick leave day for the unit member's
personal use the rest of that year, plus any accrued days the employee has available.
Section 4.
Injury Leave
An employee on injury leave under G.L. c. 41 § ll1F for thirty (30) days or
more will not accrue sick or vacation leave nor be able to use benefits under section 2 of this 
19
Page 21
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
Article. An employee on injury leave under G.L. c. 41 § 111F for the thirty days (30) calendar
days or more will be able to carry over the existing and accrued vacation at the time of injury
for a period equal to the injury leave.
Section S. Reduction ofUse ofSick Leavefor FMLA.
Effective upon ratification ofthe FY2013-FY2015 Memorandum of Agreement,
the Town's Family Medical Leave Policy, Personnel Policy No. 14A, dated November 1, 2005,
shall apply to FPOU unit members without further bargaining. Under the Town's policy,
employees shall no longer be able to use sick leave for FMLA-qualifying leave for purposes
other than an employee's own serious health condition, subject to the exception detailed in the
policy for female employees during the eight weeks immediately after giving birth. In exchange
for this provision, each FPOU bargaining unit member shall receive aone-time salary increase of
1%upon ratification of the FY2013-FY2015 Memorandum of Agreement.
ARTICLE ~~s
UNION ACTIVY'~'~]E~
Section 1. Union Meetings.
The Town shall grant a leave of absence of two (2) days without loss of pay to
not more than three (3) employees who attend the annual convention of Massachusetts Police
Union as official delegates or alternates, provided said convention is held within the
Commonwealth and further provided that not more than two (2) delegates or alternates are
selected from any one (1) shift.
Section 2. Grievance Hearing and Bargaining Meetings.
Members of the bargaining committee, or, in the case of a grievance hearing,
the grievance committee, but in either case no more than two (2) in number shall have time
off to attend all grievance hearings and bargaining meetings without loss of pay.
Section 3. Employee Rights as Stated in Chapter 1078 ofthe Acts of1973.
Employees shall have the right ofself-organization and the right to form, join,
or assist any employee organization for the purpose of bargaining collectively through 
20
Page 22
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015 
ro
representatives of their own choosing on questions of wages, hours, and other terms and
conditions of erriployment, and to engage in lawful, concerted activities for the purpose of
collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection, free from interference, restraint, or
coercion. An employee shall have the right to refrain from any all such activities, except to
the extent of making such payment of service fees to an exclusive representative as provided
in Section Twelve of this Chapter 1078 of the Acts of 1973.
Section 4.
The Town recognizes its responsibility to furnish to each employee within a
reasonable time ofthe signing ofthe new contract a copy of such contract.
Section 1. 
ARTICLE 15
CLEANING AND CLOTHING ALLOWANCE
Rolled into base pay, along with Section 2of this article, as a 2% base salary increase
per the terms ofthe Award in JLMC No. 11-03P dated June7, 2012.
Section 2.
Rolled into base pay, along with Section 1 of this article, as a 2%base salary increase
per the terms ofthe Award in JLMC No. 11-03P dated June7, 2012.
Section 3.
Any employee whose clothing is lost or damaged while he/she is performing
his/her duties as a police officer may apply to the District Court for an appropriate order for
reimbursement for such lost or damaged clothing. If the Court makes such an order, the
Town shall reimburse the ofFcer accordingly, and then the Town shall seek such
reimbursement from the defendant in the court proceedings.
Section 4.
During the winter months (November -February),officers may be allowed to
wear turtleneck shirts under their uniform instead of neckties. This will only apply to officers
Page 23
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
assigned outside of the station, in cases where such uniform is designated by the Chief as the
uniform of the day, and may be subject to other administrative controls as the Chief may
determine.
Section S.
Effective July 1, 2010, Section 1 and Section Z of this Article are hereby deleted.
Effective July 1, 2010, the base pay for each step of the wage schedule shall be increased by
2%. 
ARTICLE 16
DISABILITY, INSURANCE AND RETIREMENT BENEFITS
T'he Disability, Insurance and Retirement Plan presently in effect including, but not
limited to, all past practices, interpretations and procedures shall continue for the life of this
Agreement or any extension or renewal thereof.
ARTICLE 17
AGENCY FEE AND DUES DEDUCTION
Section 1.
As a condition of continued employment, all employees after the thirtieth
(30th) day of employment or the thirtieth (30th) day following the execution of the
Agreement, whichever is later, shall pay to the Union an Agency Fee commensurate with the
cost of collective bargaining services.
Section 2.
The Town shall for the duration of this Agreement deduct regular periodic
Union dues and Association dues each week from the pay check of each employee who
individually and voluntarily certifies in writing authorization for such deduction. The Union
and Association agree to indemnify and save the Town harmless against any and all claims,
suits, and other forms of liability arising out of the Agency Fee provision or the deduction of
money so deducted once it has .been turned over to the Treasurer of the Union and the
Association by the Town. 
22
Page 24
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
Section 3.
The Town shall also make regular periodic deductions each week from the
paycheck of each employee for the employee's credit union.
ARTICLE 18
STABILITY OF AGREEMENT
Section 1.
No amendment, alteration, or variation of the terms or provisions of this
Agreement shall bind the parties hereto unless made and executed in writing by said parties.
Section 2.
The failure of the Town or the Union to insist, in any one or more situations,
upon performance of any of the terms or provisions of this Agreement shall not be considered
as a waiver or relinquishment of the right of the Town or the Union to future performance of
any such term or provision, and the obligations of the Union and the Town to such future
performance shall continue in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 19
LEGALITY
It is understood and agreed that all provisions of this Agreement are subject to all
applicable laws now or hereafter in effect, and to the lawful regulations, rulings, and orders of
all agencies and commissions having jurisdiction. In the event of any change in the said laws,
regulations, rulings, or orders, the affected provisions of this Agreement shall be superseded,
but all other provisions of this Agreement shall continue in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 20
PRIVACY
Section 1.
An employee shall be permitted at reasonable times at least quarterly, to
review his/her personal file or dossier and shall have the right to refute derogatory statements 
23
Page 25
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
therein. He/she shall also have the right to forbid and to limit disclosure of any information
from the personal file or dossier to any non-governmental agency. On the request for such
disclosure, the Town or the Police Department shall first obtain the employee's written
permission.
Section 2.
Only a written complaint against an officer will be considered by the Town.
Such written complaints) will be processed by the Chief of Police.
Section 3.
No person and no body shall be given the address or telephone numbers of an
officer without his/her expressed permission, unless the Town is required to disclose such
information. 
ARTICLE 21
SAFETY
Section 1.
The Town shall continue the practice of initially issuing employees the
equipment required by and under the rules and regulations ofthe Police Department.
Section 2.
The Town is concerned with the safety and health of its employees. The Town
will continue to take steps to insure that working conditions are in compliance with applicable
statutes.
Section 3.
Employees shall not be required to drive vehicles which are unsafe. At the
beginning of each tour of duty, employees will inspect their vehicles. If a vehicle is unsafe, it
shall be brought immediately to the attention of the employee's superior officer. If no action
is taken, the employee shall in writing so notify the Chief of Police. 
24
Page 26
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
Section 4.
The Framingham Police insignia will be worn only by regular full time police
officers. Subject to the approval of the Chief of Police, other officers may wear the insignia
with a rocker designating the officer's position.
Section S.
A safety Committee will be appointed consisting of three (3) members of the
Union to be appointed by the Union officers and three (3) members of management to include
the Chief of Department (or his/her designee), the Personnel Director (or his/her designee)
and the Executive Administrator (or his/her designee). The Chairmanship shall rotate and
alternate commencing with an Union Chairman and change every six (6) months. Meetings
will be held during the first week of each month, September through June.
Section 6.
Among the areas of concern of the Committee shall be any and all issues
regarding the health and safety of the employees of the department.
ARTICLE 22
FUNERAL AND BURIAL EXPENSES
Pursuant to Chapter 41, Section 100G, the Town shall pay funeral and burial expenses
for police officers killed in the performance of their duties up to a maximum of seven
thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00).
ARTICLE 23
WAIVER
The Union and the Town agree that each had a right to bargain for any provision that
they wished in the contract and each expressly waives the right to reopen the contract for any
further demands or proposals that could have been made prior to the effective date of this
contract and that the present contract constitutes a complete agreement of all matters and that 
25
Page 27
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
if other proposals have been made, they have been withdrawn in consideration of this
Agreement. 
ARTICLE 24
SICK LEAVE BANK
Section 1.
A sick leave bank for use by members of the bargaining unit covered by this
Agreement who have ea~hausted their own sick leave and who have serious illness shall be
established.
Section 2.
Each employee in the bargaining unit shall contribute two (2) of his/her sick
days to the bank effective upon the execution date ofthis Agreement.
Section 3.
The number of days that can be drawn by an individual will be limited to sixty
(60) sick leave bank days.
Section 4.
The sick leave bank shall be administered by a sick leave bank committee
consisting of six (6) members. Three (3) members shall be designated by the Employer to
serve at its discretion and three (3) members shall be designated by the Union at its discretion.
The sick leave bank committee shall determine the eligibility for use of the bank and the
amount of leave to be granted.
The following criteria shall be used by the committee in administering the
bank and in determining eligibility for sick leave withdrawals and the amount of said
withdrawals: 
a) Adequate medical evidence of serious illness
b) Prior utilization of all eligible sick leave 
26
Page 28
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY201~
Section S.
If, at any time, the sick leave bank falls below one hundred (100) sick leave
days, it shall be replenished by the contribution of one (1) additional day of sick leave by each
member of the unit staff covered by this Agreement. Such additional day will be deducted
from the employee's annual fifteen (15) days of sick leave.
~~r r
,,,,t; 
ARTICLE 25
HAZARDOUS DUTY PAY
A~To...L.e,-.. ..  ,-o,l 1.,.. ~L,;~ A „,.  ,.~ ~l,.,ll ,.  o i7.,-~.,,-,1,,,,~ Tl„+~, D.,<, ;,, ~L.o
0
Section 3.
Sections 1 and 2 of this article are deleted effective July 1, 2014 by paragraph 4.b. of
the FY2013-2015 Memorandum of Agreement.
ARTICLE 26
SICK LEAVE BUY-BACK 
~_ 
.. 
27
Page 29
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015 
n
CLVVV 111./tlLll Vll V~ ~11V tiV l~.itLl 11111 V1 111 J/lllJl ll'L11 V1111iS1L tJ~~
7  1 
v
>  >
Deleted effective July 1, 2014 pursuant to the FY2013-FY2015 Memorandum of
Agreement, paragraph 14. 
ARTICLE 27
MATERNITY LEAVE
The Town will provide maternity leave in accordance with M.G.L. c. 149, Section
lOSD and the Town`s published Policy on Maternity Leave. Anew Maternity Leave Policy
will be negotiated between the parties.
ARTICLE 2~
LIMITED DUTY
Police Officers who are injured on duty or sick and who are out on sick leave or injury
leave shall be eligible to participate in the light duty program set forth in this article.
Either a Police Officer or the Chief may request that a police officer perform light duty
work pursuant to this article. Light duty work shall consist of:
1) dispatching,
2) training, 
28
Page 30
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
3) general clerical work,
4) computer operation,
5) teletype operator,
6) crime prevention,
7) assist in property and evidence room,
8) suicide prevention watch,
9) supervision (applicable to supervisors only),and
10) other limited or light duty tasks agreed upon by the Chief and the Union.
The Chief shall make reasonable efforts, whenever possible, to make assignments of
light duty on the same shift as the police officer is currently assigned. The Chief may,
however, assign light duty tasks to an injured police officer during the day shi$ when
necessary.
In the event that the Chief requests a police officer to perform light duty, or the police
officer requests light duty, the Chief shall determine whether an appropriate light duty
position is available. If so, the Chief shall provide a written job description of such duties to
the police officer. The police officer shall immediately take all reasonable steps necessary to
present that job description to his/her physician and to request a letter from his/her physician
as to whether or not the police officer is capable of performing said light duty position. The
physician shall be asked whether the lightduty position can be performed by the police officer
and the number of hours such duty can be performed. T'he police officer shall obtain a written
response from his/her physician stating his/her fitness to perform such light duty. As soon as
possible after receipt of such medical information stating that the police officer is capable of
performing such light duty, the Chief may request the police officer to perform such light duty
position.
If a police officer refuses the Chiefs request to perform light duty after there is
medical verification that such police officer can perform light duty, said police officer shall be 
29
Page 31
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
excluded from eligibility for this light duty program for five (5) years and may not request
light duty during this time.
In the event that there are no available light duty positions, when such a request is
made by a police officer, then the Town need not honor such request for light duty, but will
give that police officer the next available light duty position if such police officer continues to
be disabled. The Chief will not discriminate in filling light duty positions between those on
sick or injury leave.
If an employee receiving sick leave and requesting light duty has not presented a letter
from his/her physician stating that he/she is capable of performing light duty work, then such
police officer may not invoke the grievance procedure, and the Union will not prosecute any
such grievance.
It is understood that light duty work is temporary work during the duration or partial
duration of the police officer's injury. Light duty positions are not intended to be permanent.
A police officer may not be required to participate in such light duty work until he/she has
been out on injury or sick leave for at least thirty (30) calendar days. However, a police
officer may voluntarily participate in such light duty work prior to the thirtieth (30th) day of
such illness or injury. Such light duty work shall also not apply to police officers who are
injured, and who have applied for superannuation, disability or accidental disability retirement
benefits. However, a police officer that leas so applied for retirement benefits may voluntarily
ask to participate in this light duty program.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, dispatching or suicide prevention
watch is voluntary light duty assignments and no employee shall be penalized for refusing to
work at such assignments. 
Al2~~~ILI~ ~9
~,~~TGE~'~'~ 
30
Page 32
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
~  ~~ ~.
~ ~.
~  ~~ ~~
~ ~~
~  ~.~~ ~~
~. ~ ~~
Tl,o ,.,,.,+;,,,,.,,,~ ~  „F ~  „1.,<,00 ~l,.,ll .,.,~ l,o .loo„~o.a f~, 1,x.,0 1,00„ 1.,.,,l.o„ 1..,
i
Deleted effective July 1, 2014 pursuant to the FY2013-FY2015 Memorandum of
Agreement, paragraph 13. 
ARTICLE 30
DURATION
The provisions of this Agreement will be effective July 1, 2012 and will continue and
remain in full force and effect through June 30, 2015 and shall be automatically renewed from
year to year thereafter unless at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date either party
notifies the other in writing of its desire to terminate this Agreement. This Agreement shall
remain in force and effect until a successor Agreement is reached. 
31
Page 33
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
AR'~CC~C~,I~+ ~1
FINGERPRINTING AND PHOTOGRAPHY
`., .,1 ~.. +..,,,,~o o,.+ /70%\ ..Fl.;~/L.o« L..,~o ,..~. X1,,,7;,,...,1.;+? .1;-F~ «o,..+:..1.,
Ti.:  +•  ..a ~. „,~  •a „  .,»~  r,.T„ o.....~.o  ~.,,-~..,+,..,~ora„ 
1111) JI.IFJVIILL J11G.11 VV FJZ.Tl  ~~ ~  Y~
under FY2013-FY2015 Memorandum of Agreement, paragraph 4.a. 
Deleted
ARTICLIE 32
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT
The Town agrees to follow and apply the United States Family and Medical Leave Act
for all qualifying bargaining unit members.
~IL~'II'~~ILI~ ~~
~]I~~,~~~~~A~'~~I~
The town shall be permitted to civilianize one (1) of the positions previously held by a
police officer in the front office. One (1) position will remain as bargaining unit work. In the
event there is' a need to staff the civilian position by way of overtime, the union membership
will have the right of first refusal on same, so long as the individual is qualified to perform the
job. 
Officers will be afforded an opportunity to receive training so as to be qualified to
perform dispatching duties. 
~I~'~'~~CLE 34
~VICIE~TIME
Overtime will be subject to the same restrictions as are found in the Memorandum
regarding paid details. An employee who is absent on sick leave for three (3) consecutive
days in a contract year may not work overtime for twenty-four (24) hours after the third day. 
32
Page 34
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
An employee who is absent on sick leave for five (5) separate instances in a contract
year may not work overtime for twenty-four (24) hours after the fifth instance.
Use of family sick days will not be counted in calculating absences under this
overtime provision.
Officers who work overtime on 4th of July, Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, Christmas,
New Year's Eve, New Year's Day shall receive the following compensation: double time the
officer's base hourly rate of pay. If the granting of time off on the above-listed holidays
creates the need for overtime, which cannot be filled on.a voluntary basis by another member
of the collective bargaining unit, the Chief of Police or his designee may deny the time off
.request.
No employee shall take time off and be hired, on overtime, to work the same shift
which the employee previously took off unless the employee has taken at least a full week (5
or more consecutive days) off, which encompasses the overtime shift which the employee
seeks to work. Provided further, no employee shall be hired to work overtime on the same
shift which the employee previously took off on 4th of July, Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve,
Christmas, New Year's Eve, New Year's Day, regardless of whether the employee took a full
week or more off.
An employee who is absent on sick leave may not work a paid detail or an overtime
shift for twenty four (24) hours after the absence.
AR'~'~~CILIC ~~
~]CIF~~~tILLA~'~lE~
F..,,.i, o,,,ri,...00 ~~..,n ,.o„o:.,~ ,,.. ,,,...,,.,i ~,-:,.ora ,.~ Qi cn ~,,...,~.i~  +t,o .,o  „a ~„~ ro,.;,.a ,.~
ti3V"'t't5~~: 
33
Page 35
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
Effective upon the date when the Town Meeting vote approving the FY2012 MOA becomes
effective, the $150 annual stipend shall be rolled into the base wages of al unit members on a
pro rata basis. 
ARTICLE 36
CUSTOMER SERVI~E/E'I'~1{~c~SP~~,~~Y
The Town's customer service policy shall be implemented upon the execution of this
agreement. The Union endorses the philosophy of the policy and will. strive to adhere to it in
the course of there duties. The Town agrees that employees shall not be disciplined solely on
the failure to adhere to the policy.
The Union endorses the Town'sEthics Policy.
ART1`~C~IL~ 37
ACCRE~~'~'ATION
The Union accepts all policy, procedure, rule and regulation changes for accreditation.
nv
~z~~nnc ii „~ i of „~~~.~ n„~,.,,i n~~,.o..>...,  „i ~,.,~o ~.,i.,..<,
i  o  ~
~z9~~~~~o e€  ~t~e~-9~~~.tea,„t i.,,.,o ~.,~.,,.~,
Deleted effective July 1, 2014 pursuant to Paragraph 4.c of the FY2013-2015 Memorandum
ofAgreement. 
LIFE INSURANCE
The town agrees to establish and maintain life insurance coverage which covers all
members ofthe bargaining unit in the eventthat any member ofthe bargaining unit dies in the
lawful performance of his/her duty as a police officer. Death benefit payments will be made
to the officers' stated beneficiaries in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.OQ) 
34
Page 36
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
ARTICLE 39
INDEMNIIF'ICATION
The Town of Framingham shall indemnify officers from personal financial loss,
against whom criminal process is sought, provided that the officer was on duty and acting in
the scope ofhis/her employment at the time ofthe alleged misconduct so long as the criminal
charges result in a dismissal or afinding of not. guilty and not internal discipline was taken
against the bargaining unit member for the conduct charged.
AIZ'I'ICI~E 40
HEALTH AND WELLNESS
Employees maybe excused from work for a period ofthirty(30) minutes per shift to
use the Department's fitness facility. Temporary release from duty shall be granted at the sole
discretion ofthe employee's supervisor, subject to staffing, manpower, and operational
constraints and shall be in lieu ofthe employees' meal break as defined in Article 9, section 6.
All officers shall have athirty (30) minute lunch period. Within the confines of athirty (30)
minute limitation, such lunch period may be taken at any place ofthe officer's choice.
A1~~~~ILIE ~~fl
NO SM~~~I~TfG l~~IL~~Y
Each sector will be provided with its own designated smoking location. Smoking on duty will
be allowed in designated areas only. There will be no smoking in the cruisers. The
designated smoking locations are as follows:
Sector A: Framingham Fire Department Headquarters —Back Lot
Sector B: Framingham Police Station —Rear Lot
Sector C: Framingham, Route 9Center Fire Station —Back Lot
Sector D: Framingham, Nobscot Fire Station —Rear Lot 
35
Page 37
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
ARTICLE 42
SICK LEAVE NON-USE BONUS
Beginning January 1, 2005, any officer who has not used any sick leave including sick
leave for family illnesses for a period of one calendar year shall be granted three (3) days of
compensatory time. This Article will expire at the end of the contract term.
ARTICLE 43
CIVILIANIZATION OF CERTAIN POSITIONS
The Town shall be permitted to civilianize the following positions without additional
bargaining: detaiUevidence officer, crime analyst, and aide to the chief. Such civilianization
will not occur until the officers filling the positions as of October 29, 2012 voluntarily vacate
the positions, however nothing shall prevent the Chief of Police from removing or reassigning
such officers for just cause.
The position of Technology &Logistics Officer, and all of the duties associated
therewith, shall be removed from the FPOU bargaining unit and "civilianized."However,
nothing herein will prevent the temporary assignment of aFPOU member to this position.
ARTICLE 44
BODY ARMOR &SEAT BELTS
Section 1.
All employees shall wear seat belts when operating police vehicles.
Section 2.
Employees who perform line patrol functions shall wear protective body armor. The
corrective measures used to enforce this provision will be limited to verbal counseling. The
Town will supply body armor, at no expense to such employees, and the Town will replace body
armor upon expiration. The Town will solicit and consider employees' input regarding the type,
style, and model ofbody armor from options readily available to the Town, subject to the Chiefs
final approval. 
[cZ~
Page 38
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
ARTICLE 45
WITHDRAWAL FROM CIVIL SERVICE
The Town shall be allowed to remove and replace the current civil service system without
additional bargaining. Employees hired prior to such removal and replacement shall retain their .
civil service status and rights unless and until they are promoted, at which time they shall
become non-civil service employees. However, in the event that a civil service police officer
who is promoted to the rank of non-civil service Sergeant and demoted during his or her
probationary period, he or she shall be allowed to resume his or her prior status as a civil service
police officer.
Upon removal and replacement of civil service, promotional examinations) may be
administered outside ofthe civil service system.
No non-probationary employee, regardless of his or her date of hire, will be disciplined,
laid off, discharged, or demoted without "just cause." Employees covered by civil service, may
appeal adverse action to the Massachusetts Civil Service Commission and those not so covered,
may, at the Union's discretion, seek redress through the grievance and arbitration procedure set
forth in the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
In the event that a matter is appealed to arbitration by an employee not covered by civil
service, the Arbitrator shall decide the matter based on applicable Massachusetts Civil Service
Commission and judicial decisions. With advance notice, but without additional bargaining, the
Town shall be allowed to implement a policy covering promotions, layoffs, recalls, probationary
periods, and other such matters. 
37
Page 39
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
IN WITNESS THEREOF, the. Town has caused this instrument to be signed and sealed by
its proper officers hereunto duly authorized, and the Union has caused this instrument to be
signed and sealed by its proper officers hereunto duly authorized, this
3~ S~  day of 0~~'v~ ~' ,2014.
TOWN OF FRAM
BOARD ~~'~~LE 
I+`RAMINGHAM[ ~~~~~lE
OFFICERS iJNI~I~T
,n se.~~---  .~—~ 
d
~,~,~J~~,cJ ~~S ~iV  I~-c~~r~,)
1-" ~~'' cti-~r 
-,/~
~'
~f
~-.r~~~~{~~ c ~ 
~~~s n;
38
Page 40
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
PAID DETAILS
Section 1. Paid details shall be distributed as defined below in Section 3.
Section 2. The rate for a uniformed Police Officer on detail will be as follows with a
minimum offour (4) hour pay. The detail rate shall be Thirty-eight($38) per hour.
A uniformed Police. Officer on detail shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay.
If he/she works over four (4) hours, but less than eight(8) hours, he/she shall receive eight (8)
hours pay. After eight(8) hours, the officer shall be paid for actual time worked.
The above-noted minimum pay periods shall be in effect for utiliTy companies and
construction details only.
The rate after eight (8) hours will be time and one-half. When rank is required he/she
shall receive an additional Two Dollars ($2.00) over the current detail rate. Rank is required
When in charge offour (4) or more uniformed Officers, with a minimum offour (4) hours pay
and time and one-half (1%z) after eight (8) hours. Exceptions to the above are noted as
follows:
Sundays: Rate is time and one-half
Holidays: Rate is double time
Easter Sunday: Rate is double time
Mother's Day Rate is double time
Christmas Eve: Rate is double time (starts at 6:00 P.M.)
New Year'sEve: Rate is double time (starts at 6:00 P.M.)
The rate for a uniformed Police Officer assigned to a labor dispute or a strike detail
shall be paid twice the applicable rate, with a minimum of four (4) hours pay and time and
one-half after eight(8) hours.
Section 4. Paid details shall be administered as follows:
A. Any employee who wants to receive paid detail assignments shall so indicate
by signing a paid detail list.
B. Paid detail list shall be arranged and maintained in the order of seniority and
rotated accordingly. 
~9
Page 41
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
C. Employees who are on their day off shall receive preference in paid detail
assignments in accordance with the seniority list.
D. When subsequent paid details are needed, the first employee on the list after
_  ,  the last previously called shall receive the assignment. (In accordance with "B" above).
E. An employee assigned to a paid detail shall be required to take such detail
unless he/she obtains a replacement. The employee assigned shall be considered as having
taken the detail.
F.  Any errors in the making of assignment shall not result in pay being granted
any employee who did not receive assignment.
Section 5. An employee who is absent on sick leave for three (3) consecutive days
in a contract year may not work a paid detail for twenty four (24) hours after the third .(3rd)
day. 
An employee who is absent on sick leave for five (5) separate instances in a contract
year, may not work a paid detail for twenty-four (24) hours after the fifth (5th) instance.
The above provisions shall be enforceable under the grievance procedure of the
collective bargaining agreement. However the type of assignment shall not be subject to the
grievance procedure.
Section 6.
Effective upon ratification and funding ofthe FY2013-FY2015 Memorandum of Agreement by
Town Meeting, the Town agrees to pay officers for non-Town details pursuant to the March 19,
2014 Framingham Police Paid Detail Agreement between the FPOU and the Framingham Police
Superiors Officer Association (FPSOA),provided that it is agreed and understood that the detail
rate for Town details shall not change or be affected by the March 19, 2014 Detail Agreement
between FPOU and FPSOA. 
40
Page 42
Framingham Police Officer's Union CBA FY2013-FY2015
SIDS LETTER OF AGY~~~MENT
A Committee ofthree(3) to four(4) people will be assigned to review the contract language in
order to remove those provisions and terms that are no longer applicable under the July 1, 2012
through June 20, 2015 Bargaining Agreement. The Committee members will include at least one
(1) member of the FPOU'sexecutive board.
The review and revision shall be done within ninety (90) days of the execution of this
Agreement.
T~~fill`~1 O~FRAMINGHAM
BOARD O SELECTMEN: 
FRAl@/1I~I`~1~HAM P~L~(CIE
~-  1 v~
`"~  ~~
-  ~~. 
~~r' T  --
~ ''  ~  ai
