AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
AND
THE FRAMINGHAM POLICE DISPATCHERS
SEIU, LOCAL 888
Effective
July 1, 2017 to June 30, 2020
1
Page 2
Article 1: 
Article 2: 
Article 3: 
Article 4: 
Article 5: 
Article 6: 
Article 7: 
Article 8: 
Article 9: 
Article 10: 
Article 11: 
Article 12: 
Article 13: 
Article 14: 
Article 15: 
Article 16: 
Article 17: 
Article 18: 
Article 19: 
Article 20: 
Article 21: 
Article 22: 
Article 23: 
Article 24: 
Article 25: 
Article 26: 
Article 27: 
Article 28: 
Article 29: 
Article 30: 
Article 31: 
Article 32: 
Article 33: 
Article 34: 
Article 35: 
Article 36: 
Article 37: 
Article 38: 
Article 39: 
Article 40: 
Article 41: 
INDEX
Recognition
Management Rights
Union Dues and Agency Service Fee
Political Education Fund (Cope) 
Union Representation
No Strike Provision
Seniority
Probationary Period
Personnel Files and Privacy
Group Insurance
Hours and Conditions of Employment
Smoking
Bulletin Boards
Shift Assignments
Grievance Procedure
Emergency Situations
Unpaid Leave of Absence
Holidays
Longevity
Bereavement Leave
Personal Leave
Sick Leave
Sick Leave Incentive
Court Time
Maternity Leave
Highway Department Call
Jury Duty
Non-Discrimination
Vacations
Tuition Reimbursement
Certification Pay
Overtime
Safety and Health
Fire Department Calls
Salary
Clothing
Training
Accreditation
Equipment
Educational Incentive
Duration
2
Page 3
ARTICLE 1
Recognition
Section 1:  The City of Framingham hereby recognizes the Union as the exclusive collective
bargaining representative of all full-time and regular part-time public safety civilian dispatchers
excluding managerial and confidential employees, and all other City employees. 
ARTICLE 2
Management Rights
The list of the following specific rights of management in this article is not intended to be a
waiver of any of the rights of the City not listed herein. Such inherent management rights shall
remain with the City except as they may be shared with the Union by specific provisions of this
Agreement. 
Among the management rights vested in the City are the rights, in accordance with applicable
law, to hire, promote, transfer, assign, suspend, demote, discharge and to relieve employees from
duty and to issue reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of employees. 
The City shall have the freedom of action to determine the methods and means and the personnel
for all operations, including the starting and quitting times. The City must be able to take
whatever action is necessary to carry out its work in emergency situations. The City shall select
and determine the number and types of employees required and shall assign work to such
employees in accordance with the requirements as determined by the City. 
No employee shall be reprimanded, suspended, discharged or otherwise disciplined except for
cause. 
ARTICLE 3
Union Dues and Agency Service Fee
Section 1.  The Union shall have the exclusive right to the check-off and transmittal of Union
dues on behalf of each employee. 
Section 2.  The City shall, for the duration of this Agreement, deduct Union dues from the
weekly paycheck of each employee upon written authorization. 
Section 3.  Pursuant to M.G.L. chapter 150E, s. 12, as a condition of continued employment, 
all employees after the 30th day of employment or the 30th day following the execution of this
Agreement, whichever is later, shall pay to the Union an agency service fee, in an amount equal
to the amount required to become a member and remain a member in good standing of the
Union. 
3
Page 4
Section 4.  The Union agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless against any and all
claims, suits, and other forms of liability arising from the agency fee provision or the deduction
of money so deducted once it has been turned over to the comptroller of the Union. 
ARTICLE 4
Political Education Fund (COPE) 
Upon the demand of the Union and within forty-five (45) days notice in writing to the Employer, 
the City of Framingham shall deduct from the salary of each employee covered by the terms of
this Agreement a sum not to exceed 15 cents per week for the political education fund fee and
transmit the amount to the Union. 
It is understood that said political education fund fee will be processed as an increment to the
applicable amount of union dues or agency fee normally deducted from the employee’s salary; it
is further understood that in processing the collected amounts of the Union, the Union bears sole
responsibility for accounting to its members in terms of separation of Union dues/agency fee
from said political education fund fee. 
Any employee, who objects to said political education fund fee, may terminate his/her deduction
by notifying his/her payroll clerk and the Union in writing. It is also understood that an
employee’s contribution to COPE is not required as a condition of employment and may be
revoked at any time by the employee. Such revocation by an employee is effective when
accepted into the employee’s payroll system. 
In accordance with federal law, COPE will accept contributions only from members of the
Union. Political contributions are not tax deductible. 
ARTICLE 5
Union Representation
Section 1.  Union officer and/or stewards, in no case more than two (2) in number, shall have
time off without loss of pay to attend all grievance hearings and bargaining meetings. Such
officers and/or stewards shall give reasonable advance notice to their supervisor of the intent to
engage in such business so that the work may be arranged accordingly. 
Section 2.  Union representatives shall be permitted to have access to the premises of the City
for the purpose of discussing official Union business, including grievances, provided that (1) 
there is no disruption of operations or security, (2) whenever possible, requests for such access
will be made in advance to the appropriate authority and will not be unreasonable denied, and (3) 
they give notice to their presence to the immediate manager immediately upon arrival. 
Section 3.  An employee, at his/her request, must be allowed an official representative of the
Union to be present at any investigatory interview, conference, or hearing which may reasonably
be expected to result in disciplinary action. 
4
Page 5
ARTICLE 6
No Strike Provision
It shall be unlawful for any employee to engage in, participate in, induce, or encourage any
strike, work stoppage, slowdown or withholding of services of his own or those of any other
employee. 
ARTICLE 7
Seniority
Section 1.  A seniority list of bargaining unit employees shall be established. Thereafter
seniority shall be defined as an employee’s length of continuous service as a Framingham Police
Dispatcher. Employees shall be listed in descending order of seniority. 
Section 2.  If two (2) or more employees possess equal lengths of service (i.e. same date of
hire), seniority shall be determined by the drawing of lots. 
Section 3.  The seniority list shall be posted on the Union bulletin board. 
ARTICLE 8
Probationary Period
Section 1.  The City shall have the first nine (9) months twelve (12) months from the
commencement of employment within the bargaining unit to determine an employee’s
competency to perform and satisfy all of the requirements of the position of Police dispatcher. 
The Chief of Police may prescribe certain standards and evaluations to be met during this
probationary period. 
Section 2.  Employees hired after July 1, 1999, whose performance is deemed unsatisfactory
at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police during the probationary period, may be terminated
prior to expiration of said period. Such action is without right of appeal or subject to the
grievance procedure. 
Section 3.  The probationary period of a newly hired employee may be extended for an
additional three (3) months with the mutual agreement of the Chief of Police or his designee and
the Union. 
ARTICLE 9
Personnel Files and Privacy
Section 1.  Personnel files are confidential files. There shall be only one official personnel
file for each employee. Said personnel file shall remain in the custody of the Director of Human
Resources or his/her designee at all times. The employee is entitled to see his/her own file at
reasonable times. The employee may show his/her file to anyone upon written authorization to
the Director of Human Resources or his/her designee. The employee will be provided a copy of
any material that has been placed in his/her personnel file pertaining to his/her job performance
5
Page 6
that may result in disciplinary action. The employee shall be given the opportunity to respond in
writing to such material and such response shall be filed in her/her personnel file. 
Section 2.  Every employee is entitled to review and reproduce his/her own personnel file at
any reasonable time. 
Section 3.  At any reasonable time, an employee may request and receive information as to
the number of sick and vacation days he/she has used and the number of sick and vacation days
he/she has to his/her credit. 
Section 4.  The employee shall be notified of any complaint made regarding his/her
performance of job duties that may result in disciplinary action. Whenever feasible, a complaint
will be reduced to writing before being considered and processed by the Chief of Police. The
Union understands that the City may not adhere to this process when a criminal investigation is
being conducted. 
ARTICLE 10
Group Insurance
Section 1.  The City will continue to offer group life and accidental death and
dismemberment insurance, as well as group medical and dental coverage for all employees in the
bargaining unit who are eligible for such coverage. The provision of these benefits is subject to
coalition bargaining between the City and employee representatives. 
ARTICLE 11
Hours and Conditions of Employment
Section 1.  The scheduling of communications personnel shall be the responsibility of the
Chief. The workweek shall consist of five (5) consecutive days on duty standard workday will
be eight (8) hours and twenty-five (25) minutes in length. Full time employees will be scheduled
to work four (4) consectuve days followed by two (2) consecutive days off duty. The timing of
the transition from the 5/2 to 4/2 schedule shall be determined by the Chief of Police. The
following shall be standard shifts shall be: 
1 Shift  Monday – Friday 8:00 AM – 4:00 PM
1 Shift either
1 Shift 
Tuesday – Saturday
Sunday – Thursday 
8:00 AM – 4:00 PM or
8:00 AM – 4:00 PM
1 Shift  Sunday – Thursday 4:00 PM – 12:00 AM
1 Shift  Tuesday – Saturday 12:00 AM – 8:00 AM
7:45 AM to 4:10 PM
3:45 PM to 12:10 AM
11:45 PM to 8:10 AM 
6
Page 7
Section 2.  In advance of shift bids, the Chief may create additional work shifts so long as
they are consistent with the parameters established by Section 1. This includes the right to create
a split shift. (e.g.: an employee may work 2 evening shifts and 3 midnight shifts.)
Section 3.  Upon at least seven (7) days notice, the Chief may adjust the shift schedule so that
employees report to work up to one (1) hour in advance of their scheduled shifts. If such
adjustment occurs, any employee who has his/her shift adjusted shall be compensated by either
ending his/her shift prior to the above-mentioned quitting time, or by receiving financial
compensation commensurate with the additional time worked. The Chief may determine the
means of compensation. 
Section 4.  Employees shall be entitled to a thirty (30) minute lunch period without loss of
pay. Said lunch period may be taken at any location within the City of Framingham, determined
by the employee. 
Section 5.  Employees shall be granted two (2) fifteen (15) minute paid breaks. One break
will be taken during the first half of the employee’s shift and one break will be taken during the
second half of the employee’s shift. The timing of said breaks shall be at the discretion of the
Shift Commander or his/her designee. 
ARTICLE 12
Smoking
Employees shall only smoke during designated breaks and only within the designated smoking
area. 
ARTICLE 13
Bulletin Boards
Section 1.  The City shall provide the Union with a bulletin board designated for the purpose
of posting notices regarding matters of official Union business and job postings for positions
covered by this Agreement. The notices may remain posted for a reasonable period of time. 
Such designated bulletin boards shall be reasonably accessible to employees. The Bulletin Board
need not be for the exclusive use of this Union. 
ARTICLE 14
Shift Assignments
Section 1.  Work shift assignments shall be determined by the Police Chief. Senior
employees shall be given preference, but the Chief shall make the final decision as to work shift
assignments. Employees shall request their work shifts twice once per year, during the months
of January and July of October. Bids shall close at the end of each month October. New shift
assignments will be posted by November 15 February 15 and August 15. New shift assignments
shall go into effect on the second Sunday in January March and September of each year. Shift
assignments shall remain in effect until the next bid cycle, and shall be made as soon as possible
7
Page 8
after the execution of this agreement. If there is a vacancy during the year, shift bids will be
reopened at that time and will remain in effect until the next bid cycle. 
Section 2.  Should an opening occur on a shift, a notice shall be posted within seven (7) days
to that effect, on the union bulletin board. Any employee wishing to apply for the opening shall
sign his/her name to the notice. At the end of the seven (7) day period, the senior-most qualified
employee, as determined by the Police Chief, who has signed the notice shall be appointed to fill
the opening, subject to the rights of management. Failure to sign the notice within a seven (7) 
day period will waive any rights to the opening. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
require management to fill a shift vacancy. 
Section 3.  Employees will be allowed, but not required to exchange shifts with other
bargaining unit employees. Employees who make such arrangements for shift coverage shall not
be considered absent without leave. Employees providing shift coverage resulting from an
exchange shall not be entitled to overtime pay or compensatory time, for the shift being covered. 
Section 4.  Except in an emergency situation, at least seven (7) days written notice must be
given by the Chief to the employee in question, with reference to any change in his/her work
shift. 
Section 5.  Shift bids shall commence within ten (10) days of the execution of this
Agreement. Such bids shall remain in effect for the remainder of the bid cycle. 
ARTICLE 15
Grievance Procedure
Section 1.  A grievance shall be defined as an allegation by the Union that the City has
violated a provision or provisions of this Agreement. Nothing in this Agreement shall be so
interpreted as to require the Union to process a grievance if the Union considers the grievance to
be invalid or without merit. 
Section 2.  A grievance must be submitted in writing by the Union to the aggrieved
employee’s supervisor within seven (7) days of the event giving rising to the grievance. 
Section 3.  The aggrieved employee’s Supervisor has five (5) days to respond to the
grievance. If there is no response to or no resolution of the grievance, the Union may submit the
grievance in writing to the Chief of Police within seventy-two (72) hours after the receipt of the
Supervisor’s response or the expiration of said five (5) day period. The Chief of Police may hold
a meeting of the parties and may respond to the grievance in writing within fourteen (14) days of
submission. 
Section 4.  If there is no response by the Chief or no resolution, the Union may submit the
grievance in writing to the Mayor within seventy-two hours after receipt of the Chief’s response
or the expiration of said fourteen (14) day period. The Mayor may hold a meeting of the parties
and may respond in writing within fourteen (14) days of submission. 
8
Page 9
Section 5.  If there is no response by the Mayor or no resolution, the Union may submit the
grievance to arbitration within twenty (20) days after said events. The Union, and not the
aggrieved employee, shall decide whether or not a grievance is submitted to arbitration. 
Arbitrations shall be conducted by the Division of Labor Relations. The arbitrator shall have no
power to, subtract from, or modify any provision of this Agreement, or to issue any decision or
award inconsistent with applicable law. The decision or award of the arbitrator shall be final and
binding in accordance with M.G.L. c. 150C and 150E. 
Section 6.  All fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be shared equally by the parties. Each
side shall pay the cost of preparation and presentation of its own case. 
Section 7.  Any step or steps in the grievance procedure, as well as time limits prescribed at
each step of the grievance procedure, may be waived by mutual agreement of the parties. 
Meeting dates will be agreed upon by all parties. 
Section 8.  If the Union fails to exhaust remedies under this procedure or to abide by the time
limits with respect to each step, the grievance shall be deemed abandoned. If any responses are
not received within the prescribed time limits, the Union may move the grievance to the next
step of the grievance procedure. 
ARTICLE 16
Emergency Situations
Section 1.  If an employee is required to remain at work beyond his/her end of shift, he/she
shall receive a minimum of one-half (1/2) hour compensation, at time and one-half (1 ½) the
employee’s hourly pay rate. 
Section 2.  If an employee is called into work, outside of his/her regularly scheduled shift, 
he/she shall receive a minimum of one (1) hour compensation, at time and one-half (1 ½) the
employee’s hourly rate. 
Section 3.  Compensation shall be calculated by one half (1/2) hour increments, for the
purpose of this article. 
ARTICLE 17
Unpaid Leave of Absence
Section 1.  An employee may request an unpaid leave of absence. The request may be
granted at the discretion and with the approval of the Mayor. Such request shall not be
unreasonably denied. An employee shall not accrue sick leave, vacation time, seniority, or
longevity while on an unpaid leave of absence. 
Section 2.  Employees who do not return to work upon the expiration of an approved leave
shall be considered to have voluntarily resigned. 
9
Page 10
ARTICLE 18
Holidays
Section 1.  Employees shall be allowed to take the four (4) below listed recognized holidays
off without loss of pay or compensation. If a holiday falls on an employee’s scheduled day off, 
he or she shall receive one (1) day compensatory time, for each holiday which falls on his or her
scheduled day off. In the event an employee works on a recognized holiday, he or she shall be
compensated at time and one-half (1 ½) his or her hourly rate. The following shall be recognized
holidays for all employees: 
New Years Day
Independence Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Section 1.1 Effective July 1, 2019, the following shall be recognized holidays for all employees: 
Third Monday in February (Washington’s Birthday) 
Third Monday in April (Patriot’s Day) 
Last Monday in May (Memorial Day) 
First Monday in September (Labor Day) 
Second Monday in October (Columbus Day) 
Veteran’s Day 
Martin Luther King Day
Section 2.  Employees shall have the option to substitute Yom Kippur or Rosh Hashanah for
Christmas Day, as a recognized holiday. 
Employees will be required to work the seven (7) above holidays as scheduled and all full-time
employees shall receive holiday pay, equivalent to twenty five percent (25%) of a week's base
pay for each of the above seven holidays. Holiday pay shall be paid in the following manner: 
Three (3) holidays in the pay week in which Independence Day falls. Four (4) holidays in the pay
in which Christmas Day falls. 
ARTICLE 19
Longevity
Section 1.  Longevity pay shall be paid to any permanent full-time employee in accordance
with the following schedule: 
10 years of service
15 years of service
20 years of service
25 years of service
30 years of service
35 years of service 
$200.00
$250.00
$300.00
$350.00
$400.00
$450.00
10
Page 11
Longevity pay shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days after the employee’s anniversary
date after completion of the applicable years of service. 
Section 2.  The continuous service of an employee shall not be deemed broken by service in
the armed forces of the United States, providing such employee returns to City employment
within two (2) years of his/her service termination date, and further provided that the employee’s
time in the Armed Forces is limited to four (4) years of service (unless it is involuntary service, 
in which case it may exceed four (4) years).
Section 3.  The continuous service of an employee shall not be deemed broken when an
employee is absent due to injuries received on the job in the service of the City which are
compensable under the Worker’s Compensation Act (M.G.L. c. 152).
ARTICLE 20
Bereavement Leave
Section 1.  Any employee shall receive up to three (3) days leave with pay to attend the
funeral of any of the following: 
Spouse, domestic partner, child, parent, guardian, grandparent, grandchild, 
brother, sister, step-parent, step-child, step-sibling, step-grandparent, grandparent
of spouse or domestic partner, mother-in-law, or father-in-law. 
Section 2.  An employee shall be granted two (2) days leave with pay for the death of the
following: 
Aunt, uncle, cousin, niece, nephew, brother-in-law, sister-in-law. 
Section 3.  If a death necessitates travel of more than one hundred (100) miles by an
employee, he/she may be granted one (1) additional day for travel at the discretion of the Chief
of Police. 
Section 4.  Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent the Chief of Police from awarding
additional days off for special circumstances, at his/her discretion. 
Section 5.  Management may request, and the employee shall provide proof of death with
regard to any leave taken under the provisions of this article. 
ARTICLE 21
Personal Leave
Section 1.  Each July 1st, full-time employees will be credited with two (2) personal days. An
employee requesting to use a personal day shall give as much advance notice of his/her intent as
possible. Employees will make every effort to utilize their personal days prior to June 30th of
each fiscal year. With the prior approval of the Chief of Police, employees may carry over
unused personal time until September 30th of the next fiscal year. Such leave is at the discretion
of the Chief of Police and shall not be unreasonably denied. 
11
Page 12
Section 2.  If an employee terminates his/her service with the City, he/she shall be
compensated for any accumulated unused personal leave. Payment of such shall be calculated
by multiplying the number of unused days by the employee’s daily rate of pay. 
ARTICLE 22
Sick Leave
Section 1.  Employees covered by this agreement shall be allowed paid sick leave, accrued at
the rate of one and one-quarter (1 ¼) days per month. Accumulation is unlimited. The Chief
may require a doctor’s certificate when an employee is absent on sick leave for three (3) 
consecutive days: after an employee is absent on sick leave for five (5) instances in a contract
year or at any other time the Chief believes sick leave benefits are being abused. 
Section 2.  Up to four (4) days sick leave may be used per fiscal year for the care of the
employee’s spouse, children, parents and members of the employee’s immediate household. 
Section 3.  Upon ordinary retirement, or death, an employee covered by this Agreement or
his/her heirs, shall be entitled to buy back his/her accumulated and unused sick leave over one
hundred (100) days, accumulation at a rate of one (1) day for every five (5) days (e.g.: if the
employee had 120 days of unused and accumulated sick leave he/she would be entitled to a buy
back of four (4) days.) The maximum number of days that can be bought back is 20 days and the
maximum value of such buy back is three thousand ($3000.00) dollars. 
Section 4.  Employees on Workers’ Compensation leave shall not accrue sick and vacation
leave after being on such Workers’ Compensation leave for thirty (30) days. 
Section 5.  Employee Sick Bank: 
The Sick Bank is available to those employees who are eligible to accrue sick leave in
accordance with the Sick Leave Policy. Each eligible employee, who has elected to join the Sick
Bank, must donate two sick days to the sick bank. An authorization/participation form must be
filled out by December 31, 2013 to be included in the Sick Bank effective January 1, 2014. Due
to the timing of this agreement, dispatchers will be allowed to donate two days to the sick bank
by December 31, 2013. All employees hired after November 24, 2013 must complete the
authorization/participation form must be filled out during employee orientation at the hire date. 
These days are taken from each employee’s accrual upon the completion of their six month
introductory/probationary period. Any new employee may not draw from the Sick Bank until this
time has been donated or after six months of continuous employment is completed. An employee
may only join the Sick Bank within their first thirty days of employment. Beyond that period, 
enrollment is closed. 
This bank of time shall be tracked and maintained by the Human Resource Department. If the
Bank falls below one hundred (100) sick leave days, it shall be replenished by the contribution of
one (1) additional day of sick leave by each eligible employee. Notification will be made to all
12
Page 13
participating employees if this becomes necessary. This time will be taken from each
employee’s accumulated sick leave. If a participating employee does not have any time
available, the time will be taken from the next deposit of hours into that employee’s leave bank. 
An employee who retires, terminates or otherwise leaves the employ of the City of Framingham
and who has accrued sick days at the time of the said severance from employment, may donate
such accrued sick leave days to the Sick Leave Bank up to a maximum of ten (10) days plus one
(1) sick leave day for each year of the employee’s service with the City. Sick leave hours may
not be donated to an individual, only to the Sick Bank. 
The Sick Leave Bank shall be administered by a Sick Leave Bank Committee. The Committee
shall consist of three (3) members. These members shall be the Mayor or his/her designee, the
Director of Human Resources and the Director of the Parks and Recreation Department. This
Committee may only convene when needed or when a petition for time has been made to the
Bank and as many times thereafter required to settle the request. Minutes will be taken at each
meeting and made available to each member of Committee and kept on file in the Human
Resource Department. 
Any employee wishing to request leave time from the Bank must present the request in written
form and submit it with medical documentation regarding the requirements for their absence. A
doctor’s note explaining the illness, the day on which the absence will commence and a probable
return date must be included in the medical documentation. The Committee will review the
request, the employees’ attendance history and any other information deemed relevant. After
discussion on the topic and a review of all relevant documents, a decision is made by majority
vote. The employee will be notified in writing of the Committee’s decision. If granted, the leave
time will be deposited into the employee’s leave bank via the Human Resource Department. The
employee’s department will also be notified. If the Committee votes to deny the request, the
employee may appeal the decision. An appeal is made in writing to the Director of Human
Resources. The full Committee must meet to hear the appeal, reconsider and decide by majority
vote. Only one appeal per request for Sick Leave Bank benefits may be made by an employee. 
The decision of the Committee upon the appeal is final and binding. 
An employee may be granted up to a maximum of sixty (60) sick leave days per anniversary year
from the Sick Leave Bank. If an employee is granted less than sixty (60) days and requires an
extension of leave benefits, he or she may request an extension of benefits from the Sick Leave
Bank via the same process used to make the initial request. The Committee will convene to
review the documentation and rule on the extension request. Members must exhaust all accrued
sick leave before drawing from the Bank. 
Serious illness shall be defined as one which, diagnosed by a physician, will result in an
employee’s absence from work for a minimum of twenty (20) working days. A second opinion, 
13
Page 14
by a physician designated by the Sick Leave Bank Committee, may be required. A physician’s
statement is required for all requests. 
The available sick bank balance shall be considered as having collective value to all employees
and shall be treated so by the Sick Bank Committee. The employee’s leave records will be
examined as part of the decision making process. A record of excess leave use over the course
of the employee’s employment, will be taken into consideration by the Committee. This will not
reflect favorably on the decision and may result in ineligibility of sick leave bank benefits. If
there are extenuating circumstances surrounding the employee’s attendance history, the
employee should present them with their petition for time. 
The Committee may, as part of its decision, grant sick leave from the bank with the
understanding that the employee will return the “borrowed” time to the bank from subsequent
sick leave accruals. This will be an option offered by the Committee and may or may not be
accepted by the employee. A mutually agreed upon payback schedule will be designed and
implemented upon acceptance. 
ARTICLE 23
Sick Leave Incentive
Employees who do not use any sick leave (including family sick time) during a contract year will
be entitled to two (2) additional days of compensatory time. Employees who use no more than
two (2) sick days/leave during a contract year (including family sick time) are entitled to an
additional one (1) compensatory day. 
ARTICLE 24
Court Time
Section 1.  An employee assigned to either the evening or midnight shift, or assigned to the
day shift and on a day off, who is required to attend any legal or administrative proceeding in
his/her official capacity will, in lieu of any witness fee to which he/she would otherwise be
entitled, receive compensation for the time which he/she was in attendance at such proceeding. 
Employee shall receive a minimum of three (3) hours compensation at time and one-half (1 ½)
his/her base rate of pay. 
ARTICLE 25
Parental Leave
Section 1.  Employees shall be entitled to Parental leave in accordance with M.G.L. c. 149 s. 
105D and the City’s policy on maternity leave. 
14
Page 15
ARTICLE 26
Highway Department Calls
Section 1.  The Union agrees to answer Framingham Department of Public Works’ telephone
calls after the Department of Public Works’ normal business hours. 
ARTICLE 27
Jury Duty
Section 1.  An employee who reports for jury duty shall not be required to report to work on
the day or days he/she reports for jury duty. Such leave shall be granted without loss of
compensation. 
ARTICLE 28
Non-Discrimination
Section 1.  The City or the Union shall not discriminate against any employee covered by this
Agreement because of race, color, creed, age, handicap, sex, sexual orientation, or national
origin. 
ARTICLE 29
Vacations
Section 1.  Vacation benefits are as follows: 
At least one (1) year but less than five (5) years  10 days
At least five (5) years but not more than ten (10) years 15 days
At least ten (10) years but not more than twenty (20) years 20 days
Not less than twenty (20) years  25 years
Section 2.  Consistent with the obligation of management to maintain adequate staffing
levels, employees shall be allowed to take vacation upon reasonable notice and with the approval
of their Shift Commander, or his/her designee. 
Section 3.  Employees who permanently leave City service shall receive vacation pay, in lieu
of time off, for accrued vacation time. Vacation time shall be credited on a pro-rata basis for the
month in which separation occurs. Vacation time shall be calculated by multiplying the number
of unused vacation days by the employee’s daily rate of pay, at the time of separation. 
Section 4.  Following successful completion of six (6) months of employment, new
employees may borrow up to five (5) vacation days from their first year allotment of ten (10) 
vacation days, for use prior to the completion of their first year of service. (e.g.: if a new
employee took 5 vacation days before his/her 1 year anniversary, he/she would have 5 vacation
days remaining, to be taken after the completion of 1 year of service.)
15
Page 16
ARTICLE 30
Tuition Reimbursement
Section 1.  The City shall provide a tuition reimbursement fund up to a maximum of six
hundred dollars ($600.00) per employee per fiscal year. Only full-time employees will be
eligible to receive tuition reimbursement. Applications for tuition reimbursement shall be
submitted to and be approved, in advance, by the Chief of Police. The approval of the Chief is
within his/her discretion. In order to qualify for tuition reimbursement, the employee must
successfully complete the course and receive a grade of “C” or better or its equivalency. 
However, to be eligible for reimbursement employees must receive a grade of “B” for Masters’ 
or Doctorate level courses. Attendance at such courses must be outside of the employee’s
regular working hours and may not be a correspondence course. Reimbursements shall be
limited to tuition, registration costs, and course materials. No employee shall study on duty. In
order to qualify for tuition reimbursement, the course must be work-related or part of a degree
program. 
ARTICLE 31
Certification Pay
Section 1.  Employees who have successfully completed the Massachusetts Criminal Justice
Training Council Reserve Intermittent Police Academy shall receive a one-time stipend of fifteen
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) to be paid out twice a year. Such stipend of seven hundred and fifty
dollars shall be paid in the month of March and another payment of seven hundred and fifty
dollars in September. 
Section 2.  The LEAPS/CJIS Representative and back-up LEAPS/CJIS Representative, who
are qualified to instruct, train, and test other LEAPS/CJIS Terminal Operator, shall receive a
stipend of one thousand six hundred and fifty dollars ($1650.00). Such stipend shall be paid
annually in the month of January. No such stipend shall be paid unless the employee actually
engages in such instruction, training, or testing. 
Section 3.  Employees who have successfully completed at least eighty (80) documented
hours of a recognized public safety communications course, not including the five week State
Dispatcher Training Course, shall be entitled to a one-time stipend of $2,000, which will be
added to the base pay, to be paid on the first pay period of December. This applies to course
work taken after July 1, 2001. Course must be taken at employee’s expenses and outside of the
employee’s regular working hours. Applications for course work shall be submitted to and be
approved, in advance, by the Chief of Police. Training courses counted for this stipend may not
be counted for the instructor-level stipend. During the probationary period employees will not
be eligible for a stipend. 
Section 4.  Employees who qualify as communications training officers, by having
successfully completed at least eighty (80) documented hours of instructor-level public safety
communications course work, shall be entitled to an annual stipend of $1500, to be paid on the
first pay period of December. Training courses counted for this stipend may not be counted for
the basic stipend. Employees who request and receive this stipend may be required to train and
16
Page 17
evaluate new employees. The City may limit the number of employees assigned as training
officers, and who are therefore eligible for this payment. Application for course work shall be
submitted to and approved, in advance, by the Chief of Police. 
Section 5.  Members of the bargaining unit who successfully complete or who have
completed the five week state Dispatcher Training Course shall receive a one-time stipend of
$500 upon completion of such course. 
ARTICLE 32
Overtime
Section 1.  Overtime compensation shall be granted for any hours worked in excess of the
established workweek. The overtime rate shall be time and one-half (1 ½) the employees base
rate of pay. 
Section 2.  New Language – Overtime shall be distributed by keeping record of how many
hours worked of overtime by each dispatcher. The department will maintain a running record of
these hours. Eligibility for overtime will be determined by shift, seniority and hours worked. 
Overtime hours worked will resent every January 1st and July 1st.
ARTICLE 33
Safety and Health
Section 1.  The City agrees to provide safe, clean, stable surrounding in all places of
employment. The City agrees to comply with all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations concerning a safe working environment. 
Section 2.  Managers shall at all times be concerned with the safety and health of employees
under their supervision. When an employee reports a safety concern in writing to his/her
immediate manager, a reasonable effort will be made to correct an unsafe condition. 
ARTICLE 34
Fire Department Calls
Section 1.  The Union agrees to answer Framingham Fire Department telephone calls, subject
to the approval and consent from the Fire Department Union. Prior to the Union answering
Framingham Fire Department telephone calls, the City agrees to discuss with the Union any
impact it may have on the Bargaining Unit. 
17
Page 18
ARTICLE 35
Salary
Effective July 1, 2013 – two percent increase (2%)
Effective July 1, 2014 – one percent increase (1%)
Effective July 1, 2015 – one percent increase (1%)
Add a step 8 at 2.5% - only for employees who have reached 20 years of service
Effective July 1, 2016 – one percent increase (1%)
Effective July 1, 2017 - one percent increase (1%)
Effective July 1, 2018 - one percent increase (1%)
Effective July 1, 2019 - two percent increase (2%)
In recognition of multiple position changes, effective July 1, 2019 – New Salary
Schedule: Attachment A. Employees will step annually, in accordance with City Policy, 
if they receive a satisfactory performance evaluation for the prior year. 
Monetary Articles: 
Article 19: Longevity
Article 31: Certification Pay
Article 35: Salary/Stipend Bundle
Article 36: Clothing
Article 40: Educational Incentive
Payment Frequency
The Union agrees to change from a weekly payroll to a bi-weekly payroll if accepted by all other
City Unions (excluding School Department).
Annual Stipend Bundle
The following annual stipend shall be paid out annually as part of the employee’s base
pay in the following manner: 
Effective July 1, 2008, a new Step 7 shall be added, which shall be attained once a member of
the bargaining unit completes ten years of service with Framingham Police Department. Such
step shall be paid at $43,078.00 annually or an increase of 4%, whichever is greater. 
Effective July 1, 2009, the annual amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000) shall be added to
the base pay in the form of a bundled stipend which consists of the weekend and night shift
differentials, roll call stipend of four hundred dollars ($400), and a technology stipend of one
hundred dollars ($100). 
18
Page 19
ARTICLE 36
Clothing
Newly hired dispatchers will receive a one time $550 stipend for purchase of first uniforms in
order to comply with uniform policy. Effective July 1, 2014 eliminate clothing allowance and
add $400 to base wages. See attached uniform policy. 
ARTICLE 37
Training
Section 1.  When an employee is required to use his/her personal vehicle to perform City
business, or attend conferences if ordered by the Chief of Police, he/she shall be reimbursed in
accordance to City policy. 
Section 2.  All employees shall attend and successfully complete a basic forty (40) hour
telecommunications (dispatching) course, as approved by the Chief of Police. New hires shall be
registered for said course within six (6) months of hire. 
Section 3.  Newly hired dispatchers will go through the any training program mandated by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and/or training programs designated by the Chief of Police
or his/her designee. 
ARTICLE 38
Accreditation
The bargaining unit agrees to any future changes in terms and conditions of employment, as
required by the Police Department’s accreditation process. This includes assuming additional
duties, as accreditation may require. 
ARTICLE 39
Equipment
The City will purchase and maintain all dispatch equipment and software as the Chief of Police
deems necessary. Employees shall be granted training and access to manuals and may be
considered in choosing such equipment and software. 
ARTICLE 40
Educational Incentive
Effective July 1, 2008, an educational incentive to be added to the base pay shall be established
as follows: 
Dispatchers shall receive additional compensation as an educational incentive in increments or
amounts equal to the percent of base pay, predicated upon the following: 
19
Page 20
  Associate Degree in law enforcement or a related specialty approved in
advance by the Chief: $1200. 
  Baccalaureate Degree in law enforcement or a related specialty approved in
advance by the Chief: $2400. 
  Master’s Degree in law enforcement or a related specialty approved in
advance by the Chief: $3600. 
Payment of such incentive shall be conditioned upon the following: 
Any such degree must be in a law enforcement or work-related specialty as determined by the
Chief. Such determination shall not be subject to the grievance procedure. 
ARTICLE 41
Layoff
In the event of a reduction in the workforce hours, reduction in hours or layoffs shall be in
inverse order of hiring (by seniority).  Notice by the City to the Union and Employee shall be no
less than four (4) weeks, but in an emergency no less than two (2) calendar weeks. 
For the period of 18 months the affected employee shall have the right to be recalled to the job
title from which he/she was laid off, if apposition should become vacant or be reinstated to a
position in a different job if qualified. 
No person shall be hired as a Dispatcher until all persons on the recall list have been notified, 
and such persons decline the employment offer. 
ARTICLE 42
Duration
This agreement will be effective July 1, 2017 and will continue to remain in full force and effect, 
except for the wage re-openers, to and including June 30, 2020 and shall automatically renew
itself for one (1) year unless by April 1 of the same year of the expiration of the contract either
party gives notice that it desires to negotiate a new contract or amendment thereto. 
Signed this __________ Day of ______________, 2020
City of Framingham 
__________________________________
__________________________________
__________________________________ 
Framingham Police Dispatchers, 
SEIU, Local 888 
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
20
