BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods
  Results
  Conclusions
Background
Methods
  Malaria transmission model
  Modelling pharmacokinetics (PK) of antimalarial drugs
  Calibrating pharmacodynamics of antimalarial drugs
  Simulating mass campaigns with antimalarial drugs
  Quantification of effects of primaquine
Results
  Under-dosing of ACTs in children
  Interpretation of PQ pharmacodynamics
  ACTs in mass drug campaigns: comparison of AL and DP, 1 month post campaign
  ACTs in mass drug campaigns: comparison of 3-round and 2-round campaigns, 1 month post campaign
  ACTs in mass drug campaigns: comparison of MSAT and MDA, 1 month post campaign
  ACTs in mass drug campaigns: effects of coverage and compliance, 1 month post campaign
  Prophylaxis is most beneficial when transmission is high and coverage is moderately high: comparison of AL and DP, 4 months post campaign
  Addition of primaquine to MDA with ACTs confers a small additional reduction in prevalence: comparison of AL and DP with and without PQ, 4 months post campaign under variable EIR
Discussion
Conclusions
Additional files
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgements
References
Page 1
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144
DOI 10.1186/s12879-015-0887-y
RESEARCH ARTICLE  Open Access
Mass campaigns with antimalarial drugs: a
modelling comparison of artemether-lumefantrine
and DHA-piperaquine with and without primaquine
as tools for malaria control and elimination
Jaline Gerardin*, Philip Eckhoff and Edward A Wenger
Abstract
Background: Antimalarial drugs are a powerful tool for malaria control and elimination. Artemisinin-based combination
therapies (ACTs) can reduce transmission when widely distributed in a campaign setting. Modelling mass antimalarial
campaigns can elucidate how to most effectively deploy drug-based interventions and quantitatively compare the
effects of cure, prophylaxis, and transmission-blocking in suppressing parasite prevalence.
Methods: A previously established agent-based model that includes innate and adaptive immunity was used to simulate
malaria infections and transmission. Pharmacokinetics of artemether, lumefantrine, dihydroartemisinin, piperaquine, and
primaquine were modelled with a double-exponential distribution-elimination model including weight-dependent
parameters and age-dependent dosing. Drug killing of asexual parasites and gametocytes was calibrated to clinical data.
Mass distribution of ACTs and primaquine was simulated with seasonal mosquito dynamics at a range of transmission
intensities.
Results: A single mass campaign with antimalarial drugs is insufficient to permanently reduce malaria prevalence when
transmission is high. Current diagnostics are insufficiently sensitive to accurately identify asymptomatic infections, and
mass-screen-and-treat campaigns are much less efficacious than mass drug administrations. Improving campaign coverage
leads to decreased prevalence one month after the end of the campaign, while increasing compliance lengthens the
duration of protection against reinfection. Use of a long-lasting prophylactic as part of a mass drug administration regimen
confers the most benefit under conditions of high transmission and moderately high coverage. Addition of primaquine can
reduce prevalence but exerts its largest effect when coupled with a long-lasting prophylactic.
Conclusions: Mass administration of antimalarial drugs can be a powerful tool to reduce prevalence for a few months
post-campaign. A slow-decaying prophylactic administered with a parasite-clearing drug offers strong protection against
reinfection, especially in highly endemic areas. Transmission-blocking drugs have only limited effects unless administered
with a prophylactic under very high coverage.
Background
Despite enormous reductions in malaria incidence and mor-
tality in the past decade, malaria continues to pose a serious
health risk to much of the world’s population. In 2012, over
200 million cases and 600,000 deaths have been attributed
to malaria [1]. As countries continue to implement control
strategies and move from malaria control to elimination, it
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:jgerardin@intven.com"] jgerardin@intven.com
Institute for Disease Modeling, Intellectual Ventures, 1555 132nd Ave NE,
Bellevue, WA 98005, USA 
is crucial to understand how a variety of intervention
methods are best deployed for maximum reduction in
transmission.
Antimalarial drugs have been used for malaria control
since the 1920s and were one of several tools employed
in the eradication programs of the mid-twentieth cen-
tury [2].  With the recent development of potent
artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs),  mass
administration of antimalarial drugs is once again com-
ing into play as one of many elements in plans for mal-
aria control and elimination [3-5].  Although malaria is
© 2015 Gerardin et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144  Page 2 of 14
transmitted by vectors, the infectious reservoir is con-
tained in humans. Thus, drug clearance of parasites
within an infected population has the potential to inter-
rupt transmission under the right circumstances, and
under less optimal conditions drug-based campaigns
may still reduce parasite prevalence for months.
In the field, mass drug administrations (MDAs) have
met with mixed success. While prevalence is suppressed
during and shortly after the MDA campaign, low preva-
lence often fails to be sustained 6 months after the end
of campaigns, especially in regions of high endemicity
[6].  In particular, transmission-blocking drugs such as
primaquine appear to have minimal effects on preva-
lence [7,8].
Many questions remain regarding the determinants of
campaign outcome. Is screening before treatment a viable
alternative to mass administration given that current diag-
nostics have only limited sensitivity? Compliance with a
complex drug regimen such as that of artemether-
lumefantrine (AL) is estimated to be relatively low [9-11],
but the effect of low compliance on population prevalence
remains unknown. Prophylaxis is acknowledged as a
powerful tool, but its importance may depend on local
transmission intensity and campaign coverage, and in cer-
tain settings prophylaxis may only suppress prevalence by
a negligible amount [2,12]. Primaquine is currently consid-
ered as a gametocytocide in treating P. falciparum [13,14],
yet little is understood about the degree of prevalence re-
duction that can be gained by killing mature gametocytes.
Because of the potential for very serious adverse events
arising from treatment with primaquine [15,16], it is crit-
ical to understand whether mass administration with
primaquine could significantly reduce prevalence.
Mathematical modelling has been used for many years
as a tool for understanding the dynamics of malaria and
for predicting the outcomes of interventions [12,17,18].
Recent work has built exceedingly sophisticated models
capable of tracking the progress of individual infections,
including the development of asexual parasites into ga-
metocytes and the acquisition of host immunity [19-21].
Simulations allow the testing of many campaign scenar-
ios in a wide range of settings, enabling detailed under-
standing of how campaign elements—coverage, timing,
frequency, choice of drug—affect campaign outcome
[22-27].
While several different models have been employed to
predict outcomes of mass distribution of antimalarial drugs,
none has modelled detailed simulation of drug pharmaco-
kinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) in a simulation
of malaria transmission that includes within-host effects
and mosquito dynamics. Here we implement PK models
for artemether, lumefantrine, dihydroartemisinin, pipera-
quine, and primaquine in a previously established agent-
based model of malaria transmission [19,20].  Asexual 
parasite and gametocyte killing effects are based on in vitro
measurements of drug efficacy and calibrated to clinical
outcomes [14,28-44]. Various campaign scenarios are com-
pared: number of rounds of distribution in a campaign,
mass-screen-and-treat versus mass administration, the in-
fluence of campaign coverage and compliance on cam-
paign efficacy, usage of artemether-lumefantrine (AL)
versus dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DP), and the effect
of adding primaquine on transmission reduction.
Methods
Malaria transmission model
Simulations were conducted with EMOD v1.6 with a simu-
lation timestep of 1 hour. The EMOD model of malaria
transmission is a stochastic individual-based model with
mosquito life cycle dynamics and species-specific feeding
habits [19]. Infections begin with an infectious bite, and par-
asites progress through liver stage, asexual blood stage with
antigenic variations, and 6 sexual stages. Each individual can
sustain up to 3 simultaneous infections, and all parasite
strains respond to antimalarial drugs with identical pharma-
codynamics. Host immunity is modelled mechanistically
and includes an innate response that clears asexual parasites
and limits gametocyte success in mosquitoes, an adaptive re-
sponse to variable epitopes that clears red blood cells in-
fected with asexual parasites, and an adaptive response that
limits the success of merozoite invasion [45]. Human infec-
tiousness to mosquitoes depends on gametocyte density
and human immune factors impacting gametocyte surviv-
ability within mosquitoes. No case management or vector
control interventions were included. The EMOD software
and documentation are available at [URL: "http://idmod.org/software"] http://idmod.org/
software.
Modelling pharmacokinetics (PK) of antimalarial drugs
We implemented a simplified PK for five antimalarials—
artemether (AM),  lumefantrine (LF),  dihydroartemisinin
(DHA), piperaquine (PPQ), and primaquine (PQ)—with a
single or double exponential to model drug distribution and
elimination (Figure 1).  Parameters were calculated from
compartmental model microconstants reported in the litera-
ture (Additional file 1: Table S1, Table S2) [22,28,29,46-59].
In the simple PK model, administration of drugs re-
sults in immediate absorption into the blood. Drug con-
centrations C(t) decay with a double exponential to
approximate 2-compartment pharmacokinetics:
C t ð Þ ¼ Cmax
À  Á
e−At þ Ve−Bt  ð1Þ
Estimates of absorbance rate constants for these five
antimalarials range from 0.083 to 2.18/h (Additional file
1: Table S2). Modeling absorption as immediate may re-
sult in overestimation of patients’  exposure to certain
drugs (LF and DHA),  but the overexposure is small
Page 3
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144
A  B
C 
Page 3 of 14
Figure 1 Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of antimalarial drugs are implemented in an agent-based model of malaria transmission
and calibrated to clinical data. (A) A simplified model of drug pharmacokinetics uses a double exponential to model antimalarial drug distribution and
elimination. (B) Pharmacokinetics of 5 antimalarials as simulated with the simple PK model in a 50 kg adult. (C) Maximum drug concentration with simple
PK including age-based dosing, weight-dependent PK parameters, and WHO/CDC age-weight tables. See Tables 1 and 2 for model PK parameters and
age-based dose fractions.
relative to the total exposure. Parameters in the double
exponential model are derived from compartmental
model parameters [60]. Maximum plasma drug concen-
tration Cmax 
is given by
Cmax 
¼ S 
dose
Vc 
þ Vp 
ð2Þ
where S is a scale factor chosen such that Cmax 
is close to
maximum drug concentration observed in compartmental
models, Vc 
and Vp 
are volumes of the central and periph-
eral compartments as described in compartmental models,
and dose is the age-appropriate dose of drug. See Additional
file 1: Table S1 for a complete list of compartmental param-
eter values used to construct the simple model.
Decay time constants A and B are defined in terms of
compartmental microconstants k12
, k21
, and ke 
as
A ¼ 
1
2 
k12 
þ k21 
þ ke 
þ 
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð  Þ k12 
þ k21 
þ ke 
2−4k21
ke
ð3Þ
B ¼ 
1
2 
k12 
þ k21 
þ 
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ke
− ð  Þ k12 
þ k21 
þ ke 
2−4k21
ke 
ð4Þ
and fractional volume V as
V ¼ 
ke
B 
ð5Þ
For AM, DHA, and PQ, a single exponential decay
was used to model drug PK. In the single exponential 
case, V = 0 and A is the elimination rate from the com-
partmental model. Parameters used for modeling anti-
malarials in the simple exponential model are listed in
Table 1.
AM, LF, DHA, and PPQ were administered as fixed-
dose combinations, and PK of each drug was modeled
independently. For each antimalarial drug, children re-
ceived a fraction of the adult dose according to Table 2
[61].  AM and LF were given as the combination AL,
consisting of 80 mg AM and 480 mg LF in the adult
dose, taken every 12 hours over three days (6 doses
total).  DHA and PPQ were given as the combination
DP, consisting of 120 mg DHA and 960 mg PPQ in
the adult dose, taken once a day for three days (3
doses total).  Single dose PQ was administered with a
15 mg adult dose, with children receiving a fractional
dose according to Table 2.
Table 1 Double exponential model PK parameters for
50 kg adult patient
AM LF  DHA PPQ PQ
Adult dose 80 mg 480 mg 120 mg 960 mg 15 mg
Cmax 
(μg/L)  114
Cmax 
scaling factor 0.5 
1017
1.5 
200
0.25 
30
0.5 
75
1
Decay constant A  0.12
(1/day) 
1.3  0.12  0.17  0.36
Decay constant B  --  2.0  --
(1/day) 
41  --
V  --  1.2  --  49  --
Page 4
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144  Page 4 of 14
Table 2 Age-based dosing: children are given a fraction
of the adult dose according to their age
AL (AM + LF)  DP (DHA + PPQ) PQ
Age Dose Age
fraction 
Dose Age
fraction 
Dose
fraction
1 – 3y  0.25  6 m – 2y  0.17  <5y  0.17
3 – 6y  0.5  2 – 6y  0.33  5 – 9y  0.33
6 – 10y 0.75  6 – 11y 0.67  9 – 14y 0.67
>10y  1.0  >11y  1.0  >14y  1.0
Calibrating pharmacodynamics of antimalarial drugs
Drug effects on parasite concentrations were modeled as
a Hill function [27,62,63]:
kill rate ¼ kmax 
C t ð Þ
C t ð Þ þ C50 
ð6Þ
C50 
of each drug was estimated from in vitro data from lit-
erature [29-33]. A Hill coefficient of 1 was assumed for all
drugs. The maximum kill rate kmax 
was stage-specific, while
C50 
for each drug was the same for all parasite life cycle
stages. Maximum kill rates for asexual parasites, gameto-
cytes stages I to IIb, gametocytes stages III to IV, and mature
gametocytes were taken from literature [29-33] when avail-
able and subsequently manually tuned to replicate parasite
clearance times, recrudescence rates, reinfection rates, and
gametocyte clearance times from clinical data [28,34-41].
See Table 3 for final calibrated C50 
values and stage-specific
maximum kill rates. All final calibrated C50 
values fell within
the range of in vitro measurements, although we find that
C50 
for piperaquine must lie on the low end of in vitro ob-
servations in order to match clinical data for reinfection
rates.
All pharmacodynamics calibrations were performed on
a population of 1000 people of all ages with no births or
deaths. Each simulation was repeated for 100 stochastic
realizations.
To calibrate parasite clearance time, naïve and semi-
immune patients were challenged in the absence of vectors
with an infectious bite on day 0 and treated on day 25,
shortly before the peak of asexual parasite density in the
course of an untreated infection. Semi-immune patients
were a population of individuals with the age-dependent
Table 3 Model parameters for pharmacodynamics 
AM
C50 
(μg/L)
Asexual parasite maximum kill rate (1/day) 
0.6
8.9
Gametocyte stage I-IIb maximum kill rate (1/day)  2.5
Gametocyte stage III-IV maximum kill rate (1/day)  1.5
Mature gametocyte maximum kill rate (1/day)  0.7
Hepatocyte stage maximum kill rate (1/day)  0 
immune systems of people living in an endemic region
with annual entomological inoculation rate (EIR) 50. Para-
site clearance time was defined as the number of days post
treatment after which a patient’s asexual parasitaemia fell
below 10/μL. Maximum kill rate of asexual parasites was
tuned for AM and DHA to achieve parasite clearance time
of 1 day for most individuals [28,34-36].  Because AL is
dosed twice a day while DP is dosed only once a day,
resulting in more exposure to AM than DHA at current
dosing levels, parasite clearance time tended to be slightly
shorter for AL than for DP.
To calibrate recrudescence rates, semi-immune pa-
tients were challenged with an infectious bite on day 0
and treated on day 25 in the absence of vectors. Recru-
descent patients were those with asexual parasitaemia
above 10/μL on day 42 post-treatment (day 67 post-
infection), and recrudescence rate was compared to re-
ported values for ACTs [35-41].
To calibrate reinfection rates, semi-immune patients
were subjected to a constant annual EIR of 36, approximat-
ing clinical trial conditions, for 1 year before treatment.
Infected patients were those with asexual parasitaemia
above 10/μL on day 42 post-treatment. The recrudescence
rate was subtracted from the total infected rate to deter-
mine the rate of reinfection. The maximum kill rate of
asexual parasites for LF and PPQ were tuned to achieve
reinfection rates of 40% and 20% respectively at 42 days
post-treatment [35-41].
Stage-specific gametocyte killing rates were initialized
to in vitro measurements [64].  Semi-immune patients
were challenged with an infectious bite on day 0, and
treatment was administered to all patients with asexual
parasitaemia greater than 10/μL on day 35, when gam-
etocyte prevalence is highest in an untreated population.
Gametocyte prevalence was measured on days 0, 7, 10,
and 14 post treatment. Gametocyte kill rates of AM
were tuned to achieve gametocyte clearance in 7–10
days [14,42,43], and gametocyte kill rates for DHA were
assumed to be the same as those for AM. A small imma-
ture gametocyte killing effect was added to LF and PPQ
in line with in vitro observations.
To calibrate PQ inactivation of gametocytes, each
treated patient’s infectiousness toward mosquitoes was
measured 2 days post treatment. PQ kill rate of mature
LF  DHA  PPQ  PQ
280  0.6  5  15
4.8  9.2  4.6  0
2.4  2.5  2.3  2.0
0  1.5  0  5.0
0  0.7  0  50.0
0  0  0  0
Page 5
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144  Page 5 of 14
gametocytes was tuned to achieve high levels of inactiva-
tion for the 0.1 mg/kg dose [44].
Simulating mass campaigns with antimalarial drugs
Seasonal temperature, rainfall, vectors, and larval habitat
abundance were modelled on the Zambia Sinazongwe site.
Transmission between humans and vectors resulted in an
average annual EIR of 50 in the absence of interventions
with age-specific immunity corresponding to that level of
transmission. Births and deaths were allowed such that the
population remained around 1000 individuals. Populations
were calibrated with a 2-year burn-in period prior to any
interventions. Campaigns were conducted during year 3.
All interventions were administered on the same day for
all people. Drug distribution rounds of the three-round
campaign occurred on days 170, 226, and 282 of year 3, ap-
proximating six weeks of distribution in the field inter-
spersed with two weeks out of the field. The two-round
campaign rounds occurred on days 250 and 292, approxi-
mating a four-week distribution schedule with two weeks
in between. Day 324 marked the end of campaigns, and all
dates referencing the end of campaign are relative to this
date. Prevalence was calculated based on an asexual para-
site detection threshold of 10/μL unless otherwise indi-
cated. All simulations were repeated for 100 stochastic
realizations.
Annual EIRs lower than 50 were simulated by redu-
cing available larval habitat as indicated in Additional
file 1: Table S3. Population immunity was initialized by
50-year burn-in with the appropriate EIR prior to the 2-
year burn-in described above.
Coverage for each individual was independent in each
campaign round, and no group of individuals was system-
atically missed for all rounds. All individuals reached by
campaign took at least one directly observed dose of drugs.
Subsequent doses were taken based on a random draw
against the compliance parameter. For example, at 20%
compliance, each dose after the first had 20% chance of be-
ing taken. In a multidrug regimen, each drug was complied
with separately.
Quantification of effects of primaquine
Three-round MDA campaigns were simulated with admin-
istration of AL, AL + PQ, DP, and DP + PQ according to
the schedule described above for coverage between 50%
and 100% and EIRs between 1 and 50 for each drug and
coverage level. Each EIR, coverage, and drug combination
was repeated for 100 stochastic realizations and prevalence
was measured 4 months after the end of campaigns with
an asexual parasite detection threshold of 0.05 parasites/
μL. A highly sensitive detection threshold was chosen to
distinguish between very low prevalence levels, which can
be observed in scenarios with high coverage or low EIR. 
Stochastic realizations resulting in local elimination,
defined as zero prevalence for days 630 through 730
(100 days beginning 306 days after the end of campaign),
were removed prior to subsequent analysis. Mean preva-
lence was bootstrapped with 1000 resamples of size 100.
For each ACT and coverage level, prevalence means at
all EIR levels for ACT alone and ACT + PQ were corre-
lated using the Python 2.7 polyfit function with degree 1.
The relationship between prevalence with ACT alone
and ACT + PQ is expected to be linear at low EIR but
not at high EIR. We are considering only lower EIRs and
do not observe bowing in the plot of prevalence with
ACT alone vs prevalence with ACT + PQ (Additional file
2: Figure S3).  The relative prevalence reduction upon
addition of PQ was calculated as 1 minus the fitted
slope. Slopes were fitted to each resampled mean preva-
lence pair (ACT and ACT + PQ) at constant coverage
level, allowing calculation of mean relative prevalence
reduction upon addition of PQ at every coverage level
for each ACT.
Results
Under-dosing of ACTs in children
Since pharmacokinetics are affected by body weight, we
expect maximum plasma drug concentrations to vary ac-
cording to both patient age and weight. Antimalarial
drugs are administered to children under dosing regi-
mens determined by age (Table 2).  Age-dependence of
drug concentrations will vary between drugs according
to the nature of each drug’s pharmacokinetic depend-
ence on body weight.
Using age-weight charts from the CDC and WHO, we
show in Figure 1C that age-based dosing achieves ap-
proximately uniform maximum plasma drug concentra-
tions for AM, DHA, and PQ. While lower maximum
concentrations of LF are observed in younger children,
patients of all ages are able to achieve maximum LF con-
centrations above LF’s estimated C50 of 280 μg/L. In
contrast, under current dosing recommendations chil-
dren below the age of 2 have maximum PPQ concentra-
tion much closer PPQ’s estimated C50 of 5 μg/L;
prophylactic effects of PPQ will therefore have much
shorter duration. The under-dosing of children with
piperaquine under current dosing recommendations has
been well-documented in literature [65], but as amended
guidelines have yet to be released, we have chosen to use
the under-dosed treatment recommendations in our
simulations.
Pharmacodynamics of the combination therapies AL
and DP as well as gametocyte killing of PQ were tuned
to match parasite clearance times, recrudescence rates,
and reinfection rates to clinical data (Figure 2). As pre-
dicted by the age- and weight-based models of maximum
drug concentrations, children treated with DP had higher
Page 6
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144  Page 6 of 14
Figure 2 Parasite killing rates of antimalarial drugs are calibrated to clearance time, prevalence, and infectivity. (A) Asexual parasite clearance
time is within 3 days post-treatment for AL (red) and DP (blue) in both naive (solid bar) and semi-immune (hashed bar) populations. Black bars: 95%
confidence interval. (B) AL (red) and DP (blue) pharmacodynamics are calibrated in a semi-immune population to <3% recrudescence rate (solid lines) at
day 42 post-treatment and 50% and 20% reinfection rate (dashed lines) at day 42 post-treatment with a background EIR of 3/month. Shaded areas: 95%
confidence interval. (C) Fraction of patients clear of parasites at day 42 post-treatment is dependent on patient age for DP-treated population (blue) but
not AL-treated population (red). Young children are more likely to experience recrudescence (solid line) and reinfection (dashed line) than older patients
when treated with DP. Shaded areas: 95% confidence interval. (D) Gametocyte clearance time for AL-treated patients of all ages is calibrated to 7–10 days
(red lines) post-treatment. Addition of single-dose PQ at 0.75 mg/kg reduces gametocyte clearance time to < 7 days. Shaded areas: 95% confidence
interval. (E) Mean fraction of mosquitoes infected on day 2 post-treatment with AL, PQ, AL + PQ, or no drug in a semi-immune population challenged
with an infectious bite 25 days prior to treatment. Primaquine was given with a single dose at 0.065, 0.10, 0.25, 0.40, and 0.75 mg/kg. Bars: 95% confidence
interval (smaller than dot radius for PQ alone and AL + PQ).
recrudescence and reinfection rates than adults did due to
PPQ levels insufficient for cure and prophylaxis (Figure 2C).
Young children were especially vulnerable to recrudes-
cence, while all infections were cured in adults, indicating
that piperaquine was failing to kill the remaining parasites
untouched by DHA. Likelihood of reinfection decreased
with age among individuals treated with DP. Field studies
have also shown that DP is likely under-dosed in children,
and a higher dosage has been suggested [65-67]. In con-
trast, young children receiving AL were not more likely to
be reinfected than adults [68]. 
Interpretation of PQ pharmacodynamics
Experimental work suggests that PQ may render mature
gametocytes incapable of infecting mosquitoes even
while the gametocytes remain in the host bloodstream
[13].  In our model, we are most interested in PQ’s
transmission-blocking activity and thus do not explicitly
model inactivated gametocytes, instead considering them
to be killed and cleared. We find that to replicate the ob-
servation that even a low PQ dose of 0.065 mg/kg PQ
results in very few infected mosquitoes 2 days post treat-
ment when given with a full course of AL (Figure 2E)
Page 7
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144  Page 7 of 14
[44], the maximum kill rate of PQ on mature gametocytes
must be very high in order to compensate for PQ’s short
half-life of 8 hours. As currently parameterized, PQ com-
pletely clears gametocytes (Additional file 2: Figure S1D),
making our predictions of its impact on prevalence an
upper bound on its actual effect. However, incomplete
knowledge of PQ’s active metabolites and their pharmaco-
kinetic profiles means that our model of PQ’s killing action
is only a gross approximation, and further refinement will
be necessary as we learn more about PQ.
ACTs in mass drug campaigns: comparison of AL and DP,
1 month post campaign
We test the effects of distributing AL and DP in a mass ad-
ministration context. Case management and vector control
were excluded in order to focus explicitly on the effects of
the drug campaigns. Using an isolated population experi-
encing seasonal transmission, a multi-round drug adminis-
tration campaign was simulated during the dry season,
when prevalence drops to 30%. Both AL and DP reduce
prevalence while the campaign rounds are ongoing and
continue suppressing prevalence for a few months into the
high transmission season (Figure 3A). Due to PPQ’s long
prophylactic tail, campaigns with DP result in lower preva-
lence that extends longer into the high transmission season
than campaigns with AL as has been previously observed
with generic short- and long-acting ACTs [25]. At this level
of EIR, prevalence returns to baseline levels within
18 months of the MDA campaign even when DP is used.
Using antimalarials to reduce prevalence in the long term
requires repeated mass drug campaigns, permanent scale-
up of case management with effective drugs, or simultan-
eous deployment of vector control with high coverage
[12,23-25]. Here we focus on one aspect of a complex mal-
aria control strategy: how to optimize elements of a single
drug campaign to reduce parasite prevalence up to
4 months after the end of the campaign.
ACTs in mass drug campaigns: comparison of 3-round
and 2-round campaigns, 1 month post campaign
When malaria prevalence is seasonal, mass administration
campaigns are conducted during the low transmission sea-
son in order to most effectively deplete the infectious reser-
voir and possibly interrupt transmission [23,69].  We
compared the efficacy of three-round and two-round mass
drug administration (MDA) campaigns at reducing preva-
lence one month after the end of the campaign. While 3-
round campaigns cost more than 2-round campaigns, the
third round offers an additional chance to reach people
who were not covered in previous rounds. At a cover-
age level of 70%,  and independent coverage between
rounds, only 9% of individuals will have never been treated.
We investigate how critical it is to reach another 70% of
the last 9%. 
We find that reducing campaign rounds from 3 to 2 in-
creases parasite prevalence one month post-campaign for
both AL and DP (Figure 3B). DP is more sensitive to num-
ber of rounds than AL. At 70% coverage, prevalence one
month post-campaign is more than twice as high for a 2-
round campaign as a 3-round campaign when DP is admin-
istered. Because DP has long-lasting prophylactic effects,
additional campaign rounds are particularly beneficial as
previously uncovered individuals become protected against
reinfection and prevalence reduction is cumulative from
round to round. In contrast, individuals treated with AL are
not protected from reinfection for as long, and to some ex-
tent prevalence is able to reset to higher levels between
rounds, leading to a smaller cost of reducing a campaign to
fewer rounds.
When coverage is 100%, prevalence continues to be
higher for the 2-round campaign, but the difference
between 2- and 3-round prevalence is not as great
(Additional file 2: Figure S2A). Switching from a 3-round
campaign structure to a 2-round campaign is therefore
recommended only for situations where very high cover-
age can be achieved. In all cases, treatment with DP
showed lower prevalence post-campaign than treatment
with AL.
ACTs in mass drug campaigns: comparison of MSAT and
MDA, 1 month post campaign
Campaigns may distribute antimalarial drugs to all indi-
viduals (mass drug administration, MDA), or they may
choose to give drugs only to individuals testing positive
for parasites (mass screen-and-treat, MSAT).  If an in-
sensitive diagnostic is used in an MSAT to identify indi-
viduals carrying parasites, then the MSAT campaign will
fail to eliminate a large portion of the parasite reservoir,
as many individuals who harbour sub-patent infections
will fail to receive treatment. However, MSATs may be
preferred because they avoid unnecessary dosing of un-
infected individuals and may be less likely to lead to
drug resistance in parasites.
Current rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) are sensitive only
above 50–200 parasites/μL [70], which has been shown to
be inadequate for reducing prevalence in a mass campaign
context [71-73]. To identify a minimum diagnostic sensi-
tivity necessary for an MSAT campaign to reduce parasite
prevalence with efficacy comparable to an MDA, we tested
MSAT screening sensitivities from 0.01 to 200 parasites/
μL (Figure 3C). Only diagnostics capable of detecting par-
asites below 0.1 parasites/μL result in prevalence reduc-
tion on par with an MDA campaign; current RDTs are
nowhere near sensitive enough and new technologies are
necessary if MSATs are to become the campaign of choice
in the future. For DP, even MSATs with sensitivity of 0.01
parasites/μL cannot achieve the degree of prevalence sup-
pression seen in an MDA because treating uninfected
Page 8
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144
A
B  C 
Page 8 of 14
D  E
Figure 3 Campaign outcome depends on timing, diagnostic sensitivity, coverage, and compliance. (A) Asexual parasite prevalence (top) and
daily EIR (bottom) of a semi-immune population of 1000 people with no intervention (black), multi-round MDA with AL (red), and multi-round MDA with
DP (blue). Solid lines: 3-round campaigns. Dashed lines: 2-round campaigns. MDAs were simulated with 100% coverage and 100% compliance.
Annual EIR was 50, and infected individuals were those with ≥10 asexual parasites/μL. DP’s long prophylactic tail better protects against reinfection after
campaign. (B) Prevalence 1 month after campaign for 3-round and 2-round MDA campaigns with AL or DP. MDAs were simulated with 70% coverage
and 100% compliance; annual EIR was 50. Error bars: 95% confidence interval. (C) Prevalence 1 month after 3-round MSAT campaigns with varying
sensitivity of MSAT diagnostic. Coverage and compliance were 100%; annual EIR was 50. Shaded areas: 95% confidence interval. (D) Prevalence 1 month
after 3-round MDA campaigns with varying coverage and 100% compliance. Annual EIR was 50. Shaded areas: 95% confidence interval. (E) Prevalence
1 month after 3-round MDA campaigns with varying compliance and 100% coverage. All covered individuals take the first dose of AL or DP; subsequent
doses are taken with probability equal to the compliance. Annual EIR was 50. Shaded areas: 95% confidence interval.
individuals with DP confers protection against infection.
In contrast, AL has little prophylactic effect, and an AL
MSAT with a highly sensitive diagnostic can be a good al-
ternative to an AL MDA. 
ACTs in mass drug campaigns: effects of coverage and
compliance, 1 month post campaign
Success of an MDA campaign may depend on both cover-
age, the fraction of the population reached by the campaign,
Page 9
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144  Page 9 of 14
and compliance, individuals’ rate of adherence to the cor-
rect drug dosing regimen. We tested the influence of cover-
age and compliance rates on outcomes of campaigns with
AL and DP by comparing asexual parasite prevalence one
month after the end of campaign rounds.
Increasing coverage up to 90% results in reduced preva-
lence for both AL and DP campaigns (Figure 3D). Under
high transmission conditions with annual EIR of 50, each
additional 20% increase in coverage reduces prevalence by
half. Beyond 90%, further increase in coverage nets little
additional gain. Campaigns deploying DP result in lower
prevalence than campaigns using AL. To achieve the same
prevalence reduction one month post-campaign, an AL
campaign requires coverage of 15-20% higher than the DP
campaign.
A sweep over compliance rates shows that most of the
reduction in parasite prevalence is accomplished by tak-
ing the first dose of AL or DP (Figure 3E).  In a semi-
immune population, most infected individuals have low
parasitaemia (Additional file 2: Figure S1),  and a sub-
curative dose of ACT is often capable of curing infec-
tions with low parasite density. Increasing compliance
with unobserved doses from 10% to 100% reduces preva-
lence only by around 5%.
Coverage and compliance do not complement each other,
and increasing compliance can compensate for deficiencies
in coverage only to a very limited extent (Additional file 2:
Figure S2C). For both AL and DP, increasing coverage re-
sults in stronger prevalence reduction than a similar in-
crease in compliance. Compliance exerts a stronger effect
on prevalence 4 months post-campaign for DP (Additional
file 2: Figure S2D), when improving very low compliance
for high coverage campaigns can reduce prevalence by 20%
when compliance is increased from 0% to 20%. Improving
compliance with DP campaigns lengthens the duration of
protection against reinfection, which is a critical component
of DP’s efficacy in suppressing prevalence.
Prophylaxis is most beneficial when transmission is high
and coverage is moderately high: comparison of AL and
DP, 4 months post campaign
In the simulated campaigns discussed above, administra-
tion of DP results in equal or lower prevalence than ad-
ministration of AL under identical conditions. DP and
AL differ primarily in the choice of partner drug to the
artemisinin-based component. While lumefantrine is the
more effective killer of asexual parasites, piperaquine
possesses a much longer half-life and therefore confers a
longer window of protection against reinfection.
The power of DP’s long prophylactic tail is most striking
when considering asexual parasite prevalence four months
post-campaign in a high transmission setting (Additional
file 2: Figure S2B). A DP campaign with only 45% coverage
achieves on average the same prevalence reduction as an 
AL campaign with 100% coverage at this timepoint. Diffi-
culties achieving good coverage can be overcome by choos-
ing an antimalarial with superior prophylactic qualities.
To quantify the effect of a long-lasting prophylactic
such as piperaquine, we assumed that all prevalence re-
duction observed after a campaign with AL is due to
curing individuals, while any additional reduction in
prevalence achieved by DP compared to AL is due to
protection against reinfection (Figure 4A).  Since both
AL and DP cure nearly all individuals when correctly ad-
ministered in the absence of reinfection (Figure 2), this
assumption is reasonably accurate.
In a highly endemic setting, prophylaxis can suppress
prevalence far beyond what can be achieved by cure alone
(Figure 4B left). Even after an MDA campaign with good
coverage, the infectious reservoir remains substantial and
treated individuals remain vulnerable to reinfection, so
prophylaxis is very powerful. Addition of a transmission-
blocking drug such as PQ to an AL- or DP-based cam-
paign further reduces prevalence, but prophylaxis has the
larger effect.
Under low transmission conditions, administration with
AL is able to deplete the infectious reservoir through cure.
Because very few infected individuals remain after an
MDA campaign with good coverage in a region with low
transmission, protection against reinfection post-campaign
offers little additional benefit (Figure 4B right). In contrast
to high transmission settings, transmission-blocking drugs
are approximately as effective at reducing transmission as
prophylactics when coupled with a curative antimalarial in
a low transmission setting.
The dependence of prevalence reduction due to prophy-
laxis on both coverage and EIR is shown in Figure 4C by
measuring the difference in prevalence 4 months after
MDA campaigns using AL and DP. As discussed above,
prophylaxis reduces prevalence most for high EIR, where
risk of reinfection is highest and protection against reinfec-
tion confers the most benefit. For coverage between 50 and
80%,  prophylaxis reduces prevalence by an increasing
amount as more individuals are protected against reinfec-
tion. For coverage above 80%, prophylaxis offers less add-
itional gain in prevalence reduction because the infectious
reservoir is already depleted through cure. Thus, each indi-
vidual is challenged with few infectious bites, and prophy-
lactic benefits are smaller.
Addition of primaquine to MDA with ACTs confers a small
additional reduction in prevalence: comparison of AL and
DP with and without PQ, 4 months post campaign under
variable EIR
Current WHO guidelines recommend the addition of prima-
quine (PQ) to an ACT regimen as a gametocytocide against
P. falciparum infections [61]. To systematically quantify the
impact of PQ on ACT campaigns, we compared prevalence
Page 10
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144
A  C
B 
Page 10 of 14
Figure 4 Efficacy of prophylaxis is greatest under high transmission conditions and moderately high coverage. (A) AL reduces
prevalence by curing individuals in an infected population, while additional prevalence reduction observed in DP is due to the long-lasting
prophylactic effects of piperaquine. Annual EIR of 50, MDA coverage 90%, compliance 100%, 3 campaign rounds, mean of 100 stochastic
realizations. (B) Normalized prevalence 4 months after MDA campaigns in high and low transmission settings. Transmission-blocking refers to
prevalence reduction upon addition of PQ. Coverage 90%, compliance 100%, 3 campaign rounds, annual EIR of 50 (left) and 1 (right). (C) Absolute
prevalence reduction due to prophylaxis (mean prevalence using AL - mean prevalence using DP) depends on both coverage and EIR.
four months after MDA campaigns with and without PQ
over a range of transmission intensities and coverage levels.
While lowering EIR is not a perfect proxy for altered condi-
tions under vector control, it is an acceptable approximation
for our study of relatively short-term outcomes. Our results
agree with previous modelling observations that single-dose
PQ as part of an MDA reduces prevalence only a small
amount beyond that achieved by ACTs alone [23,25,27].
We can measure the relative effect of PQ by calculating
the slope of a linear regression between prevalence outcomes
for campaigns with and without PQ at constant coverage
over a range of EIRs (Figure 5A) (see Methods). For the ex-
ample in Figure 5A, this relative reduction is 0.025, indicating
that at any level of annual EIR in our sampled range, addition
of PQ to a campaign with AL that has 70% coverage will, on
average, reduce prevalence at the 4-month mark by 2.5%
relative to the prevalence that would have been observed had 
only AL been deployed. See Additional file 2: Figure S3 and
Additional file 1: Table S4 for prevalence correlations at all
coverage levels for both AL and DP.
Higher coverage results in PQ reducing prevalence by
a higher relative amount for both AL and DP campaigns
(Figure 5B). For AL, complete coverage of 100% yields a
relative prevalence reduction of 13% when PQ is present.
Thus, we expect that for mass drug campaigns that do
not employ a long-lasting prophylactic, dosing with PQ
can further reduce prevalence by only 13% or so. Be-
cause we did not account for some individuals’ inability
to be administered PQ or metabolize PQ to its active
product, we expect 13% to approximate an upper bound
on PQ impact. However, even at 100% coverage, MDA
with AL results in prevalence of 30% at the 4-month
mark, so a 13% additional relative reduction in preva-
lence can still reduce absolute prevalence by 4% overall.
Page 11
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144
A  B 
Page 11 of 14
C
Figure 5 Primaquine reduces transmission when campaign coverage is very high. (A) At a coverage of 70%, addition of PQ to an AL MDA
reduces prevalence 4 months post campaign by <5%. EIR is sampled at constant coverage for 100 stochastic realizations for each EIR. Compliance
was 100% and 3 rounds of campaigns were conducted. Mean +/− one standard deviation is shown for each EIR value. A linear regression is
shown (dotted line) correlating prevalence after MDA with AL + PQ to prevalence after a 3-round MDA with AL alone. (B) Prevalence reduction
due to addition of PQ is highly dependent on coverage. The fractional relative prevalence reduction upon addition of PQ is the slope of the linear
regression of prevalence with PQ to prevalence without PQ (panel A) subtracted from 1. Lines: bootstrapped mean fractional relative prevalence
reduction at each level of coverage. Shaded areas: 95% confidence interval. (C) Higher coverage with ACTs and addition of primaquine lead to
higher probability of local elimination, especially at higher EIR. Fraction of stochastic realizations leading to eradication is shown for 4 bins of
annual EIR at each level of coverage, with 100 realizations per EIR per coverage. Compliance was 100% and 3 rounds of campaigns were
conducted. The height of each bar is normalized to the total number of realizations in each EIR bin.
When coverage is sufficiently high, a MDA with DP
alone can result in very low prevalence 4 months after
the end of campaign. Most individuals are protected
against reinfection for many weeks after their last round
of DP, and only those who were not reached by MDA
and those experiencing drug failure are vulnerable.
Addition of PQ to the MDA can be very powerful in this
context: PQ reduces prevalence another 60% relative to
what was achieved by DP alone. By clearing mature ga-
metocytes, PQ reduces the infectious period of an ACT-
treated gametocyte carrier from 7 days to only 1 day.
Thus, most individuals in the DP + PQ campaign are
both non-infectious and protected against reinfection,
leaving only the small fraction of uncovered individuals
to propagate the parasite.
Increasing coverage increases the likelihood of local elim-
ination for AL- and DP-based campaigns at all sampled EIR 
levels (Figure 5C).  At low EIR and high coverage, ACTs
alone eliminate malaria in nearly all simulations, but only
DP can eliminate when transmission is high. Addition of PQ
increases the likelihood of elimination but exerts its stron-
gest effect under high EIR when deployed in combination
with DP with high coverage.
Discussion
Mass drug administrations are currently being considered
as a tool for malaria elimination where vector control and
case management have already reduced the disease burden.
Here we investigate the conditions under which mass drug
campaigns can have their strongest effects.
Drug campaigns lower malaria prevalence in three
ways: by reducing the parasite reservoir in a population,
by preventing infection of uninfected people, and by pre-
venting transmission from infected people. High cure
Page 12
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144  Page 12 of 14
rate, high coverage, good compliance, multiple campaign
rounds, and targeting a high number of low-density infec-
tions all contribute to reducing the parasite reservoir.
While we have modelled coverage and compliance as in-
dependent between rounds, in reality it is likely that some
individuals will be repeatedly missed by the campaign, re-
fuse treatment, or display poor compliance with dosing
schedules. Because compliance appears to have little effect
on post-campaign prevalence, correlated compliance is un-
likely to have major impact on modelled outcomes. As a
rough example of the importance of avoiding significant
missed pockets of transmission, compare a 3-round cam-
paign with coverage of 70%. If coverage is perfectly corre-
lated, the 3 campaign rounds result in overall coverage of
70%.  With independent sample, coverage of 70% over 3
rounds is roughly equivalent to a case where only 3% of
the population never receives drug, or a correlated cover-
age of 97%.  Thus the modelled outcomes for a given
coverage level represent a best-case scenario, and any cor-
relation in untreated individuals across rounds will result
in higher parasite prevalence and decrease the likelihood
of elimination.
Population movement is also a crucial factor in near-
elimination scenarios. Human movement around the
campaign area such that some people are not at home
during campaigns can be approximated with lower
coverage. The reintroduction of malaria from people car-
rying infections into the campaign area and the robust-
ness of elimination to reintroductions are critical to
consider when modelling near elimination and will be
addressed in subsequent work.
Prophylaxis, the prevention of infection in uninfected
people, is most beneficial under high transmission con-
ditions when individuals are frequently challenged with
infectious bites. However, mass drug campaigns are un-
likely to be conducted under such conditions. Under low
or transmission conditions, biting rate is low, and high
coverage with a prophylactic drug makes the infectious
bite of a susceptible individual an unlikely event, push-
ing the system toward elimination.
Transmission-blocking and prophylaxis work together
to reduce prevalence and increase the likelihood of elim-
ination. On the whole, adding a transmission-blocking
drug such as PQ to a mass drug campaign only reduces
prevalence by a small amount. However, PQ should be
considered in certain conditions: if the MDA campaign
includes a long-lasting prophylactic, if coverage is very
high, and if EIR is low and local elimination is the goal.
Outside of these conditions, the risks and costs of mass
distribution of PQ may very well outweigh the benefits.
Conclusions
We developed an age- and weight-based model of
antimalarial drug pharmacokinetics in the context of 
an agent-based model of malaria transmission. Using
current drug dosing guidelines and available clinical
data, our model predicts that young children are
likely to be under-dosed for DHA-piperaquine, leav-
ing them disproportionately vulnerable to recrudes-
cence and reinfection.
Mass distribution of ACTs can reduce parasite
prevalence for several months after the campaign.
Mass-screen-and-treat campaigns administer antima-
larials only to individuals who test positive for asexual
parasites, but poor sensitivity in diagnostic tools
means that individuals with very low parasitaemia,
who may be infectious, remain untreated. Our model
predicts that a diagnostic must achieve sensitivity at or
below 0.1 parasites/μL in order for a mass-screen-and-
treat campaign to have outcome similar to a mass
drug administration.
By sweeping over possible coverage and compliance
levels, we show that coverage exerts a much stronger
effect on campaign outcome than compliance does.
Late in the dry season, many individuals in a highly
endemic area have asexual parasite densities low
enough to be cleared by a single dose of ACT, so in-
creasing compliance to complete an entire drug regi-
men has little impact on transmission. In contrast,
increasing coverage to clear more infections will have a lar-
ger impact on the population’s infectious reservoir.
A long-lasting prophylactic such as piperaquine con-
fers protection against reinfection and is most efficacious
for regions with high transmission and campaigns with
moderately high coverage. For low transmission re-
gions, changing policy to favour DP over AL offers
much smaller benefits because risk of reinfection is
lower.
Current interest in primaquine as a gametocytocide is
very high. We find that single-dose primaquine is most
efficacious when deployed with a long-lasting prophylac-
tic like DP, where most of the population is protected
against reinfection and only a small number of individ-
uals are either infected or vulnerable to infection. For
conditions where coverage is insufficiently high, prophy-
laxis is absent, or transmission rate is high, we predict
that there is negligible benefit to adding primaquine to
an MDA campaign.
Our simulations describe the efficacy of antimalarial
drugs when deployed in a campaign setting. We antici-
pate that the addition of vector control and vaccines
may interplay with MDAs in interesting ways as preva-
lence is reduced close to 0, and future work will situ-
ate drug campaigns in the context of other ongoing
interventions. We anticipate that after other interven-
tions have reduced transmission intensity, MDAs with
high coverage can be a very powerful tool for malaria
control and elimination.
Page 13
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144  Page 13 of 14
Additional files
 Additional file 1: Table S1. Compartmental model PK parameters.
Table S2. PK parameter sourcing. Table S3. Scaling EIR by reducing
larval habitat. Table S4. Correlations of prevalence after MDA campaigns
with and without PQ.
 Additional file 2: Figure S1. Asexual parasite prevalence and distribution
of asexual parasitaemia and gametocytaemia under constant annual
EIR 36 with a semi-immune population in the absence of intervention.
Figure S2. Campaign outcome dependence on timing, coverage, and
compliance. Figure S3. Prevalence 4 months after campaigns with
and without primaquine.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
JG designed the simulations, performed the analysis, and wrote the
manuscript. PE and EAW conceptualized the project. All authors have
reviewed and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Bill and Melinda Gates for their active support of this work
and their sponsorship through the Global Good Fund.
Received: 14 November 2014 Accepted: 12 March 2015
References
1.  World Health Organization. World Malaria Report 2013. Geneva: WHO; 2013.
2.  Greenwood B. The use of anti-malarial drugs to prevent malaria in the
population of malaria-endemic areas. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2004;70:1–7.
3.  Song J, Socheat D, Tan B, Dara P, Deng C, Sokunthea S, et al. Rapid and
effective malaria control in Cambodia through mass administration of
artemisinin-piperaquine. Malaria J. 2010;9:57.
4.  von Seidlein L, Walraven G, Milligan PJ, Alexander N, Manneh F, Deen JL,
et al. The effect of mass administration of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
combined with artesunate on malaria incidence: a double-blind,
community-randomized, placebo-controlled trial in The Gambia. Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg. 2003;97:217–25.
5.  White NJ. The role of anti-malarial drugs in eliminating malaria. Malaria J.
2008;7 Suppl 1:S8.
6.  Poirot E, Skarbinski J, Sinclair D, Kachur SP, Slutsker L, Hwang J. Mass drug
administration for malaria. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;12, CD008846.
7.  El-Sayed B, El-Zaki S-E, Babiker H, Gadalla N, Ageep T, Mansour F, et al. A
Randomized Open-Label Trial of Artesunate- Sulfadoxine-Pyrimethamine
with or without Primaquine for Elimination of Sub-Microscopic P. falciparum
Parasitaemia and Gametocyte Carriage in Eastern Sudan. PLoS ONE.
2007;2:e1311.
8.  Shekalaghe SA, Drakeley C, van den Bosch S, Braak ter R, van den Bijllaardt
W, Mwanziva C, et al. A cluster-randomized trial of mass drug administration
with a gametocytocidal drug combination to interrupt malaria transmission
in a low endemic area in Tanzania. Malaria J. 2011;10:247.
9.  Yeung S, White NJ. How do patients use antimalarial drugs? A review of the
evidence. Trop Med Int Health. 2005;10:121–38.
10. Lawford H, Zurovac D, O'Reilly L, Hoibak S, Cowley A, Munga S, et al.
Adherence to prescribed artemisinin-based combination therapy in Garissa
and Bunyala districts, Kenya. Malaria J. 2011;10:281.
11. Minzi O, Maige S, Sasi P, Ngasala B. Adherence to artemether-lumefantrine
drug combination: a rural community experience six years after change of
malaria treatment policy in Tanzania. Malaria J. 2014;13:267.
12. Okell LC, Drakeley CJ, Bousema T, Whitty CJM, Ghani AC. Modelling the
impact of artemisinin combination therapy and long-acting treatments on
malaria transmission intensity. PLoS Med. 2008;5(11):1617–28.
13. White NJ. Primaquine to prevent transmission of falciparum malaria. Lancet
Infect Dis. 2013;13:175–81.
14. Eziefula AC, Bousema T, Yeung S, Kamya M, Owaraganise A, Gabagaya G,
et al. Single dose primaquine for clearance of Plasmodium falciparum
gametocytes in children with uncomplicated malaria in Uganda: a 
randomised, controlled, double-blind, dose-ranging trial. Lancet Infect Dis.
2014;14:130–9.
15. Beutler E. The hemolytic effect of primaquine and related compounds: a
review. Blood. 1959;14:103–39.
16. Reeve PA, Toaliu H, Kaneko A, Hall JJ, Ganczakowski M. Acute intravascular
haemolysis in Vanuatu following a single dose of primaquine in individuals
with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. J Trop Med Hyg.
1992;95:349–51.
17. Molineaux L, Diebner HH, Eichner M, Collins WE, Jeffery GM, Dietz K.
Plasmodium falciparum parasitaemia described by a new mathematical
model. Parasitology. 2001;122:379–91.
18. Ross R. The Prevention of Malaria. New York: Dutton; 1910.
19. Eckhoff PA. A malaria transmission-directed model of mosquito life cycle
and ecology. Malaria J. 2011;10:303.
20. Eckhoff P. P. falciparum Infection Durations and Infectiousness Are Shaped
by Antigenic Variation and Innate and Adaptive Host Immunity in a
Mathematical Model. PLoS ONE. 2012;7:e44950.
21. Filipe JAN, Riley EM, Drakeley CJ, Sutherland CJ, Ghani AC. Determination of
the Processes Driving the Acquisition of Immunity to Malaria Using a
Mathematical Transmission Model. PLoS Comput Biol. 2007;3:e255.
22. Hodel EM, Kay K, Hayes DJ, Terlouw DJ, Hastings IM. Optimizing the
programmatic deployment of the anti-malarials artemether-lumefantrine
and dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine using pharmacological modelling.
Malaria Journal. 2014;13:138.
23. Maude RJ, Socheat D, Nguon C, Saroth P, Dara P, Li G, et al. Optimising
strategies for Plasmodium falciparum malaria elimination in Cambodia:
primaquine, mass drug administration and artemisinin resistance.
PLoS ONE. 2012;7:e37166.
24. Griffin JT, Hollingsworth TD, Okell LC, Churcher TS, White M, Hinsley W,
et al. Reducing Plasmodium falciparum Malaria Transmission in Africa:
A Model-Based Evaluation of Intervention Strategies. PLoS Med.
2010;7:e1000324.
25. Okell LC, Griffin JT, Kleinschmidt I, Hollingsworth TD, Churcher TS, White MJ,
et al. The Potential Contribution of Mass Treatment to the Control of
Plasmodium falciparum Malaria. PLoS ONE. 2011;6:e20179.
26. Silal SP, Little F, Barnes KI, White LJ. Towards malaria elimination in
Mpumalanga, South Africa: a population-level mathematical modelling
approach. Malaria J. 2014;13:297.
27. Johnston GL, Gething PW, Hay SI, Smith DL, Fidock DA. Modeling
Within-Host Effects of Drugs on Plasmodium falciparum Transmission and
Prospects for Malaria Elimination. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014;10:e1003434.
28. Ezzet F, Mull R, Karbwang J. Population pharmacokinetics and therapeutic
response of CGP 56697 (artemether + benflumetol) in malaria patients.
Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1998;46:553–61.
29. Ezzet F, van Vugt M, Nosten F, Looareesuwan S, White NJ. Pharmacokinetics
and pharmacodynamics of lumefantrine (benflumetol) in acute falciparum
malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2000;44:697–704.
30. Denis MB, Tsuyuoka R, Lim P, Lindegardh N, Yi P, Top SN, et al. Efficacy of
artemether-lumefantrine for the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum
malaria in northwest Cambodia. Trop Med Int Health. 2006;11:1800–7.
31. Delves M, Plouffe D, Scheurer C, Meister S, Wittlin S, Winzeler EA, et al. The
Activities of Current Antimalarial Drugs on the Life Cycle Stages of
Plasmodium: A Comparative Study with Human and Rodent Parasites. PLoS
Med. 2012;9:e1001169.
32. Tyner SD, Lon C, Se Y, Bethell D, Socheat D, Noedl H, et al. Ex vivo drug
sensitivity profiles of Plasmodium falciparum field isolates from Cambodia
and Thailand, 2005 to 2010, determined by a histidine-rich protein-2 assay.
Malaria J. 2012;11:198.
33. Tarning J, Ashley EA, Lindegardh N, Stepniewska K, Phaiphun L, Day NPJ,
et al. Population Pharmacokinetics of Piperaquine after Two Different
Treatment Regimens with Dihydroartemisinin-Piperaquine in Patients with
Plasmodium falciparum Malaria in Thailand. Antimicrob Agents Chemother.
2008;52:1052–61.
34. Piyaphanee W, Krudsood S, Tangpukdee N, Thanachartwet W, Silachamroon
U, Phophak N, et al. Emergence and clearance of gametocytes in
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
2006;74:432–5.
35. Denis MB, Davis TME, Hewitt S, Incardona S, Nimol K, Fandeur T, et al.
Efficacy and safety of dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (Artekin) in
Cambodian children and adults with uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Clin
Infect Dis. 2002;35:1469–76.
Page 14
Gerardin et al. BMC Infectious Diseases (2015) 15:144  Page 14 of 14
36. Mårtensson A, Strömberg J, Sisowath C, Msellem MI, Gil JP, Montgomery
SM, et al. Efficacy of artesunate plus amodiaquine versus that of
artemether-lumefantrine for the treatment of uncomplicated childhood
Plasmodium falciparum malaria in Zanzibar, Tanzania. Clin Infect Dis.
2005;41:1079–86.
37. Piola P, Fogg C, Bajunirwe F, Biraro S, Grandesso F, Ruzagira E, et al.
Supervised versus unsupervised intake of six-dose artemether-lumefantrine
for treatment of acute, uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in
Mbarara, Uganda: a randomised trial. Lancet. 2005;365:1467–73.
38. Tshefu AK, Gaye O, Kayentao K, Thompson R, Bhatt KM, Sesay SS, et al. Efficacy
and safety of a fixed-dose oral combination of pyronaridine-artesunate
compared with artemether-lumefantrine in children and adults with
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria: a randomised non-inferiority
trial. The Lancet. 2010;375:1457–67.
39. Price RN, Uhlemann A-C, van Vugt M, Brockman A, Hutagalung R, Nair S,
et al. Molecular and pharmacological determinants of the therapeutic
response to artemether-lumefantrine in multidrug-resistant Plasmodium
falciparum malaria. Clin Infect Dis. 2006;42:1570–7.
40. Bassat Q, Mulenga M, Tinto H, Piola P, Borrmann S, Menéndez C, et al.
Dihydroartemisinin-Piperaquine and Artemether-Lumefantrine for Treating
Uncomplicated Malaria in African Children: A Randomised, Non-Inferiority
Trial. PLoS ONE. 2009;4:e7871.
41. The Four Artemisinin-Based Combinations (4ABC) Study Group. A
Head-to-Head Comparison of Four Artemisinin-Based Combinations for
Treating Uncomplicated Malaria in African Children: A Randomized Trial.
PLoS Med. 2011;8:e1001119.
42. Smithuis F, Kyaw MK, Phe O, Win T, Aung PP, Oo APP, et al. Effectiveness of
five artemisinin combination regimens with or without primaquine in
uncomplicated falciparum malaria: an open-label randomised trial. Lancet
Infect Dis. 2010;10:673–81.
43. Pukrittayakamee S, Chotivanich K, Chantra A, Clemens R, Looareesuwan S,
White NJ. Activities of Artesunate and Primaquine against Asexual- and
Sexual-Stage Parasites in Falciparum Malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother.
2004;48:1329–34.
44. White NJ, Qiao LG, Qi G, Luzzatto L. Rationale for recommending a lower
dose of primaquine as a Plasmodium falciparum gametocytocide in
populations where G6PD deficiency is common. Malaria J. 2012;11:418.
45. Eckhoff P. Mathematical models of within-host and transmission dynamics
to determine effects of malaria interventions in a variety of transmission
settings. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2013;88:817–27.
46. Tarning J, Kloprogge F, Piola P, Dhorda M, Muwanga S, Turyakira E, et al.
Population pharmacokinetics of Artemether and dihydroartemisinin in
pregnant women with uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum malaria in
Uganda. Malaria J. 2012;11:293.
47. Na Bangchang K, Karbwang J, Thomas CG, Thanavibul A, Sukontason K,
Ward SA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of artemether after oral administration to
healthy Thai males and patients with acute, uncomplicated falciparum
malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1994;37:249–53.
48. Mwesigwa J, Parikh S, McGee B, German P, Drysdale T, Kalyango JN, et al.
Pharmacokinetics of Artemether-Lumefantrine and Artesunate-Amodiaquine
in Children in Kampala, Uganda. Antimicrob Agents Chemother.
2009;54:52–9.
49. Djimdé A, Lefèvre G. Understanding the pharmacokinetics of Coartem.
Malaria J. 2009;8 Suppl 1:S4.
50. Tarning J, Rijken MJ, McGready R, Phyo AP, Hanpithakpong W, Day NPJ,
et al. Population Pharmacokinetics of Dihydroartemisinin and Piperaquine in
Pregnant and Nonpregnant Women with Uncomplicated Malaria.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012;56(4):1997–2007.
51. Nguyen DVH, Nguyen QP, Nguyen ND, Le TTT, Nguyen TD, Dinh DN, et al.
Pharmacokinetics and Ex Vivo Pharmacodynamic Antimalarial Activity of
Dihydroartemisinin-Piperaquine in Patients with Uncomplicated Falciparum
Malaria in Vietnam. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009;53:3534–7.
52. Hung T-Y, Davis TME, Ilett KF, Karunajeewa H, Hewitt S, Denis MB, et al.
Population pharmacokinetics of piperaquine in adults and children with
uncomplicated falciparum or vivax malaria. Br J Clin Pharmacol.
2004;57:253–62.
53. Moore BR, Salman S, Benjamin J, Page-Sharp M, Robinson LJ, Waita E, et al.
Pharmacokinetic Properties of Single-Dose Primaquine in Papua New
Guinean Children: Feasibility of Abbreviated High-Dose Regimens for
Radical Cure of Vivax Malaria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother.
2013;58:432–9. 
54. Na Bangchang K, Songsaeng W, Thanavibul A, Choroenlarp P, Karbwang J.
Pharmacokinetics of primaquine in G6PD deficient and G6PD normal
patients with vivax malaria. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 1994;88:220–2.
55. Binh VQ, Chinh NT, Thanh NX, Cuong BT, Quang NN, Dai B, et al. Sex Affects
the Steady-State Pharmacokinetics of Primaquine but Not Doxycycline in
Healthy Subjects. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2009;81:747–53.
56. Kim Y-R, Kuh H-J, Kim M-Y, Kim Y-S, Chung W-C, Kim S-I, et al.
Pharmacokinetics of primaquine and carboxyprimaquine in Korean patients
with vivax malaria. Arch Pharm Res. 2004;27:576–80.
57. Bhatia SC, Saraph YS, Revankar SN, Doshi KJ, Bharucha ED, Desai ND, et al.
Pharmacokinetics of primaquine in patients with P. vivax malaria. Eur J Clin
Pharmacol. 1986;31:205–10.
58. Edwards G, McGrath CS, Ward SA, Supanaranond W, Pukrittayakamee S,
Davis TM, et al. Interactions among primaquine, malaria infection and other
antimalarials in Thai subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1993;35:193–8.
59. Hodel EMS, Guidi M, Zanolari B, Mercier T, Duong S, Kabanywanyi AM, et al.
Population pharmacokinetics of mefloquine, piperaquine and
artemether-lumefantrine in Cambodian and Tanzanian malaria patients.
Malaria J. 2013;12:235.
60. Wagner JG. Fundamentals of Clinical Pharmacokinetics. Hamilton: Drug
Intelligence Publications; 1975.
61. World Health Organization. Guidelines for the Treatment of Malaria. World
Health Organization; 2010.
62. Simpson JA, Watkins ER, Price RN, Aarons L, Kyle DE, White NJ. Mefloquine
pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic models: implications for dosing
and resistance. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2000;44:3414–24.
63. Prinz H. Hill coefficients, dose–response curves and allosteric mechanisms.
J Chem Biol. 2009;3:37–44.
64. Adjalley SH, Johnston GL, Li T, Eastman RT, Ekland EH, Eappen AG, et al.
Quantitative assessment of Plasmodium falciparum sexual development
reveals potent transmission-blocking activity by methylene blue. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2011;108:E1214–23.
65. Tarning J, Zongo I, Somé FA, Rouamba N, Parikh S, Rosenthal PJ, et al.
Population Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of Piperaquine in
children with Uncomplicated Falciparum Malaria. Clin Pharmacol Therapeut.
2009;91:497–505.
66. The WorldWide Antimalarial Resistance Network (WWARN) DP Study Group.
The Effect of Dosing Regimens on the Antimalarial Efficacy of
Dihydroartemisinin-Piperaquine: A Pooled Analysis of Individual Patient
Data. PLoS Med. 2013;10:e1001564.
67. Hodel EM, Kay K, Hayes DJ, Terlouw DJ, Hastings IM. Optimizing the
programmatic deployment of the anti-malarials artemether-lumefantrine
and dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine using pharmacological modelling.
Malaria J. 2014;13:138.
68. Falade C, Makanga M, Premji Z, Ortmann C-E, Stockmeyer M, de Palacios PI.
Efficacy and safety of artemether–lumefantrine (Coartem®) tablets (six-dose
regimen) in African infants and children with acute, uncomplicated
falciparum malaria. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2005;99:459–67.
69. Gu W, Killeen GF, Mbogo CM, Regens JL, Githure JI, Beier JC.
An individual-based model of Plasmodium falciparum malaria transmission
on the coast of Kenya. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2003;97:43–50.
70. Babiker HA, Schneider P, Reece SE. Gametocytes: insights gained during a
decade of molecular monitoring. Trends Parasitol. 2008;24:525–30.
71. Halliday KE, Okello G, Turner EL, Njagi K, Mcharo C, Kengo J, et al. Impact of
Intermittent Screening and Treatment for Malaria among School Children in
Kenya: A Cluster Randomised Trial. PLoS Med. 2014;11:e1001594.
72. von Seidlein L. The failure of screening and treating as a malaria elimination
strategy. PLoS Med. 2014;11:e1001595.
73. Tiono AB, Ouédraogo A, Ogutu B, Diarra A, Coulibaly S, Gansané A, et al. A
controlled, parallel, cluster-randomized trial of community-wide screening
and treatment of asymptomatic carriers of Plasmodium falciparum in
Burkina Faso. Malaria J. 2013;12:79.
