BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods
  Results
  Conclusion
Multilingual abstracts
Background
Methods
  Study area
  Study design
  Data collection
  Data analysis
  Ethical considerations
Results
  Socio-demographic characteristics of the respondents
  Knowledge of malaria
  Livelihoods and malaria risk
  Knowledge and perceptions on climate change
  Food insecurity
Discussion
Conclusions
Additional file
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgements
Author details
References
Page 1
Mayala et al. Infectious Diseases of Poverty (2015) 4:21
DOI 10.1186/s40249-015-0052-2
RESEARCH ARTICLE  Open Access
Knowledge, perception and practices about
malaria, climate change, livelihoods and food
security among rural communities of central
Tanzania
Benjamin K Mayala1, Carolyn A Fahey2, Dorothy Wei2, Maria M Zinga3, Veneranda M Bwana1, Tabitha Mlacha1,
Susan F Rumisha1, Grades Stanley1, Elizabeth H Shayo1 and Leonard EG Mboera1*
Abstract
Background: Understanding the interactions between malaria and agriculture in Tanzania is of particular significance
when considering that they are the major sources of illness and livelihoods. The objective of this study was to determine
knowledge, perceptions and practices as regards to malaria, climate change, livelihoods and food insecurity in a rural
farming community in central Tanzania.
Methods: Using a cross-sectional design, heads of households were interviewed on their knowledge and perceptions
on malaria transmission, symptoms and prevention and knowledge and practices as regards to climate change and
food security.
Results: A total of 399 individuals (mean age = 39.8 ± 15.5 years) were interviewed. Most (62.41%) of them had
attained primary school education and majority (91.23%) were involved in crop farming activities. Nearly all (94.7%)
knew that malaria is acquired through a mosquito bite. Three quarters (73%) reported that most people get sick from
malaria during the rainy season. About 50% of the respondents felt that malaria had decreased during the last 10 years.
The household coverage of insecticide treated mosquito nets (ITN) was high (95.5%). Ninety-six percent reported to
have slept under a mosquito net the previous night. Only one in four understood the official Kiswahili term (Mabadiliko
ya Tabia Nchi) for climate change. However, there was a general understanding that the rain patterns have changed in
the past 10 years. Sixty-two percent believed that the temperature has increased during the same period. Three quarters
of the respondents reported that they had no sufficient production from their own farms to guarantee food security in
their household for the year. Three quarters (73.0%) reported to having food shortages in the past five years. About half
said they most often experienced severe food shortage during the rainy season.
Conclusion: Farming communities in Kilosa District have little knowledge on climate change and its impact on malaria
burden. Food insecurity is common and community-based strategies to mitigate this need to be established. The findings
call for an integrated control of malaria and food insecurity interventions.
Keywords: Malaria, Agriculture, Climate change, Food insecurity, Knowledge, Practice, Tanzania
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:lmboera@nimr.or.tz"] lmboera@nimr.or.tz
1National Institute for Medical Research, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Mayala et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Mayala et al. Infectious Diseases of Poverty (2015) 4:21  Page 2 of 9
Multilingual abstracts
Please see Additional file 1 for translations of the
abstract into the six official working languages of the
United Nations.
Background
Health, agriculture, and food security are interdepend-
ent, whereby failure in one has negative effects on the
others. These interactions operate in a vicious cycle:
illness and death, such as that caused by malaria, de-
tract from farm worker productivity, which leads to
low harvests, thereby resulting in food insecurity [1].
This, in turn results in malnutrition and weakened im-
mune systems that are more susceptible to illness [2,3].
Further links between agriculture, food security, and
malaria show that these issues should be addressed in
tandem rather than as stand-alone issues. Many devel-
oping countries rely on agriculture as a significant por-
tion of the national economy, therefore affecting the
government’s ability to finance public services includ-
ing healthcare [4]. Looking ahead, agriculture will have
an increased role in health as climate change takes a
toll on agricultural yields and the individuals and econ-
omies that affect farmers’  livelihoods. On the other
hand, some agricultural practices also pose health haz-
ards, including providing environments for mosquito
breeding and thus contributing to malaria [5,6].
Malaria control, agricultural development, food se-
curity are all high on global health and development
agendas. Reducing the incidences of hunger and mal-
aria are among the specific aims of the Millennium De-
velopment Goals. International funding for malaria
control rose to a peak of US$2 billion in 2011; while
the 2006–2008 world food crisis brought food security
to the forefront and has set policymakers to work fig-
uring out how to manage volatile world food prices
[4,7,8]. Despite the attention and funding given to agri-
culture, climate change, food security, and malaria,
little research has been done on the links between all
four drivers at community level. Studies on the rela-
tionship between food security, malaria and climate
change are few [9,10].  Links between agriculture and
food security are intuitive, yet understanding of this dy-
namic is still being developed; meanwhile, studies have
only recently begun on the interactions between agri-
culture and malaria [5,11-13]. Though the four drivers
are considered separate development issues in need of
independent intervention strategies, there are reasons
to assume that agriculture, climate change, food secur-
ity, and malaria overlap and affect each other. Under-
standing these links is imperative to health and progress
particularly in Africa, where 85% of the countries are
endemic for malaria and where 90% of global deaths
from the disease occur [14]. 
Tanzania is an important place to explore the links
between agriculture, climate change, food security and
malaria. Malaria is considered the most important pub-
lic health problem and the focus of major public health
interventions [15].  Chronic malnourishment and food
insecurity is also a problem in Tanzania, made even
more serious by escalating food prices around the world
[7]. Meanwhile, agriculture accounts for 45% of Gross
Domestic Product and employs 75% of the population
[16].  With the majority of agriculture being rain fed,
crops are highly vulnerable to climatic changes [16]. Cli-
mate change events including floods, droughts have
already had drastic effects on lives and destroyed crops
[7] and have been associated with a number of commu-
nicable diseases, including malaria [9].
Understanding the interactions between malaria,
food security and climate change in Tanzania is of par-
ticular significance when considering that they are the
major sources of livelihoods and illness. The objective
of this study was to determine knowledge, perceptions
and practices as regards to malaria, climate change,
livelihoods and food insecurity in a rural farming com-
munity in central Tanzania.
Methods
Study area
The study was carried out in Kilosa District (5°55’ -7°53’ S;
36°30’  - 37°30 E),  located in central Tanzania about
300 km west of Dar es Salaam, and about 70 km
from Morogoro town. The district has a total surface area
of about 14,400 km2 and a population of 489,513 people
living in 105,635 households with an average household
size of 4.6 people.
Kimamba Ward of Kilosa District was purposely se-
lected for this study. Kimamba is located at about
21 km from Kilosa District capital and 59 km from
Morogoro Regional capital (Figure 1). The village has a
total population of 7,810 whereby 4,102 are women and
3,708 are men. Kimamba is in the lowland and flatland
area characterized by few valleys and hills. The vegeta-
tion cover consists of bushes, short grasses and scat-
tered trees. The inhabitants cultivate mainly maize and
rice. The area is characterized by large sisal farms. A
number of inhabitants are employees and labourers in
the sisal estates.
The area experienced severe flooding in 2009/2010,
which has been attributed to climate change coupled
with environmental degradation ([URL: "http://www.ifrc.org/docs/appeals/10/MDRTZ0101.pd"] http://www.ifrc.org/
 docs/appeals/10/MDRTZ0101.pd).  During the 2009/
2010 floods, 1076 acres of maize farming land were
flooded, covered in sand and mud, and are no longer
fit for future farming (Kilosa District Council, 2010
unpubl.). Resultant crop failures due to flooded fields
resulted in a loss of income and food insecurity for
Page 3
Mayala et al. Infectious Diseases of Poverty (2015) 4:21  Page 3 of 9
types of food available in the household, and the measures
taken when experiencing food shortage.
Data analysis
The database was prepared using EpiData Version 3.1 soft-
ware and data were entered using trained clerks. The data
cleaning and quality check was done by a statistician who
compared sample of the questionnaire with the entered
data. Data was migrated to STATA (Stata Corps) for fur-
ther analysis. Cross tabulations were done between selected
variables of interest. Perception of individuals on climate
change and their resilience strategies were assessed. The
association between different factors was tested using χ2-
test and proportional tests (where appropriate).
Figure 1 Map of Tanzania showing the study area in Kilosa District.
farming communities. The impact was huge to some ex-
tent that some families were still displaced and were living
outside their home areas during the study period in No-
vember 2011.
Study design
This was a household-based study that involved face-to-
face interviews with heads of households (≥18 years old). A
purposive sampling was used to get a minimum sample size
of households to be involved in the study. The sample was
calculated using the using the World Health Organization
Sample Size Determination in Health Studies [17] assuming
a 41% prevalence of malaria, with a 95% confidence interval
and a 5% relative precision. The sample size was then ad-
justed by a refusal rate of 5% which gives a total of 390
households. The household to participate in the study were
selected with the criterion that crop production was con-
tributing about 50% of the household economic activities. 
Ethical considerations
The study obtained ethical approval from the Medical
Research Coordinating Committee of the National Institute
for Medical Research. Permission to conduct the study was
sought from Kilosa District authorities. Oral informed con-
sent was sought from the respondents after the objective
and the methodology of the study had been explained. Priv-
acy and confidentiality was maintained throughout the
study. The respondents were assured of their right to with-
draw from the interview at any time they would wish dur-
ing the discussion.
Results
Socio-demographic characteristics of the respondents
A total of 399 individuals were interviewed. The age of re-
spondents varied between 16 and 98 years with mean of
39.8 (SD = 15.5).  Of these, females accounted for three
quarters of the respondents. Most (62.41%) of the respon-
dents had attained primary school education. Majority
(91.23%) were involved in farming activities as the main oc-
cupation (Table 1).
Data collection
The study participants were recruited and interviewed at
their homes. Participants were interviewed in Kiswahili
using a semi-structured questionnaire. Household informa-
tion was collected in three broad categories: (i) Malaria
knowledge and perception, which included the cause of
malaria, the symptoms, the season people get malaria most,
treatment and prevention, and whether or not malaria has
decreased in the study area during the past 10 years; (ii)
Changes of rainfall and temperature for the past 10 years
and the impacts to the communities, and changes in farm-
ing system and crops as the adaptive capacity; and (iii) Food
security, which included availability of sufficient food to last
before the next harvest season, number of meals per day, 
Table 1 Socio-demographic characteristic of respondents
(N = 399)
Socio-demographic characteristics Frequency Percent (%)
Sex  Male  103  25.81
Female 296  74.19
Education Level None  129  32.33
Primary 249  62.41
Secondary 21  5.26
Occupation Farming 364  91.23
Business 15  3.76
Employee 5  1.25
Other  15  3.76
Page 4
Mayala et al. Infectious Diseases of Poverty (2015) 4:21  Page 4 of 9
Knowledge of malaria
Awareness of the existence of malaria in the sample popu-
lation was high. Majority (97.5%) of the respondents indi-
cated to have heard of malaria. Three quarters (73%)
reported that most people get sick from malaria during the
rainy season. Nearly all (94.7%) knew that malaria is ac-
quired through a mosquito bite, and virtually all (99.5%)
confirmed that mosquitoes were present in their homes
and in the surroundings. About 50% of the respondents felt
that malaria had decreased in their village during the last
10 years, presumably leaving the other half unimpressed by
malaria changes and mosquito abundance. The most com-
monly known symptom of malaria was fever (66.7%),
followed by headache (44.4%), joint pains (43.6%), and nau-
sea/vomiting (40.9%). Poorly known symptoms were diar-
rhoea (18.8%), convulsions (2.0%), and anaemia (1.5%).
Nearly all (95.5%) respondents mentioned the use of in-
secticide treated mosquito nets (ITN) as the main method
of malaria prevention. Only a small proportion of the re-
spondents mentioned other vector control methods includ-
ing use of mosquito coils (4.8%); indoor residual spraying
(6.8%);  and larviciding (0.8%).  Majority (78.7%) of the
respondents believed that mosquito nets were the most ef-
fective method for preventing malaria. Environmental man-
agement of malaria was poorly known by the respondents.
For instance, cleaning the environment around the homes
was mentioned by 23.3% of the respondents while clearing
grass and bushes around homes was mentioned by 12.5%.
A large proportion (85.2%) of the respondents was of the
opinion that reducing the population of mosquitoes would
reduce malaria incidents.
Reported availability of ITN in the households was very
high (98.90%), with an average of at least 2 nets per house-
hold. Almost all (96.0%) reported to have slept under a
mosquito net the previous night. However, 17.0% of the
respondents said there were some nights they did not sleep
under a mosquito net. About 87.0% reported receiving at
least one ITN for free from a government source, and 12%
had received a subsidized net from the national voucher
scheme. Slightly over a quarter (26.9%) reported to have
bought at least one ITN, indicating that nets were a priority
for these households. The majority (98%) of the respon-
dents reported that they sought health care from govern-
ment health facility when a household member fell sick.
However, among them, 12.0% mentioned to seek care
from drug stores. A few respondents (18.3%) admitted
that sometimes they do not seek treatment from health fa-
cilities when someone in the household suffers from mal-
aria. Of these, 4.8% reported not seeking treatment from
health facilities because of the high cost.
Livelihoods and malaria risk
Standing water (57.9%) and environmental factors includ-
ing presence of grasses (42.9%) were the most frequently 
mentioned factors affecting mosquito abundance in and
around homes. Climatic factors were not as commonly as-
sociated with malaria risk: only 35.8% mentioned amount
of rainfall, 11.3% temperature, and 2.0% relative humidity.
Although the respondents apparently knew that the state
of the environment around the village contributes to mos-
quito breeding, they did not connect that standing water
and grass growth are influenced by climatic events. Some
40.0% of the respondents did not know the linkages be-
tween crop farming and malaria prevalence. However, 30%
of the respondents believed that rice farming contributed to
malaria, and only 11% mentioned maize farming, which is
the dominant occupation among the community members.
Over one-third of the respondents had outdoor activities
starting before 5 am in the morning. Majority (92%) of the
respondents admitted to wake up early in the morning to
travel to their farms where they worked for the whole day.
Travel time from homes to farms was approximated to take
between one and three hours (~4-10 km). Over half (55.0%)
of the respondents reported that there are times when they
stay overnight in their farms, mostly during harvesting sea-
son. Staying overnight in the farms was described as neces-
sary to reduce travel time to and from the farm, protecting
crops from domestic and wild grazing animals as well as
protecting crops from birds and insect pests. Encouragingly,
82.0% reported that they brought mosquito nets to protect
themselves from mosquito bites while sleeping in the farms.
Knowledge and perceptions on climate change
Only one in four understood the official Kiswahili term
for climate change known as Mabadiliko ya Tabia Nchi.
However, there was a general understanding that the rain
patterns have changed in the past 10 years (less than 5%
said there were no changes). There were a range of de-
scriptions for this change: 35.0% said the rains begin earl-
ier, while 21.0% said rains begin late; 22.0% said that there
is more total rain than ever before, but 10% said there is
less total rain; 38.0% described the rains as being more
unpredictable.
Most of the respondents who described that the rain
pattern was unpredictable adopted irrigation practices
(60%) and about half (46%) initiated use of agricultural in-
puts and equipment, while 40% changed crop type and
variety. The perception that rain began earlier was associ-
ated with changing crop type or variety. These differences
were described more by male than female respondents
(test of proportion, p-value < 0.001) (Figure 2).
There was more agreement on temperature change, with
62.0% believing that the temperature has increased in the
last 10 years (19.0% said there had been a decrease in
temperature while 18.0% said there was no change). Most
of the respondents who perceived that the temperature has
increased changed crop type and/or variety (63%) while
56% started to use more agricultural inputs and equipment
Page 5
Mayala et al. Infectious Diseases of Poverty (2015) 4:21  Page 5 of 9
Figure 2 Community perception on rainfall pattern for the past 10 years and resilience in the farming practices.
and 40% moved to irrigation practice. Similar to the
changes in rainfall pattern, the impact of temperature
changes was described more frequently by male than
female respondents (test of proportion, p-value < 0.001)
(Figure 3).
Respondents with primary education were more
likely to perceive temperature increases than those with
secondary or higher education, while those with sec-
ondary or higher education were more likely to be con-
cerned with unpredictable rain patterns (Chi-square
test, p-value <0.001). Older individuals (>45 years) were
also more concerned with the impact of change in
temperature and rain on the farm productivity than 
younger individuals (p-value <0.001). There was a ten-
dency of families with large number of children to
change their farming practice due to unpredictable rain
or increase in temperature (p-value <0.01) (Table 2).
Majority (86.0%) of the respondents reported to rely
on weather patterns to determine planting time for their
crops. Only about half of the respondents thought that
the weather forecast by the Tanzania Meteorological
Agency as provided through radio and television is use-
ful in helping them to determine planting time.
It was observed that respondents who were relying on
rain-fed crop production, employed different strategies
to cope with extreme climate events such as drought.
Figure 3 Community perception on temperature pattern for the past 10 years and resilience in the farming practices.
Page 6
Mayala et al. Infectious Diseases of Poverty (2015) 4:21  Page 6 of 9
Table 2 Proportion of respondents adopting changing in farming practices due to climate change by different
socio-demographic characteristics
Increase in Temperature  Unpredictable rain
Crop type/variety Agricultural inputs/equipment Irrigation Crop type/variety Agricultural inputs/equipment Irrigation
Sex
Male 69%  65%  50% 47%  44%  50%
Female 61%  52%  38% 38%  47%  62%
Education
Primary 71%  83%  100% 27%  40%  0%
Secondary+ 59%  52%  33% 46%  47%  67%
Age category (in years)
<30  55%  47%  40% 33%  33%  60%
31 - 45  63%  55%  50% 41%  56%  50%
>45  70%  69%  0%  49%  50%  100%
Number of children
<=3  59%  48%  43% 41%  44%  57%
>3  67%  67%  33% 40%  48%  67%
Overall 63%  56%  40% 40%  46%  60%
These included switching to more pest-resistant maize
varieties, changing cultivars, seeking temporary jobs in
urban areas or renting their fields. These were more re-
ported as adaptation farming practices, indicating resili-
ence to climate change. One in three had changed their
crop variety in the last 10 years. About 16% had changed
crop type and 11% had gained use of equipment (Figure 2).
However, inputs and irrigation practices remained mostly
unchanged (less than 5% reported the change).  When
asked about the impact of the 2009/2010 floods in Kilosa,
77% of the respondents reported their households to be
affected. Some 30% reported to have been displaced from
their homes, with others reporting being still displaced for
the past two years. Farmland was heavily affected with
45% of the respondents reporting a permanent loss of part
of their land.
Food insecurity
Food insecurity was described by the majority of respon-
dents to be a common problem across the study area.
Three quarters of the respondents reported that they
had no sufficient production from their own farms to
guarantee food security in their household for the year.
Three quarters (73.0%) reported to having food short-
ages in their household in the past five years. About half
said they most often experienced severe food shortage
during the rainy season - the season when most house-
holds experience several bouts of febrile illnesses includ-
ing malaria (Figure 4). This is also the planting season,
when farmers need to put much of their energy in farm-
ing to ensure high productivity. Maize was as staple food 
for almost all (98.35%) respondents, meaning their house-
hold would be upset by poor maize harvests. About a
quarter (26%) had less than two meals a day.
Discussion
The community of Kilosa had at least some basic under-
standing of malaria, its causes, symptoms and prevention
methods. They were apparently employing recommended
prevention methods including use of mosquito nets and
seeking treatment from health facilities. Similar findings
have been reported in the district in another study [18].
Despite this knowledge and efforts to scale up malaria
interventions, there was no consensus that malaria was de-
clining among the farming communities. However, avail-
able statistics indicate that malaria has declined in all
geographical zones of Tanzania. The prevalence of malaria
parasitaemia among <5 years old children in Morogoro Re-
gion (where Kilosa District belongs) has fallen from 15.7%
in 2008 to 7.4% in 2012 [19,20]. On the other hand, a re-
cent community-based study in the district indicated a
prevalence of 3.5% among schoolchildren; with those from
Kimamba having the lowest prevalence [13].
This study hypothesized that some the effectiveness of
malaria interventions, including mosquito nets, may be af-
fected by rural farming lifestyles. One concern with effect-
ive mosquito net usage for populations such as Kilosa,
where farms are located far from family homes, is result-
ant time spent out of the home during mosquito biting
hours. This may occur when farmers need to leave their
home before 5 am to reach their field early in the day, or
when farmers spend the night in their field to cut down
Page 7
Mayala et al. Infectious Diseases of Poverty (2015) 4:21  Page 7 of 9
Figure 4 The proportion of respondents on the season when they experience most malaria and food shortage.
travel time or to protect their crops at harvest time. In
these situations, even if members of the households have
mosquito nets they will not be protected at all times. In-
deed, in Kilosa district, the habit of rising before 5 am for
daily farming activities was common, which makes mos-
quito nets ineffective for preventing mosquito bites for
some time when mosquitoes are still biting. To their credit,
the community proved resilient in taking extra measures to
use their mosquito nets whenever possible during night
farm activities. In fact, spending the night at the field may
be a better practice than rising early to go to the farm and
being exposed to mosquito bites during commute and
when farming. The mosquito net campaigns, which have
clearly been successfully adopted in Kilosa is evident from
their widespread use [18,21]. The national malaria control
programme should take this into consideration and make
sure that ITNs are being used effectively in make-shift
shelters.
Human activity outside the home into late evening and
early morning hours is very common in Kilosa district.
Outdoor human activities observed in this study have im-
plication in malaria transmission and control. Studies have
indicated that Anopheles gambiae complex readily seek
hosts in outdoor venues [22].  The relevance of outdoor
night biting behaviour of mosquitoes to vector suppression
depends greatly on whether outdoor biting coincides with
human outdoor activity. Previous studies have reported
that host seeking activity of An. gambiae peaks around
midnight [23]. Future studies of human behaviour in rela-
tion to livelihoods would provide important insights into
human activity and other potential risk factors associated
with outdoor biting. Although some respondents in this
study claimed to bring mosquito nets when carrying out
outdoor farm activities, it is obvious that the use of the nets
is limited when one has to walk chasing animals grazing in
his/her farmstead. Similar to our finding that most malaria
incidence occur during the rainy season, in a neighbouring 
Kilombero Valley, the rainy season (which is also the main
cultivation period, has been reported to be the time of high
vulnerability for the farming population because of food in-
security, labour stress and poor access to health services
[1]. In Côte d'Ivoire, disease episodes during the cultivation
period have been described to result in lower crop yield
and consequently lower household’s income [24]. The find-
ings that farmers were carrying mosquito nets to their
farms have also been reported [1] in the Kilombero Valley.
Our findings and others in Tanzania, indicate that house-
hold members spend a considerable part of the farming
season living in very basic shelters under difficult condi-
tions and away from accessibility to health care services [1].
The high proportion of displaced residents and loss of
farmland reported by the respondents pose problems to
both malaria control efforts (including mosquito nets
hung in the homes) and food security (from subsistence
agriculture). Flood preparedness measures should address
malaria control and sustainable food security. The lack of
comprehension of climate change shows that the commu-
nity has not received education on climate change, which
could prepare them for possible consequences. There was
a general awareness that the temperature was rising and
the rains were changing [25], which may have attributed
to some of the change in crop variety reported by the
farmers. Such flexibility is important for resilience to cli-
mate change. Similar to our findings in Kilosa District, re-
sults from a study in north-eastern [26] and south-western
highlands [25] of Tanzania also have revealed that most
farmers were aware of ongoing climate variability.
In this study, food shortage among households in Kilosa
was common. Similar findings have been reported in south-
western Tanzania [25]. Managing seasonal climate risks for
food production more effectively is challenging in Sub-
Saharan Africa where highly variable rain fed environments
and projected long-term increases aridity pose serious risks to
agriculture [27]. Seasonal climate forecasts are an important
Page 8
Mayala et al. Infectious Diseases of Poverty (2015) 4:21  Page 8 of 9
planning tool at the farm level that can lead to better
management of seasonal climate risks and instil pro-
cesses useful to longer-term adaptation. However, in
this study, majority of farmers were not aware of the
usefulness of weather forecast. Reporting two or less
meals increased the likelihood of food insecurity and
malnutrition. Studies elsewhere have already shown that
children who are malnourished are more susceptible to
malaria morbidity and mortality [28,29]. In the current
study, an important result is the seasonal nature of food
insecurity and malaria problems in the district. The
greatest time of need is during the rainy season, for both
hunger alleviation and malaria prevention. Food inse-
curity and malnutrition seriously impedes efforts to
control diseases in resource poor countries [30]. Previ-
ous studies have documented an increased risk of mal-
aria associated with micronutrient, including zinc and
vitamin A deficiencies [28]. Children living in severely
food insecure households are more likely to experience
micronutrient deficiencies, resulting in greater impair-
ment in their malaria-protective immune function
[28,29]. Besides its impact on physical health, household
food insecurity and the poverty-related determinants of
this condition have been associated with maternal stress
and suboptimal psycho-emotional human development
in diverse settings [10,31].
It has been described that food insecurity is common
in developing countries. In Sub-Saharan Africa alone, an
estimated two billion people experience food insecurity
and its consequences like malnutrition and dietary defi-
ciencies [32]. A high proportion of households in sub-
Saharan Africa are therefore in a constant process to
mitigate and cope with hunger or hunger threat in
addition to communicable diseases. In Tanzania, it is
estimated that 58% of the households are experiencing
food insecurity problem [33] and thus their mitigation
and coping strategies are seriously threatened by the
high burden of communicable diseases. In rural Haiti,
severe food insecure was a risk factor for perceived
clinical malaria [10].  Malaria has been described to
occur within the context of widespread poverty, poor
health, and food insecurity.
Several limitations of this study restricted its compre-
hensiveness. Self-reporting could have resulted in recall
bias. Convenience sampling may not have accurately
represented the entire population, including men who
often were not present in the home. There was missing
input from farmers who were in the fields during the
days surveying occurred.
Conclusions
This study revealed information about malaria, cli-
mate change, livelihoods and food security, through
the eyes of those whom policy makers seek to address. 
The results show a need for improvement in health, en-
vironment and agricultural sectors, with some overlap-
ping issues that can be addressed in tandem. Policy
implications stemming from this study involve a need
for an integrated and intersectoral approach among ex-
perts in different fields that draws on community par-
ticipation. Specifically, farmers need to be prepared in
accordance with information about climate change and
possible adaptations in order to ensure food security
and economic stability in coming years. The findings of
this study suggest that communities affected by malaria
also commonly suffer from chronic food insecurity, and
that both disorders affect small-scale farmers’  liveli-
hoods. Given the tools and information about how to
prevent malaria and improve their agricultural practices,
farmers are willing to make changes to their livelihoods.
Additional file
 Additional file 1: Multilingual abstracts in the six official working
languages of the United Nations.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
BKM participated in the development of the research proposal and
manuscript writing. CAF, DW and LEGM participated in the design of the
study, prepared the research proposal and manuscript, and performed the
data collection. MMZ, VMB, TM performed the data collection, selected the
study population, and prepared the manuscript. SFR participated in the data
analysis. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Rose Mary Nguruwe, John Lindi, and
Dionis Rwegoshora for their excellent field and technical assistance during
data collection. The Director General, National Institute for Medical Research
is thanked for the logistical support. This manuscript is published with
permission from Director General, National Institute for Medical Research.
The study received financial assistance from the International Development
Research Centre of Canada through Integrated Research Partnership for
Malaria Control through an Ecohealth Approach in Africa (IDRC Project No.
104263–004).
Author details
1National Institute for Medical Research, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
2Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA. 3Catholic University of Health
and Allied Sciences- Bugando, Mwanza, Tanzania.
Received: 29 December 2014 Accepted: 2 April 2015
References
1.  Hetzel MW, Alba S, Fankhauser M, Mayumana I, Lengeler C, Obrist B, et al.
Malaria risk and access to prevention and treatment in the paddies of the
Kilombero Valley, Tanzania. Malar J. 2008;7:7.
2.  Mboera LEG. Environmental and socio-economic determinants of malaria
epidemics in the highlands of Tanzania. Tanzania Health Res Bull.
2004;6:11–7.
3.  Asenso-Okyere K, Chang C, Thangata T, Andam K. Interactions between
health and farm-labour productivity. International Food Policy Research
Institute. 2011. [URL: "http://www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/pr23.pdf"] http://www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/pr23.pdf.
Page 9
Mayala et al. Infectious Diseases of Poverty (2015) 4:21  Page 9 of 9
4.  World Bank. World Development Report: Agriculture for Development. 2008.
 http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/
 EXTWDRS/.
5.  Ijumba J, Mosha F, Lindsay S. Malaria transmission risk variations derived
from different agricultural practices in an irrigated area of northern
Tanzania. Med Vet Entomol. 2002;16:28–38.
6.  Mboera LEG, Shayo E, Senkoro K, Rumisha S, Mlozi M, Mayala B. Knowledge,
perceptions and practices of farming communities on linkages between
malaria and agriculture in Mvomero District, Tanzania. Acta Trop.
2009;113:139–44.
7.  FAO. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2011. Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations. 2011. [URL: "http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/i2330e/i2330e.pdf"] http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/
 i2330e/i2330e.pdf.
8.  WHO. World Malaria Report 2011. World Health Organization. 2011.
 http://www.who.int/malaria/world_malaria_report_2011/en/.
9.  Mboera LEG, Mayala BK, Kweka EJ, Mazigo HD. Impact of climate change on
human health and health systems in Tanzania: a review. Tanzania J Health
Res. 2011;13:10.
10. Pẻrez-Escamilla R, Dessalines M, Finnigan M, Pachon H, Hromi-Fiedler A,
Gupta N. Household food insecurity is associated with childhood malaria in
rural Haiti. J Nutr. 2009;139:2132–8.
11. Asenso-Okyere K, Asante F, Tarekgan J, Andam K. The linkages between
agriculture and malaria: issues for policy, research, and capacity strengthening.
International Food Policy Research Institute, Discussion Paper 00861. 2009.
 http://www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/ifpridp00861.pdf.
12. Mboera LEG, Mlozi MRS, Senkoro KP, Rwegoshora RT, Rumisha SF, Mayala BK,
et al. Malaria and agriculture in Tanzania: impact of land-use and agricultural
practices on malaria burden in mvomero district. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania:
National Institute for Medical Research; 2007. ISBN 978-9987-9143-1-9.
13. Mboera LEG, Mlozi MRS, Rumisha SF, Bwana VM, Malima RC, Shayo EH,
et al. Malaria, ecosystems and livelihoods in kilosa district, central Tanzania.
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: National Institute for Medical Research; 2013. ISBN
978-9987-9143-2-6.
14. WHO. World Malaria Report 2008. World Health Organization. 2008.
[URL: "http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/9789241563697/en/"] http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/9789241563697/en/.
15. Mboera LEG, Mazigo HD, Rumisha SF, Randall K. Towards malaria
elimination and its implication for vector control, disease management and
livelihoods in Tanzania. Malaria World J. 2013;4:19.
16. Mashindano O. Global food crisis policy responses in Tanzania: A country-level
Report on policy responses to the food crisis submitted to IFPRI as an input to
the food security portal. Economic and Social Research Foundation.
2009. [URL: "http://www.esrftz.org/publication.php"] http://www.esrftz.org/publication.php.
17. Lwanga S, Lemeshow S. Sample size determination in health studies: a
practical manual. Geneva: World Health Organization; 1991.
18. Rumisha SF, Zinga MM, Fahey CA, Wei D, Bwana VM, Mlozi MRS, et al.
Accessibility, availability and utilisation of malaria interventions among
women of reproductive age in Kilosa District in central Tanzania. BMC
Health Serv Res. 2014;14:452.
19. THMIS. Tanzania Commission for AIDS (TACAIDS), Zanzibar AIDS
Commission (ZAC), National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), Office of the Chief
Government Statistician (OCGS), and ICF International 2013. Tanzania HIV/
AIDS and Malaria Indicator Survey 2007-08. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania:
TACAIDS, ZAC, NBS, OCGS, and ICF International; 2008. [URL: "http://lib.tacaids.go.tz:8080/newgenlibctxt/"] http://lib.tacaids.-
 go.tz:8080/newgenlibctxt/.
20. THMIS. Tanzania Commission for AIDS (TACAIDS), Zanzibar AIDS
Commission (ZAC), National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), Office of the Chief
Government Statistician (OCGS), and ICF International 2008. Tanzania HIV/
AIDS and Malaria Indicator Survey 2011-12. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania:
TACAIDS, ZAC, NBS, OCGS, and ICF International; 2013. [URL: "http://lib.tacaids.go.tz:8080/newgenlibctxt/"] http://lib.tacaids.-
 go.tz:8080/newgenlibctxt/.
21. Shayo EH, Rumisha SF, Mlozi MRS, Bwana VM, Mayala BK, Malima RC, et al.
Social determinants of malaria and health care seeking patterns among rice
farming and pastoral communities in Kilosa District of central Tanzania. Acta
Trop. 2014;144:41–9.
22. Reddy MR, Overgaard HJ, Abaga S, Reddy VP, Caccone A, Kiszewski AE, et al.
Outdoor host seeking behaviour of anopheles gambiae mosquitoes
following initiation of malaria vector control on Bioko island, equatorial
guinea. Malar J. 2011;10:184.
23. Maxwell CA, Wakibara J, Tho S, Curtis CF. Malaria-infective biting at different
hours of the night. Med Vet Entomol. 1998;12:325–7. 
24. Girardin O, Dao D, Koudou BG, Essẻ C, Cissẻ G, Yao T, et al. Opportunities
and limiting factors of intensive vegetable farming in malaria endemic Cote
I’Ivoire. Acta Trop. 2004;89:109–23.
25. Kangalawe RYM. Food security and health in the southern highlands of
Tanzania: a multi-disciplinary approach to evaluate the impact of climate
change and other stress factors. Afr J Environ Sci Technol. 2012;6:50–66.
26. Mungai, C. Harnessing farmers' valuable agricultural knowledge the right
way. CGIAR/CCAFS. 2013. [URL: "http://ccafs.cgiar.org/blog/harnessing-valuable-indigenous-farm-knowledge-right-way"] http://ccafs.cgiar.org/blog/harnessing-valuable-
 indigenous-farm-knowledge-right-way. Accessed in August 2013.
27. Boko M, Niang I, Nyong A, Vogel C, Githeko A, Medany M, et al. Africa. Climate
Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, Parry ML, Canziani OF, Palutikof JP, van der Linden PJ, Hanson
CE, editors. Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press; 2007. p. 433–67.
28. Caulfield L, Richard S, Black R. Undernutrition as an underlying cause of malaria
morbidity and mortality in children less than five years old. Am J Trop Med
Hyg. 2004;71:55–63.
29. Shankar AH. Nutritional modulation of malaria morbidity and mortality. J Infect
Dis. 2000;182 Suppl 1:S37–53.
30. Semali I, Edwin T, Mboera LEG. Food security and coping strategies among
people living with HIV in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. Tanzania J Health Res.
2011;13:2.
31. Weinreb L, Wehler C, Perloff J, Scott R, Hosmer D, Sagor L, et al. Hunger: its
impact on children's health and mental health. Pediatrics. 2002;110:e41.
32. FAO. The state of food insecurity in the world. Rome: Food and Agriculture
Organization; 2003.
33. National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) [Tanzania] and ORC Macro. Tanzania
Demographic and Health Survey 2004-05. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: National
Bureau of Statistics and ORC Macro. 2005. [URL: "http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR173/FR173-TZ04-05.pdf"] http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/
 pdf/FR173/FR173-TZ04-05.pdf.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
