Town of Framingham
Board of Selectmen
Policy on Powers, Duties, and Obligations of the Board of Selectmen
Issue date: January 7, 2002
Type of policy: New ( )  Amendment (x)
Effective date: January 12, 2002
Amendment dates: May 19, 2005; September 17, 2013
Level: Department ( )  Division ( )  Town Wide (x)
Policy Statement
The Board of Selectmen is the Chief Elected Officials of the Town of Framingham, and, as such,
plays anintricaterole inthe affairs ofthe community. Thispolicy outlines theresponsibilities of
the Board as policy makers, rights of Board members in their roles as Selectmen, and,
specifically, Chairman, and how appointments are made to various Town positions. It also
addresses the structure and agenda setting for regular Selectmen's meetings, and how the Board
strives to maintain good communication with other Town departments and the community at
large. 
References
M.L. G.Chapter 30A, § §18 -25 (Open Meeting Law)
M.L. G.Chapter 268A (Conflict ofInterest Law)
Special Terms
None.
I.  General 
Policy Description
The Board of Selectmen is an elected board and derives its authority and responsibilities
from the statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the by -laws of the Town of
Framingham, and the voters of Framingham. Board members are regular Municipal
Section 1. Procedural 1.1  1
Page 2
Employees forthe purpose ofMGLc.268A. In general, the duties of the Board are as
follows:
Uphold the Constitutions of the United States of America and the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, federal and state laws, and Town by -laws;
Recognize the Board's primary role is to set policy, with responsibility for
administration delegated to the Town Manager;
Recognize that members are part of a collegial body;
Be well informed concerning the duties of a Board member on both state and local
levels;
Establish annual goals and objectives for itself and the Town;
Represent the entire community at all times;
Appoint a Town Manager, and set performance goals and objectives;
Make appointments to volunteer boards, committees, and commissions;
Act as the Licensing Board for the Town; and
Sets dates for town meetings as required, and prepares the warrant for annual and
special Town meetings.
II. Compensation
Each member of the Board shall be compensated as determined by vote of Town Meeting.
Members of the Board are entitled to reimbursement of expenses that are incurred while
attending meetings and conferences in carrying out their duties related to their function as
members as provided in the Massachusetts General Laws.
III. Election and Duties of Board Officers
At its first meeting following the annual Town election in April, the Board shall elect from
its membership a Chair, Vice -Chair and a Clerk. Officers shall be elected for a term of one
year, and a majority vote shall constitute an election. Nominations of officers shall require
botha motion and a second. Vacancies occurringinany office shallbefilledbytheelection
of a successor to fill the unexpired term at the next regularly scheduled Board meeting.
The Chair shall have the following duties and Responsibilities:
Preside at all meetings of the Board, maintain order in the meeting room by
recognizing speakers, calling for votes, and presiding over the discussion of agenda
items and generally being guided by Robert's Rules of Order, except as modified
herein;
Sign official documents that require the signature of the Chair, following a vote of the
Board as required;
Call special meetings of the Board in accordance with the Open Meeting Law;
Review meeting agendas with the Town Manager;
Represent the Board at meetings, conferences, and other gatherings unless otherwise
determined by the Board or delegated by the Chair;
Section 1. Procedural 1.1  2
Page 3
Serve as spokesperson for the Board at Town Meetings and present the Board's
position unless otherwise determined by the Board or delegated by the Chair; and
Make liaison assignments, as appropriate, and assign overview responsibilities for
projects and tasks to Board members unless otherwise determined by the Board.
The Chair shall have the same rights as other members to discuss questions, and to vote
thereon.
The Vice -Chair shall act in the place of the Chair if absent at Board meetings. Should the
Chair leave office, the Vice -Chair shall assume the duties of Chair until the Board elects a
successor.
IV. Appointments
A. Board Members
The Board shall, after reorganizing each April, appoint for a term of one year a Board
member or another appropriate individual to represent the Board in the following
capacity:
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority Advisory Board member
Massachusetts Water Resources Authority Advisory Board member
Metropolitan Area Planning Council member
Metro -West Regional Collaboration member
Metropolitan Planning Organization
Real Property Committee member
Athenaeum Hall Superintendent
Traffic and Roadway Safety Committee
Utility Abatement Review Board member
Representatives appointed by the Board will represent the official positions of the
Board, when such positions have been taken.
B. Volunteer Positions
The Board shall make its annual appointments of volunteer positions no later than its
lastregular meeting in June. Appointments shall haveterms beginning on July 1 and
expiring on June 30 and shall be for three (3) year terms or as required by state statute
or Town by -law. In addition, as the need arises, the Board may make appointments
throughout the year for terms to take immediate effect, with expiration dates of June
30. Incumbents shall continue to serve in office until a successor shall be appointed.
A complete listing of all officials appointed by the Board is provided in
Article I of the Town by -laws, and a regular updated listing of the current
status ofall officials isprovidedbythe Town Clerk. Appointments shall be
based on merit and qualifications. Wherepossible the Boardwill seekvariety
Section 1. Procedural 1.1  3
Page 4
in backgrounds, interests, ages, genders, and geographic areas of residents, so
that Town boards, committees and departments will reflect a true cross -
section of the community.
In order to attract qualified and interested persons, vacancies will be publicly
advertised as far in advance of the appointment as practicable, with
description of responsibilities and actions, and request for cover letters and
resumes shall be given.
All applicants should submit an application in the form required by the Selectmen.
Notification of receipt and outcome will be sent to the applicant. The Selectmen' s
Office shall maintain a file of interested applicants.
Any person appointed by the Board of Selectmen may resign prior to expiration of his
or her term by filing a resignation in writing to the Town Clerk. Resignations are
deemed accepted by the Board of Selectmen automatically upon filing with the Town
Clerk.
C. Elected and Appointed Positions
The Town Manager will ensure that the Chair of the board on which a vacancy occurs
is advised of the vacancy, and will seek nomination recommendations of a majority of
therelevantcommittee. In the case of an incumbent seeking reappointment, the
Board of Selectmen may request from the Chair of the committee the attendance
history of the incumbent. Reappointment shall not be considered automatic, but shall
be based on an evaluation of the appointee's past contribution to the board or
committee. Thereis nolimittothenumberoftermswhichan appointeemay serve,
but all interested applicants will be considered for vacancies as they occur. To
facilitate this process, the Selectmen's Office will maintain a listing of the Town
residents who have expressed an interest in Town service, and the Board will be
provided the names of all who have expressed interest in serving on a board,
committee or commission before it votes to make the appointment by the Board.
Town residents interested in serving must submit a letter of interest to the Selectmen.
Upon notification of a vacancy on an elected Town board, the Board and the
remaining members of the elected board shall appoint a replacement, on a majority
roll call vote of the combined boards, subject to MGL c.30A, § §18 -25 and Town by-
laws. The newappointee shall be aregisteredvoterinthe TownofFramingham and
shall serve only until the next annual Town election.
D. Establishment of Ad Hoc Committees
It is often necessary or desirable for the Board to appoint committees to investigate
andtoreporttotheBoard onspecific problems ofgeneral concern. Thepurposeof
these committees is to develop greater expertise and more widespread participation
Section 1. Procedural 1.1  4
Page 5
than might otherwisebeavailable. All committees appointed by the Board are
advisory for it is the Board's ultimate responsibility to discharge its obligations.
The Board will give each advisory committee a written charge, which shall include
the work to be undertaken, the time in which it is to be accomplished, and the
procedures forreportingtotheSelectmen. Eachcommittee mustreportinwritingat
least annually to theSelectmen. The Selectmen's Office shall be sent copies of all
committee agendas andminutes. The Board will discharge committees upon
completion of their work.
The charges and membership of standing or long -term committees will be reviewed
annually to assess the necessity and desirability of continuing the activity of the
committee as well as to consider the contribution made by individual committee
members. ItisthepolicyoftheSelectmen toappointqualified citizensrepresenting
all segments of the Town to all boards and committees.
E.  Stipends
The Board shall review and vote on all stipends at its first regular meeting in July.
V. Annual Report of Town and Town Meeting Journal
The Board shall annually cause to be produced an " Annual Report for the Town of
Framingham ".  Said document shall report to the citizens of Framingham on the activities
undertaken by the various agencies, committees, commissions, boards and officials,
including a complete financial accounting, and shall be distributed atthe first night ofthe
Annual Town Meeting.
The Board shall also cause to be produced sufficient copies of submitted materials to assist
Town Meeting members in their deliberation and discussion of all warrant articles placed
beforethem. This may bedistributed asthedocumentknown asthe TownMeeting Journal,
or in any format which the Board feels is relevant and responsive to the needs of the Town
Meeting members.
VI. Conflict of Interest and Code of Conduct
Board members shall avoid conflicts of interest or even the appearance of conflicts of interest
in strict compliance with all applicable by -laws and state statutes, including MGL c.268A.
VII. Meetings of the Board
The Board of Selectmen functions only when acting as a Board in a legally constituted
session. The Board functions as a body in all policy decisions and all other matters as
required by law or determined by a vote oftheBoardinformalsession. Selectmenare
elected officials with responsibility to represent all segments of the community and there
should be no restraint in the proper and reasonable exercise of this responsibility. The
Section 1. Procedural 1.1  5
Page 6
individual members of the Board shall respect their responsibility to other members of the
Board so that the discharge of these duties may be accomplished in and expeditious and
productive manner. Extended orations or arbitrary declarations are not conducive to
intelligent and factual solutions to problems before the Board.
A quorum shall consist ofthree members of the Board. As a practical courtesy, action on
critical or controversial matters, the adoption of policy, or appointments shall be taken,
whenever practicable, with the full Board in attendance. Actions and decisions shall be by
motion, second, and vote.
Split votes will be identified by name in meeting minutes. The Chair will announce the
outcome of each vote taken.
Regular meetings of the Board shall be held in the Memorial Building as scheduled by the
Board. Meetings shall be televised on the local cable access channel. Meetings falling on a
legal holiday are usually canceled or rescheduled at the discretion of the Board.
In addition to regular meetings, the Chair may call from time to time, as needed, working
sessions. Working sessions shall be duly posted and recorded as are all other meetings, but
the Board will take no action or votes during such sessions. The sessions will allow the
Boardtomeetinformallyto discussandworkoncurrentissues. Allmeetings oftheBoard
shall be held in places accessible to the handicapped.
Meetings of the Board may be convened at the direction of the Chair whenever
circumstances require. These will normally be convened to address unfinished business,
respond to emergency situations, orto conduct informal working sessions. The Board will
notice and record minutes of all meetings as required by MGL c.3OA, § §18 -25.
A. Agenda Setting and Support Material
The Town Manager bears primary responsibility for coordinating and planning the
agenda for regular meetings ofthe Board. The Town Manager, in consultation with the
Chair, shall prepare the agenda, and schedule a realistic time period for each
appointment, interview, conference, or other scheduled item ofbusiness. Any request for
an item to be included on the agenda should be submitted as far in advance of the
meeting as possible, and in no event later than the time for posting ofthe agenda except
as otherwise provided by the Open Meeting Law.
Members of the Board, Staff, Town Manager or others who prepare background materials
for a meeting should have such materials available by the close of business three business
days before the meeting. If background information is insufficient or complex, any
member should feel free to ask for additional time for careful study of an issue or a
motion.
Section 1. Procedural 1.1  6
Page 7
Copies of the minutes of previous meetings and all important correspondence, reports and
other pertinent background materials shall be held in the Selectmen's Office for
inspection by interested parties and the press. In addition, a reasonable number of copies
should be made available to the public for their inspection on the night of the Selectmen's
Meeting. A sign up sheet for Public Participation will be made available to the audience.
B. Public Participation
The purpose of Public Participation is to encourage the public to present to the Board
matters of general interest and to request that the Board take action on them. Time shall
be allotted for the public to address the Board at each open meeting. Such time shall be
limited to fifteen minutes with no more than three minutes allowed to each topic except
bymajority consentoftheBoard. Speakerswillberecognized subjectto availabletime.
No person may address a meeting of a governmental body without permission of the
Chair, and all persons shall be silent at the request ofthe Chair. If a person persists in
disorderly behavior in such a meeting after warning from the Chair, the Chair may order
him or her to withdraw from the meeting.
Members of the public who want to present matters during Public Participation must use
the following procedure:
1. Sign their names on the sign up sheet that is available in the Meeting Room prior to
the start of the meeting.
2. Give their residence address and whether they are speaking as agent or representative
of another person or organization.
3. Namethesubjectmatteronwhichtheywantto speak.
Speakers will be expected to use the following format when addressing the Board:
1. State the issue that they are bringing to the Board's attention.
2. Describe specifically therequested actionbytheBoard.
3. State the reasons that support the requested action.
4. Observe proper decorum in referring to other persons.
The Board may take any of the following actions on matters that are initially presented
during Public Participation:
1. ReferthemattertotheManagerforstudyandreport.
2. Defer discussion until later in the meeting when agenda items have been
disposed of and invite Public Participation speakers to remain until that time.
3. Require that speaker(s) submit supporting information in writing for
consideration by the Board and Manager.
4. Place the issue on the agenda for a subsequent meeting, request further input
from the speaker to be presented at that time, and notify the speaker when the
matter will be on the agenda.
Section 1. Procedural 1.1  7
Page 8
C. Public Hearings
Hearings before the Board shall be conducted in accordance with the following
procedures, unless are necessary to comply with statutory requirements applicable to
particular matters:
The Town Manager will ensure that the hearing is advertised and notice given to
interested persons, such as abutters, as required by statute or as directed by the
Chair in the absence of statutory requirements;
Hearings will be scheduled at the beginning of the meeting agenda;
At the time advertised for the hearing, the Chair will announce the nature and
purpose of the hearing, identify the particular matter, and recite the notice given;
All questions shall be addressed to the Chair, and individuals may address the
Board when recognized;
The order of presentation will be: presentation by the proponent; receipt of
recommendations from any Town board or officer; questions from Board
members; and statements by members of the public an/or opponents; and
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board may render its decision or take the
matter under advisement, announcing the intended date of decision.
D. Minutes of Meetings
The Office Manager shall attend Board meetings and draft minutes which will be made
available to Boardmembersin a timely fashion. The Office Manager shall be a
confidential employee. ApprovedminutesshallberecordedinaMinutesBook.
Minutes of Board meetings held in Executive Session shall be kept separately
IX. Communication with Appointed, Elected Officials, Employees and the Public
A. Town Boards, Commissions, Committees, and Elected Officials
The Board is aware that coordination and cooperation is needed among the Town's
boards, committees, and commissions to provide efficient day -to -day operations of
government. Cooperative relationships will enable the Board to set town -wide goals
and priorities; identify and anticipate major problems, select effective activities
directed toward their resolution; and develop a process for dealing with agencies of
the state and federal government. These shall include but not be limited by the
exchange of minutes, the establishment of a central repository for data, studies, and
reports, and the invitation to Chairs of appropriate boards and committees to meetings
of the Board on matters relevant to those boards or committees.
Town boards, committees, commissions or officials, elected or appointed,
should direct inquiries regarding the day -to -day operations, budget or policies
of a particular department through their professional staff or chair of their
Section 1. Procedural 1.1  8
Page 9
respective committee to the Town Manager or the Board. Elected or appointed
officials will not interfere with department heads or Town employees on
matters that relate to the administration or management of a particular
department. Itisimportant thattheTownManagerretainoverallcontroland
jurisdiction over Division Heads and their employees, and that there be no
interference from Town officials in this area.
Board members are free to speak with Town employee and department heads
to refer complaints or to make routine inquiries. However, a Board member
or other elected or appointed official wishing an in -depth inquiry into a
department's policies, procedures, or operations must make such a request
during a regular Board meeting in open session and receive approval by the
Board by consensus or Board vote or receive said approval from the Town
Manager.
B. Citizen of Framingham
In recognizing that it both represents and is accountable to the residents of the Town,
it is the policy of the Board to make every effort to strengthen communications with
citizens. The Board will act to increase citizen participation, encourage citizen input
into government decisions, and to keep residents informed of all actions contemplated
or taken by the Board that will affect them. To this end, the Board will take the
following steps:
In addition to Citizen Participation, aresident or group ofresidents may
request a meeting with the Board by contacting the Selectmen's Office, stating
precisely the reason for the appearance and the Board action desired and by
naming a spokesperson for the group As circumstances permit, such a meeting
will be incorporated into the agenda of a regularly scheduled Board meeting if
the issue cannot be satisfactorily resolved by the Town Manager. Participants
shall be allowed to make a reasonable presentation through the spokesperson
and to express opinions and to ask for pertinent information. Residents
making such presentations are encouraged to prepare written materials for the
Board's review;
The Selectmen's Office will ensure that persons who will be directly affected
by proposed Board discussion or action will be notified of the date and time of
the meeting at which the matter will be discussed or acted upon by the Board;
When the Board is considering matters of citizens concern at a regular
meeting, the public will be allowed to ask questions or make brief statements
relative to the matter under consideration at the discretion of the Chair; and,
The Town Manager and Chair will ensure that all citizen questions and
complaints are answered promptly. Matters requiring the attention of the full
Board shall be included in the agenda of the next regular Board meeting
Section 1. Procedural 1.1  9
