Town of Framingham
Board of Selectmen
Policy on Establishment of Policy, Procedure and Regulations
Issue date: June 17, 1996
Type of policy: New (  x )  Amendment
Effective date: June 24, 1996
Level: Department ( )  Division ( )  Town Wide ( x)
Policy Statement
This statement sets forth the guidelines by which a policy, procedure or regulation established by
the Board of Selectmen for the Town ofFramingham may be created and /or revised. It also sets
forth the responsibility for the maintenance and oversight of said policies.
References
None.
Special Terms
None.
Policy Description
It is recognized that in order to operate effectively as a unit, the Board will be well served by a
system ofpolicies todirectitsdecisions andactions. Apolicy maybeinitiated byamember of
the Board, the Town Manager, a Town employee, or by a citizen of the Town by requesting that
the Chair provide for discussion of the proposed policy in the agenda of a regular meeting of the
Board. The individual initiating the discussion shall provide the Board with awritten draft ofthe
proposed policyfordistribution totheSelectmen. TheBoardmayschedule anyhearing or
Section 1. Procedural 1.2
Page 2
meetingsitdeems necessaryfor discussion. The Boardmay distribute a draftfor commentto
appropriate officials as itdeems necessary, and shall notify ofthe discussion any Town boards,
committees, or employees who may be affected by the policy.
Unless otherwise voted by the Board, the Board shall not vote on a policy at the same meeting at
whichitisfirstintroduced. AvotebythreeoftheBoard'sfivemembers shallberequired forthe
adoption ofa new oramendedBoard policy. A new or revised policy adopted bythe Board shall
take effect immediately, and shall be carried outuntil itisrescinded oramended.
The Town Manager shall be responsible forthe maintenance ofall policies and procedures, for
updating the Policy Manual with new and amended policies, and for ensuring that copies of the
Board'spolicies andprocedures aredistributed tonewlyelectedBoardmembers. Copiesofthe
Policy Manual shall be made available to the public at the Selectmen's Office and the Office of
the Town Clerk.
Section 1. Procedural 1.2  2
