Town of Framingham
Board of Selectmen 
Policy Statement on Litigation
Issue date: August 11, 2009
Type of policy: New (  x )  Amendment ( )
Effective date: August 12, 2009
Level: Department ( )  Division ( )  Town Wide ( x)
Policy Statement
The Board of Selectmen hereby establishes a policy statement on litigation for purposes of
ensuring that the Town is efficiently and effectively represented in any suit brought against or by
the TownandthatTownfunds devotedtolitigationmattersareprudentlyexpended. TheBoard
of Selectmen, through Town Counsel, is solely responsible to prosecute, defend and manage all
aspects of any matters of litigation brought by or against the Town.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Town Counsel and, in conjunction with Town Counsel,
Special Counsel. The full Board ofSelectmen, with advice from the Town Manager and Chief
Financial Officer (CFO),will work in a coordinated fashion with Town Counsel and /or Special
Counsel to ensure that all issues related to litigation are fully vetted and considered in the
decision making process. These may include issues of legal costs such as fees and expenses,
liability for damages and the cost to the Town of obtaining money damages or other remedies to
whichtheTown maybe entitled. TheCFO orBoardofSelectmenwill conferwiththeFinance
Committee regarding legal costs of litigation.
References
Section 1. Procedural 1.6 
General Bylaws, Art. II, Sec. 1.4
General Bylaws, Art. II, Sec. 5.2
General Bylaws, Art. II, Sec. 5
General Bylaws, Art. II, Sec. 10
G.L c. 40, ยง2 
1
Page 2
Case Management
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Town Counsel, oversee the Town Counsel financial
contract and ensure that legal fees are spent wisely and prudently. Review of cases will occur, in
executive session, as needed by Town Counsel or as deemed necessary by the Board of
Selectmen.
In conjunction with Town Counsel, the Board of Selectmen may appoint a Special Counsel for a
suit brought by, for or against the Town when legally appropriate and where it is in their
judgment to do so for the best interests of the Town. The Board of Selectmen, in conjunction
with Town Counsel, shall be responsible for supervising Special Counsel, and controlling and
managing the expenses of Special Counsel. In cases where the Town Counsel has a conflict,
he /she shall have no role in the selection or supervision of Special Counsel. In such cases,
Special Counsel will be supervised by the Board of Selectmen, with the assistance of the Town
Manager and Chief Financial Officer. Such cases will be actively managed by the Board, both in
terms of legal strategy and financial management. Assistance in management from the Town
Manager or the CFO will be requested as needed by the Board. The Board will enter into a
written contract with Special Counsel governing the fee arrangement and terms and scope of the
engagement. The Board will endeavor to enter into fixed -fee based, contracts with Special
Counsel where possible. The Board will also require that any special counsel, with a fixed -fee or
hourly rate contract, submit monthly bills to be consistently delivered on an agreed -upon billing
date. The Board, in conjunction with Town Counsel, is responsible for the oversight of Special
Counsel but may ask the assistance of the Town Manager or the CFO to ensure that these best
practices are enforced.
The Board of Selectmen will also review with Town Counsel, Special Counsel or litigation
counsel assigned by the Town's liability insurer the status of matters in litigation covered by
insurance.
In cases where it is necessary and legally appropriate for the Board of Selectmen to appoint
Special Counsel to handle a case for another Board, Commission, or Department in Town, the
Board of Selectmen shall receive periodic updates from said Special Counsel, either in writing or
by way ofjoint meetings with said Special Counsel and the affected Board, Commission, or
Department or its designee, along with the Town Counsel, as appropriate. In cases handled by
the Town Counsel, the Board of Selectmen also will meet with the affected Board, Commission,
or Department, or its designee, along with the Town Counsel, as appropriate. The Board of
Selectmen at all times will retain the ultimate authority with respect to decisions made in
connection with the handling of such cases by Special Counsel for other Boards, Commission, or
Departments in the Town, after obtaining the input of Special Counsel and the affected Board,
Commission, or Department, and the Town Counsel, as appropriate.
Section 1. Procedural 1.6  2
Page 3
Town Manager, CFO, Finance Committee and Town Meeting
The Board of Selectmen will communicate regularly with the Town Manager and Chief
Financial Officer (CFO) regarding the financial requirements for litigation and the impacts on
the Town budget. The Town Manager, Town Counsel and CFO may be called upon to assist the
Board of Selectmen in:
1. Estimating thecosts andthevalue ofthebenefit totheTown ofprosecuting ordefending
particular matters involving judicial or administrative proceedings that are chargeable to
appropriations available for the purpose.
2. Estimating thecosts andthe value ofthebenefit totheTown ofsuch matters where itis
anticipated that a supplemental appropriation or transfer from the Reserve Fund may be
necessary and appropriate.
3. Advising the Board of estimated costs and expenses for the purpose of managing the
Town's cash flow.
4. Advising the Finance Committee regarding financial status of litigation including
requests for supplemental appropriations or transfers from the Reserve Fund.
The Board of Selectmen may meet with the Finance Committee before the Annual Town
Meeting and the Fall Special Town Meeting to discuss litigation finances in open or executive
session depending on the nature of the matters being discussed and whether or not they fall under
an exceptiontothe Open Meeting Law. The Finance Committee also may initiaterequests for
collaborative discussions with the Board of Selectmen.
As required by Town Bylaws, the Board of Selectmen, through the Town Counsel, shall make an
annual report to the Town of the status of all litigation to which the Town is a party.
Section 1. Procedural 1.6  3
