BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods
  Results
  Conclusions
Background
Methods
  Survey and in-depth interviews
  Data analysis
  Survey
  In-depth interviews
Results
  Survey
  Voluntary participation
    Seeking permission from husbands or community elders to participate in the genetic study
  Comprehension of study purpose
  In-depth interviews
  Voluntary participation
    Seeking permission from one’s husband to participate in the genetic study
  Approval of community elders
  Comprehension of study purpose
Discussion and conclusion
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgements
Author details
References
Page 1
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38
RESEARCH ARTICLE  Open Access
Voluntary participation and comprehension of
informed consent in a genetic epidemiological
study of breast cancer in Nigeria
Patricia A Marshall1*, Clement A Adebamowo2, Adebowale A Adeyemo3, Temidayo O Ogundiran4, Teri Strenski5,
Jie Zhou3 and Charles N Rotimi3
Abstract
Background: Studies on informed consent to medical research conducted in low or middle-income settings have
increased, including empirical investigations of consent to genetic research. We investigated voluntary participation
and comprehension of informed consent among women involved in a genetic epidemiological study on breast
cancer in an urban setting of Nigeria comparing women in the case and control groups.
Methods: Surveys were administered in face-to-face interviews with 215 participants following their enrollment in
the genetic study (106 patients, 109 controls). Audio-taped in-depth interviews were conducted with a sub-sample
of 17 (8%) women who completed the survey.
Results: The majority of all participants reported being told that participation in the genetic study was voluntary
(97%), that they did not feel pressured to participate in the study (99%), and that they could withdraw from the
study (81%). The majority of the breast cancer patients (83%) compared to 58% of women in the control group
reported that the study purpose was to learn about the genetic inheritance of breast cancer (OR 3.44; 95% CI =1.66,
7.14, p value = 0.001). Most participants reported being told about study procedures (95%) and study benefits (98%).
Sixty-eight percent of the patients, compared to 47% of the control group reported being told about study risks
(p-value <0.001). Of the 165 married women, 19% reported asking permission from their husbands to enroll in the
breast cancer study; no one sought permission from local elders. In-depth interviews highlight the use of persuasion
and negotiation between a wife and her husband regarding study participation.
Conclusions: The global expansion of genetic and genomic research highlights our need to understand informed
consent practices for studies in ethnically diverse cultural environments such as Africa. Quantitative and qualitative
empirical investigations of the informed consent process for genetic and genomic research will further our
knowledge of complex issues associated with communication of information, comprehension, decisional authority
and voluntary participation. In the future, the development and testing of innovative strategies to promote
voluntary participation and comprehension of the goals of genomic research will contribute to our understanding
of strategies that enhance the consent process.
Keywords: Informed consent, Genetic epidemiological research, Breast cancer, Nigeria
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:pam20@case.edu"] pam20@case.edu
1Department of Bioethics, School of Medicine, Room TA 227Case Western
Reserve University10900 Euclid Avenue Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4976
Cleveland, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2014 Marshall et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38 
Page 2 of 11
Background
Investigators from multiple disciplines have increased
their efforts to use genomic tools to shed light on the
complex interplay between genetic and non-genetic factors
in disease etiology [1]. The systematic growth of genetic
and genomic research initiatives highlights the need to
understand and address informed consent practices for
genetic studies with diverse populations [2].  Empirical
studies on informed consent practices for biomedical
research in low or middle-income countries have increased
in recent years [3-17] including studies of consent for
genetic research in culturally diverse populations in African
settings [18-27].
In a series of articles, Tekola, Bull, Farsidesm, Newport
Adeyemo, Rotimi, Davey, for example, examined a range
of issues associated for genetic research on podoconiosis
in Ethiopa, including the potential for social stigma on
the process of obtaining consent, and tailoring consent to
enhance its effectiveness for study participants [19-21]. The
process of informed consent for genetic epidemiological
research on hypertension in Nigeria has been studied by
Marshall, Adebamowo, Adeyemo and colleagues [22].
Richards and colleagues examined issues surrounding
consent in a genetic epidemiological study of women
with breast cancer [23].  Marsh and her associates
studied community engagement and informed consent in a
genetic project on severe childhood diseases in Kenya [24].
Tindana, Bull, Amenga-Etego, de Vries and colleagues
have explored the consent process for participation in
the MalariaGEN project, a genomic research study,
implemented in Ghana [25].  In their discussion of
ethical issues raised in human genomics research in
developing countries, de Vries, Bull, Doumbo, Ibrahim
and colleagues draw on experiences of the MalariaGEN
Consortium in developing countries including African
sites [26]. Rotimi and Marshall outline specific challenges
for informed consent to genetic and genomic research in
culturally diverse low-income settings [27].
International and national guidelines for ethical conduct
in research address specific requirements for informed
consent [28-34]. The process of informed consent centers
on voluntary participation and the ability of individuals or
their surrogates to comprehend information about study
goals and risks. Despite the availability of guidelines,
obtaining truly informed consent can be challenging in
actual practice [35-40]. Consent documents may be lengthy
and difficult to understand, especially when they include
sophisticated medical or genetic terms such as haplotype,
placebo and randomization [41-44]. Language barriers and
requirements for signed consent may diminish effective
communication, particularly in areas with low levels of
formal education, high illiteracy rates, or where signatures
are used infrequently in medical affairs [45,46].  Lack of
trust in medical institutions can exacerbate challenges to 
informed consent and some individuals or communities
may also be vulnerable to coercion because of their poverty
or social and political conditions that affect voluntary
participation [47-49]. Additionally, beliefs about individual
autonomy and decision-making capacity are embedded
within cultural and social patterns of family ties and
community obligations [50-54].
In this paper, we report findings from a study examining
factors associated with voluntary participation and
comprehension of the study purpose among women
involved in genetic epidemiological research on breast
cancer in Ibadan, Nigeria, a large metropolitan city.
We compare the responses to surveys among women
with breast cancer to women in the control group
without breast cancer. We anticipated that breast cancer
patients might report higher levels of comprehension of
the elements of informed consent for the genetic study,
compared to women in the control group, because of their
more frequent interactions with the health care system. At
the time of this study, the population of Ibadan was
about 2 million people. Over 90% of Ibadan residents
are Yoruba. The area in Ibadan where participants
were recruited has an active Council of Elders; regularly
scheduled meetings are organized to inform local residents
about ongoing activities, including medical research being
implemented in the community.
Nigeria is an ethnically diverse country with more than
370 tribes. The three dominant tribes are the Yoruba in
the south west, the Igbo in the south east, and the Hausa
in the north. The official language of Nigeria is English
but more than 500 languages are spoken in Nigeria. It is
common for Nigerians to speak local languages in
addition to English. The two primary religions in Nigeria
are Christianity and Islam; Islam represents the dominant
religion of the Hausa in northern Nigeria.
Methods
We surveyed women who were diagnosed with breast
cancer (cases) and women who have never been diagnosed
with breast cancer (controls) enrolled in a genetic
epidemiological study conducted in Ibadan, Nigeria.
This ongoing international collaborative study was designed
to identify high risk alleles for breast cancer among Black
women on two continents-Africa and North America [23].
Participants signed or placed thumbprints on written
consent forms for the genetic study; consent forms were
translated into Yoruba and back-translated into English.
Consent forms were read to and discussed with all partici-
pants by research assistants fluent in English and Yoruba
and trained to conduct the process of informed consent.
Patients were recruited at the Oncology Clinics of the
University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria, while women
in the control group were recruited from a community
adjoining the hospital. Participants were enrolled in the
Page 3
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38 
Page 3 of 11
informed consent study either soon after recruitment into
the genetic epidemiology or at attendance in follow-up
clinics. All participants were women 18 years of age or
older. Verbal informed consent was obtained from all
participants. An Information Sheet explaining the study
was given to all participants. The Information Sheet was
translated into Yoruba and back-translated into English.
Research assistants at the University of Ibadan participated
in a training workshop on obtaining informed consent in a
culturally and linguistically appropriate manner. Research
assistants were fluent in both English and Yoruba.
Informed consent was obtained in either Yoruba or
English, depending upon individuals’ choice and comfort
level with the language.
The research protocol was reviewed and approved by
Institutional Review Boards at Loyola University of Chicago,
Howard University, Case Western Reserve University, and
the University of Ibadan.
Survey and in-depth interviews
Quantitative and qualitative methodologies were employed
in this study. A survey was administered to 215 participants
and in-depth audio-taped interviews were conducted with a
sub-sample of 17 survey respondents (8%).  A table of
random numbers was used to select the subgroup invited
to participate in the in-depth interview.
The development of both the survey instrument and
the in-depth interview guide were based on earlier
research on cultural issues surrounding consent to genetic
research in Nigeria [54].  The survey and in-depth
interview addressed topics associated with the process
of consent including: participants’  recall of being told
about study goals, procedures, benefits and risks;
comprehension of study purpose, voluntary participation,
reasons for participating in the study, and permission of
husbands or community elders in decisions to join the
genetic study. The in-depth interview guides included 15
questions with probes; these questions followed the topics
addressed in the survey but were designed to allow further
discussion of the survey items.
The survey instrument and in-depth interview guide
were translated into Yoruba and back-translated into
English. Both instruments were pre-tested in Nigeria
to ensure their accuracy in assessing participants’
understanding of issues surrounding informed consent
and decision making regarding participation in the
genetic epidemiological study of breast cancer. The
survey was first pre-tested with research assistants,
with each assistant taking turns being the interviewer and
the interviewee. The survey was then pre-tested with three
women representative of the study population.
The survey and in-depth interviews were conducted in
face-to-face-interviews that took place in health clinics.
Research assistants conducted the survey and in-depth 
interviews in Yoruba or English, depending upon the
participant’s choice. Participants were compensated for
transportation and lost daily wages and provided with a
small gift of vitamins. Surveys were administered in
approximately thirty minutes. In-depth interviews lasted
approximately forty-five minutes to one hour.
The survey interview was conducted after women
enrolled in the genetics of breast cancer study. The
length of time between our survey and consent for
the genetic study ranged from the same day to three
weeks. In-depth interviews were conducted approximately
two months after individuals’ completed the survey.
Data analysis
Survey
Five questions were used to evaluate voluntary participa-
tion: 1) participants’  report of whether or not they were
told that participation in the genetic study was voluntary;
2) if participants’ felt pressured to participate; and 3) if par-
ticipants’ understood they could withdraw from the study;
4) if married, did participants ask permission to participate
in the genetic study from their husband; and 5) if permis-
sion to participate in the genetic study was sought from
local community elders. Five measures of comprehension
of informed consent are reported. Survey participants were
asked if, during the consent discussion, they were told
about the study purpose, procedures, benefits, and risks
associated with participation. Participants were also asked,
“What were you told about the purpose of the study?”
Responses to this question were recorded verbatim by
trained research assistants conducting the interviews.
Discrete codes were developed using traditional methods
for text analysis [55-57]. Discrepancies in the application of
code categories were resolved in consultation with an
investigator not directly involved in the coding. In our
analysis, we developed two codes to represent responses to
the question on the purpose of the study: 1) to learn about
genetic inheritance of breast cancer; and 2) to learn about
the prevention and treatment of breast cancer. We then
created a dichotomous code (“yes” or “no”) to indicate
whether or not participants stated that the purpose of the
study was to learn about genetic inheritance of breast
cancer. Women whose responses were included in the
category “genetic inheritance of disease” made specific
reference to genetic inheritance by stating that the
study purpose was to “learn how breast cancer is
passed down from mother to daughter”,  “inherited in
the family”, or “to find out if the disease [breast cancer] is
in the blood”.
Covariates included respondents’  age, education,
marital status, ability to read the consent form, past
participation in research, and the time interval between
consent to the genetic study and the interview date for
this study.
Page 4
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38 
Page 4 of 11
Data reliability was ensured through double entry
verification. Survey data were entered into MS Access
(Version 11, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, Washington).
Data management and analysis was done using uni-
variate and multivariable techniques (SAS Version 8.1,
SAS Institute, Cary, NC). We compared responses using
Wilcoxon rank-sum tests for continuous variables and
χ2 for categorical variables. Age-adjusted logistic regression
was used to identify significant variables at p-value
of < 0.10. These were then used in multivariate logistic
regression models to identify significant predictors of
outcomes at a p-value of < 0.05 or those that changed the
effect estimate by more than 10%.  We report p-values,
odds ratios, and 95% confidence intervals.
In-depth interviews
Audio-tapes from in-depth interviews were transcribed
and translated into English when necessary. Identifying
names did not appear in the transcriptions. Transcriptions
were imported into Atlas-ti,  a computer program for
managing text data [58]. Standard procedures for analyzing
qualitative data were employed [59,60]. Thematic domains
were identified through a process of intense review of
transcript data; codes for conceptual categories were
developed. Coding discrepancies were resolved in discussion
with the investigative team.
Results
Survey
Table 1 describes the participants’  demographic charac-
teristics. Women with breast cancer were, on average,
eight years older than controls. Most women reported
being married (76.7%, 165/215). More than half (56.7%,
122/215) of all participants reported a high school
education or higher. Women in the control group were
more likely to have more than a high school education
compared to breast cancer cases (p-value < .0001). Most
participants (78.1%,  168/215) reported being able to
read the consent forms and no differences were
observed in ability to read the consent form between
cases and control subjects. As expected, educational
level significantly predicted ability to read the consent
form; the multivariate OR comparing those with a high
school education or more with those who had less than
high school education was 119, 95% CI = 15.0, 939;
p-value < 0.001. Only 4% (8/215) of the women reported
past participation in medical research. The time interval
between consent to the genetic study and our interview
was longer for cases (4.5 + 36.1 days) than for controls
(0.3 + 3.0 days).
Voluntary participation
The majority of women (97%,  212/215) reported
being told that participation in the genetic study was 
Table 1 Demographic characteristics of participants
Controls Cases Total
N = 109 % N = 106 % N = 215
Education*
< High School  15 13.8  47 44.1  62 28.8
High School  10  9.2  21 19.8  31 14.4
> High School  84 77.1  38 35.9 122 56.7
Age (years)**  37.2 + 9.3  45.3 + 10.8  41.2 + 10.9
Marital status
Non-married  27 24.8  23 21.7  50 23.3
Married  82 75.2  83 78.3 165 76.7
Able to read consent form
Yes  99 90.8  69 65.1 168 78.1
No  10  9.2  39 34.9  47 21.9
Past research participation
Yes  4  3.7  4  3.8  8  3.7
No  105 96.3  102 96.2 207 96.3
Time interval (days) between
consent to genetic study and
survey** 
0.3 + 3.0  4.5 + 36.1  2.4 + 25.5
*p-value < .0001.
**Mean/Standard Deviation.
voluntary and that they did not feel pressured to
participate in the genetic study (99%,  210/215).
Seventy-nine percent (84/106) of the cases and 83%
(90/109) of the controls reported being told they could
withdraw from the study at any time; this difference was
not statistically significant.
Seeking permission from husbands or community elders to
participate in the genetic study
Nineteen percent (31/165) of the married women reported
they sought permission from their husband before joining
the genetic study on breast cancer. In multivariate analysis
adjusted for age and educational status, women in the
control group were more likely than cases to ask for
their husband’s permission (OR = 0.37; 95% CI - 0.15,
0.93, p-value = 0.04);  and women with less education
were more likely to ask their husband’s permission.
None of the respondents reported seeking permission
from community elders to participate in the genetics
of breast cancer study.
Comprehension of study purpose
All participants reported being told the purpose of the
study during the informed consent discussion. When
asked to describe the goal of the study, 70% (151/215)
said the purpose was to learn about genetic inheritance
of breast cancer and 30% (64/215) said the purpose was
to learn about the prevention and treatment of breast
Page 5
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38 
Page 5 of 11
cancer. A dichotomous code was created to indicate
whether or not participants reported that the study
purpose was to learn about genetic inheritance of breast
cancer. Table 2 reflects the analysis of the dichotomous
coding (“yes” or “no”) indicating whether or not the
participant reported that the purpose of the study was to
learn about genetic inheritance; in multivariate analysis
adjusted for age, education and time interval between
the genetic study and consent study, cases were more
likely than controls to say that the study was to learn
about genetic inheritance of breast cancer (OR 3.44; 95%
CI = 1.66, 7.14 p-value = 0.001).
The majority of the participants (98%,  210/215)
reported being told the benefits of the study. The majority
of respondents (95%,  205/215) reported they were told
about study procedures. In contrast, only 57% (123/215)
of the respondents reported being told about the risks of
participating in the study; 11% (24/215) said they were not
told and 32% (68/215) indicated they could not recall.
Significant differences were observed between cases and
controls (p-value <0.001);  68% (72/106) of the cases
compared to 47% (51/109) of the controls said they were
told about risks associated with the study.
In-depth interviews
In-depth interviews were conducted with 17 participants
(10 cases and 7 controls).  The cases were, on average,
9 years older than the controls. Educational background
was comparable between cases and controls. Overall, 4
women completed primary school, 6 women completed
high school, and 7 had college degrees. Fourteen were
married. All women were able to read the consent form.
None had participated in medical research in the past.
Results of analysis are described for: 1) beliefs about the
meaning of voluntary participation; 2) beliefs about the
need for seek permission from a husbands or community
elders to participate in the study, and 3) comprehension of
the purpose of the genetics of breast cancer study. Table 3
illustrates these domains of analysis with quotations 
from the women interviewed; quotations to illustrate
the domains of “voluntary participation” and seeking
permission from others” are combined in the table.
Voluntary participation
Results of analysis indicate two key dimensions of what it
means to “participate voluntarily”. First, in their descriptions
of the meaning of “voluntary participation”, women called
attention to the importance of having the freedom to choose
whether or not to join the study. Second, most women
noted their decision to participate in the study was not
forced or compulsory.
Thus, discussions with the women about the notion of
voluntariness suggest a dialectical relationship between
self-determination—on one hand, and the lack of coercion
or force—on the other hand. The ability to make one’s own
decision must be coupled with the absence of coercion in
order for participation to be truly voluntary. Illustrating the
overriding importance of free will and individual choice in
the absence of coercion, a breast cancer patient said, “To
have the free will –you are not compelled to do it; you have
your option”. When asked “What does it mean to partici-
pate voluntarily, another patient replied “I was not forced
to participate. It was from my mind that I decided to
participate. [It means] doing something from ones heart
[and] not necessarily being told to do so”.
An important aspect of voluntary participation in
research is the capacity to withdraw from an ongoing
study. From this perspective, the notion of voluntariness
in relation to scientific research has a temporal
dimension including the possibility of changing one’s mind.
Volunteering for a study implies a dynamic engagement
with the researchers, an engagement that may involve a
decision to withdraw after initially agreeing to participate
in a project. Several women mentioned this aspect of
voluntariness. For example, when asked what she
understood by voluntary participation, a woman in the
control group noted, “I am not forced to take part in this
study and as far as I am concerned I can, at any stage
exclude myself [from] any further involvement”.
Table 2 Comprehension of study purpose: “to learn
about genetic inheritance”
Purpose: to learn Controls Cases Total
genetic inheritance
of breast cancer 
N = 109 % N = 106 % N = 215 %
Yes  63  57.8  88  83.0  151 70.2
No  46  42.2  18  17.0  64  29.8
Age adj. OR  3.83
95% CI  1.93, 7.61
MV* OR  3.44
95% CI  1.66, 7.14
*Adjusted for age, education, time interval between the original study and
consent study. 
Seeking permission from one’s husband to participate in
the genetic study
Results of analysis of in-depth interviews revealed three
dominant themes concerning the husband’s role in
participants’  decision to join the genetics of breast
cancer research: first, the significance of individual
autonomy; second, recognition of the cultural value
placed on respect for the authority and status of the
husband; and third, the importance of discussion and
negotiation in the decision-making process.
Twelve of the 17 women interviewed emphasized their
ability to make decisions for themselves, as indicated in
the exchange below:
Page 6
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38 
Page 6 of 11
Table 3 Thematic domains: voluntary participation and seeking permission from others, and comprehension of
study purpose
Voluntary participation and seeking
permission from others 
“Voluntary participation is when you decide on your own, not that you want to take permission
from somebody before you participate. If you feel like participating and you participate, not that
you are being forced to do it.” Breast Cancer Patient
“What I understand by this is that God gave us freedom of choice…so I can make a choice by
myself.” Breast Cancer Patient
“It [joining a study] is a choice nobody is forced [to make] because each participant has a right to
withdraw at any point and time.” Control Group, Woman from Community
“When you give your consent…you have your own will, from your mind you are interested. But
an elder giving consent for you, it is just like the village we have mentioned…you are under
compulsion to do it because the Baale said we must do it and everybody must do it. It is
different from, ‘I want to do it,’ and I participated. The first one is out of free will and the other
one is out of compulsion.” Control Group, Woman from Community
Comprehension of the purpose of the
genetics of breast cancer study 
“[Purpose is to] know whether the breast cancer disease has a genetic origin…to know whether
it is a genetic problem.” Breast Cancer Patient
“The researcher told us that it is through [the] blood test that we can know if we have problem
with the gene in the body.” Control Group, Woman from Community
“Through our genes a child can inherit this disease [breast cancer] from us. You [researcher] will
take our blood to know if we have a problem in our body. They want to find out about the gene
that relates to my disease.” Breast Cancer Patient
“We all know that the body is made up of cells and each human being has her own peculiar kind
of a cell formation and we believe that if a group of people have the same gene…they have
similar problems…And this [breast cancer] gene varies from one family to another. So one will
be able to know how one can benefit as [an] individual, as family and then as a community.”
Control Group, Woman from Community
Patient: When we were told [about] this research,
I told my husband and he was happy with it.
Interviewer: What if your husband disapproves of the
study or anybody discourages you not to participate,
will you still participate?.
Patient: The opinion of the husband shouldn’t disturb
that of the wife because [she] has her own life to live.
Interviewer: What is your husband’s opinion for you
to participate in this study?.
Patient: He did not force me to participate or not to
participate. He said I should go ahead and do it.
Indicative of the strength of personal autonomy and
individual free will in relation to participation in the
genetic research, five of the women said that even if
their husband disapproved of their participation, they
would go ahead and join the study. Although individual
freedom of choice was the dominant theme expressed by
the women interviewed, five of the 17 women said they
would not join the study if their husband disapproved.
Interviews highlighted the importance of discussing
and negotiating the process of decision making with
husbands. Specifically, the interviews call attention to
the use of persuasion to influence their husbands’  or
others’  opinions about the study and their participation 
in it. When asked, “What if…your husband disapproves
it, will you still participate”, a woman said, “I will appeal
to him and I know he will allow me to participate”. In
response to the question about whose opinion is most
important to consider when deciding to join a study,
another woman replied, “My own opinion”.  And when
asked what she would do if her husband disapproved,
she replied, “I will convince [him] and I will go ahead
and do it”. Similarly, when asked if she would be willing
to participate if her husband or other family members
disapproved of the study, a participant indicated she
would, “[T] ry to convince them if I know the study is
going to benefit me. Maybe they did not see it the way I
saw it”.
The following exchange illustrates a participant’s views
about normative expectations concerning a husband’s role
in Nigerian culture and how this is articulated in the
context of decision making regarding study participation:
Patient: According to Nigerian culture before you do
anything you have to gain the consent of your husband.
I just had to inform him and he really helped me.
Interviewer: What was his opinion?.
Patient: He said, pertaining to myself, that the health
talk concerning breast cancer as a woman is okay for
me. That if I wanted to go I could go there, no
problem was attached to it.
Page 7
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38 
Page 7 of 11
Interviewer: Let me ask you, assuming your husband
disapproved of it?
Patient: Actually, I had made up my mind to go; I just
wanted to gain his consent.
Approval of community elders
When asked about their views concerning the role of
elders in approving study participation, the women
interviewed reported that there might be rural and urban
differences regarding the importance of community elders
in the implementation of research. One of the women, for
example, made the following observation:
The thing about [a rural] community is to take
permission from the elders. Even if the villagers agree
[to participate], there must be a word from the elders…
maybe because of the way they live, you know, they
believe there must be a word from their elders if there is
going to be a stranger coming to the village. Then the
Baale or the Chief would [say] ‘Okay, you can go
ahead,’  …I don’t think it is possible to go into a village
and carry out a study without the approval of the
community leader.
When asked if she thought that people would be able
to participate in a study if the elders disapproved, this
respondent replied, “Assuming I am living in the village,
I will have the full mentality of the village…if the Baale
says no, there is nothing we can do because we see
Baale as the small god, you know, when he says ‘No,’  I
will have that mentality in me that nobody can do it
[participate] because anybody that participates would be
like an outcast to the entire village”.
Comprehension of study purpose
Results of analysis indicated that the women interviewed
understood the study purpose was to learn about the
role of genetics in breast cancer. A woman in the control
group said, “They [the researchers] said they want to see
[if] maybe cancer is an inherited disease or if something
else [is] causing the disease”. In their descriptions of the
study purpose, several women included both genetic
inheritance of breast cancer and the prevention of breast
cancer. For example, a woman with breast cancer noted
that, “The purpose is to enlighten us more about breast
cancer and [the] ways by which we can prevent it and
how to correct it if there is any. They are trying to find
out if the gene in our body has cancer”. Another woman
called attention to an underlying long term goal of the
study which would contribute to the prevention of
breast cancer, “The purpose is that if one had already
passed through the [blood] test you asked us to partake
in, it is possible for you to know…if it [the disease] is a
hereditary one, so that it will not continue to spread”.
Combining both genetic inheritance and prevention in 
their descriptions of the goal of the breast cancer study
could reflect the conversational nature of the interview.
It may also be a function of the participants’  concern
about the prevention of breast cancer generally. It could
also reflect the way in which the consent discussion for
the genetic study was presented to the women. One
rationale for the genetic epidemiology of breast cancer
research is to prevent other women from getting the
disease in future. Indeed, the consent form stated
that participating in this research will help doctors
understand the causes of breast cancer and may help
prevent the disease in other women.
The women interviewed highlighted concerns about
their children and the importance of participating in the
study because of how genetic inheritance—in this case,
for breast cancer—might influence the health of their
children. A breast cancer patient said, “I was told that
the researcher would be able to learn the cause of cancer
in our body and to learn if it was a hereditary disease
from our parents so that [we] would not pass it on to
our children”. A woman in the control group reported,
“The reason for this research…is to find out about [the]
gene in our body which can affect our children in the
future”. Another woman from the control group said, “I
was told that genetic testing helps to know [about]
the disease in one’s body and if they detect any disease in
one’s body, we can consult a medical practitioner…
because it might be a hereditary disease. Also, genetic
testing helps…because this disease can be passed to
our own children through our genes”.
Discussion and conclusion
In this study of consent to genetic epidemiological
research on breast cancer in the urban center of Ibadan,
Nigeria, the majority of all participants (70%) reported
that the study purpose was to learn about genetics and
breast cancer. However, breast cancer patients (83%)
were more likely than women in the control group
(58%) to report that the purpose of the study concerned
the genetic inheritance of breast cancer. The overall high
level of comprehension among all participants about the
genetic purpose of the study could reflect the skill of
research staff in explaining study goals during the
consent discussion for the genetic research. It could also
reflect the relatively high level of education among the
participants. The higher level of comprehension among
the women with breast cancer about the study purpose,
compared to women in the control group, could be
attributed to their greater interaction with the health
system because of their cancer. Women being treated
for breast cancer are asked to complete a number of
forms during clinical interactions, including consent forms
for treatment interventions. This could have increased
their attentiveness to the consent process for research
Page 8
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38 
Page 8 of 11
participation in the genetic study. In addition, the
diagnosis of cancer may sharply focus the mind of
the breast cancer cases on every aspect of their interaction
with the health care team, including the research staff, to
a higher degree than individuals who are enrolled as
controls in the community. This higher level of attention
by breast cancer cases may be associated with greater
attention to detail and improved comprehension. The
breast cancer patients may also ask for more clarifications
and ask more questions but we did not examine these
issues in this study.
In contrast to findings in this study, results from
analysis of data in our study of consent to genetic
epidemiological studies of hypertension conducted in
metropolitan Chicago in the U.S. and in the rural
town of Igbo-Ora, Nigeria, show that only about half
of respondents at both sites reported the study purpose
was to learn more about the genetic inheritance of
hypertension [22].  Differences in comprehension of
study purpose between participants in the breast cancer
study and the hypertension study may reflect the symbolic
power attributed to a disease such as cancer, especially
among the women with breast cancer in our study.
Breast cancer generally evokes greater concern among
women everywhere than illnesses perceived as less
threatening such as hypertension, and this could impact
comprehension of the study purpose during the consent
discussion. Hypertension is more common than breast
cancer and thus, more people have personal experi-
ence with hypertension or perhaps know others with
hypertension. Finally, hypertension is a chronic condition
that is treatable with medicines or changes in diet or
exercise habits while breast cancer requires more
invasive interventions such as surgery, chemotherapy
or radiation and the outcomes of treatment may not
be favorable in the long-term.
Nearly all of the women in this study recalled being
told participation was voluntary and that they did not
feel pressured to participate. In-depth interviews reveal
two important dimensions of participants’ understanding
of “voluntariness”.  First, women addressed the need
for self-determination—in order for participation to
be voluntary, a person must be able to make their
own decision about joining a study. Second, women
emphasized that a decision could not be coerced or
forced by someone else. From this perspective, the
act of voluntary participation requires both individual
choice and the absence of coercion.
The concepts of individual autonomy and self-deter-
mination are foundational in the western ethical practice
of informed consent. Yet, individuals everywhere may
discuss medical issues, including participation in sci-
entific research, with husbands, family members or
others who are important to them. Our survey results 
indicate that only one-fifth of the married participants
sought permission from their husbands to join the
genetic study. In contrast, findings from our study on
consent to the genetics of hypertension research in
the town of Igbo-Ora show that nearly half of the
married women reported they sought permission from
their husbands [22]. In both of these studies, the survey
format asked participants to respond “yes” or “no” to the
question, “Did you seek permission to participate in the
study from your husband?” Because the survey was not
designed to evoke explanations about the meaning of
seeking permission to join the study, we are cautious
about over-interpreting participants’  reports of “seeking
permission” from husbands.
Acquiescence to the husband’s authority in decisions
about research participation does not represent normative
behavior either in the urban city of Ibadan or the rural
setting of Igbo-Ora where we conducted our research.
Indicative of the lack of a single normative expectation
about husbands’  permission for research participation is
the variability of the responses at both sites. In other
words, not all rural married women reported seeking their
husband’s permission and not all urban women reported
they did not need to seek their husband’s permission to
join the study. Nevertheless, findings from our breast
cancer study, compared to the hypertension study, suggest
an urban-rural trend. Moreover, if this study has been
conducted with Hausa women who were practicing
Muslims living in rural northern Nigeria, they may be more
likely to seek husbands’ approval to participate in a study
because of the possibility for more conservative views about
the hierarchy of decisional authority and its implications
for the relationship between wives and husbands.
In-depth interviews with participants in the breast
cancer study call attention to the nuanced and complex
negotiations in the process of decision making between
a wife and her husband. We believe that “seeking
permission from a husband” to participate in research
represents a more dynamic and fluid process of discussing
information about a research project, not a simple request
to be “allowed” to participate.
Our findings suggest that in the urban setting of
Ibadan, Nigeria, decisions concerning participation in
genetic epidemiological research on breast cancer did
not involve input from community elders. It is important
to note that in the community where the study took
place there is a well-established council of elders; regularly
scheduled public meetings are held with community
members to discuss activities, events, and issues of
concern. Our survey asked participants to reply “yes”
or “no” to the question, “Did you ask permission of a
community elder to join the study?” It could be that
women did not seek permission from local elders for
practical reasons associated with study recruitment.
Page 9
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38 
Page 9 of 11
Women may also have reported not seeking permission for
study participation from a community elder because they
did not believe that the study represented an investigation
that might call for consultation with elders.
Although the approval of elders for research participation
was not a concern for participants in our study, inter-
national guidelines for biomedical research recognize
that, in some areas, investigators may need to consult
with community leaders or elders before implement-
ing research projects [30,32]. The views of community
leaders may be communicated to local populations
through accepted social venues such as council meetings or
public events; it is in this public arena where their opinions
are likely to influence someone’s decision to join a study.
Findings from our study suggest that participants in
the genetic epidemiological study of breast cancer in
Ibadan reported a high level of comprehension of study
goals and voluntary participation. However, these findings
need to be treated cautiously; as Hollowell and her
colleagues and others have demonstrated, even highly
educated individuals may have difficulty understanding
information communicated during the process of consent,
and specifically, the differences between research and
clinical practice [61-63]. This has particular relevance for
the breast cancer patients who participated in our study.
There are several limitations of this study. First, findings
may not be generalizable to other African sites. The cul-
tural and social context of the site where genetic research
is conducted will vary depending upon local traditions,
geographic location, and the goals and procedures of the
genetic study itself. For example, our study focused on
informed consent to genetic epidemiological research on
breast cancer in the urban center of Ibadan, Nigeria. By
comparison, a study on informed consent for biobanking
of DNA samples conducted in a Xhosa community in
rural South Africa may result in different findings.
Second, the translation of the instruments from English to
Yoruba for Nigeria represents another possible limitation.
However, a process of back-translation was implemented
and all field staff were fluent in English and Yoruba and
trained to conduct the survey and in-depth interviews.
Third, in our descriptive study, we did not attempt to
assess participants’  knowledge of the difference between
research and clinical care. Thus, we do not know the
extent to which the patients with breast cancer who
participated in the study differentiated between consent
for clinical care or research.
Our study contributes to the literature on voluntary
participation and comprehension of informed consent to
genetic research conducted in African settings. The
importance of both quantitative and qualitative empirical
research on applications of requirements for informed
consent to genetic studies will increase as genetic and gen-
omic investigations continue to expand in Africa [64,65]. 
Currently, for example, genomic research on a range of
topics is being implemented through the H3Africa (Human
Heredity and Health in Africa) initiative; the goal of H3Af-
rica, supported with funds from the Wellcome Trust and
the National Institutes of Health, is to build capacity for
genome science on the continent of Africa [65].
The fundamental goal of consent to research-informed
and voluntary participation—applies to all medical
and behavioral studies, including genetic investigations.
Nevertheless, the nature and purpose of particular
scientific studies and their associated risks and benefits vary
in complexity and this can influence the process of commu-
nicating information during the consent conversation. In
some genetic and genomic research, for example, the cre-
ation of cell lines, ownership of donated DNA samples and
data sharing are key features in the design and implementa-
tion of the study. The role of the individual in research,
whether as someone with disease who has been recruited
as a case participant, or someone proven not to have the
disease of interest and therefore enrolled as a control, may
also affect engagement with the processes of research in a
way that may affect comprehension of consent. A breast
cancer patient pays more attention to information being
provided about breast cancer than a control does. The level
of investment in the information is markedly different.
Future empirical investigations on the process of informed
consent will further our knowledge of comprehension and
voluntary participation in the context of genetic and
genomic research involving complicated issues that have
implications for individuals and their communities.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
PM, CR, CA, and AA contributed to the study design, data analysis and
interpretation, and manuscript preparation. TO was responsible for data
collection and assisted in manuscript development. TS assisted in the
qualitative analysis of the in-depth interview transcripts. JZ conducted data
analysis of the survey. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by funding from NIH/National Human Genome
Research Institute (PI: P. Marshall, 2 R01 HG002207-04), the National Center
on Minority Health and Health Disparity (NCMHD), the National Center for
Research Resources (NCRR), the Center for Genetic Research Ethics and Law,
Case Western Reserve University (PI: P. Marshall, NIH/National Human Gen-
ome Research Institute, P50-HG-03390). We thank Richard Cooper and Elaine
Prewitt for their support in research design and data analysis.
Author details
1Department of Bioethics, School of Medicine, Room TA 227Case Western
Reserve University10900 Euclid Avenue Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4976
Cleveland, USA. 2Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Institute of
Human Virology and Greenebaum Cancer Center of the University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore Howard Hall Suite 200, 660 W.
Redwood Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. 3Center for Research on
Genomics and Global Health, National Institutes of Health, Building 12A,
Room 4047, 12 South Dr, MSC 5635, Bethesda, MD, 20892-5635, USA.
4Division of Oncology, Department of Surgery, University College Hospital,
Ibadan, Nigeria. 5Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 750
N Lake Shore Dr, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
Page 10
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38 
Page 10 of 11
Received: 1 August 2013 Accepted: 1 May 2014
Published: 13 May 2014
References
1.  Malaria Genomic Epidemiology Network: A global network for
investigating the genomic epidemiology of malaria. Nature 2008,
11(456):732–737.
2.  Chokshi DA, Kwiatkowski DP: Ethical challenges of genomic epidemiology
in developing countries. Genomics Soc Policy 2005, 1:1–15.
3.  Molyneux CS, Wassenaar DR, Peshu N, Marsh K: ‘Even if they ask you to
stand by a tree all day, you will have to do it (laughter…!:) Community
voices on the notion and practice of informed consent for biomedical
research in developing countries. Soc Sci Med 2005, 61:443–454.
4.  Chaisson LH, Kass NE, Chengeta B, Mathebula U, Samandari T: Repeated
assessments of informed consent comprehension among HIV-infected
participants of a three-year clinical trial in Botswana. PLoS One 2011,
6(10):e22696.
5.  Sabik L, Pace CA, Forster-Gertner HP, Wendler D, Bebchuk JD, Tavel JA,
McNay LA, Killen J, Emanuel EJ, Grady C: Informed consent: practices and
views of investigators in a multinational clinical trial. IRB: Ethics & Hum Res
2005, 27(5):13–18.
6.  Pace C, Emanuel E, Chuenyam T, Duncombe C, Bebhuk JD, Wendler D,
Tavel JA, McNay LA, Phanuphak P, Forster HP, Grady C: The quality of
informed consent for a clinical research study in Thailand. IRB: Ethics and
Hum Res 2005, 27(Suppl 1):9–17.
7.  Pace C, Talisuma A, Wendler D, Faustin M, Wabwire-Mangen F, Bakyaita N,
Okira E, Garrett-Mayer ES, Emanuel E, Grady C: Quality of parental consent
in a Ugandan malaria study. Am J Public Health 2005,
95(Suppl 7):1184–1189.
8.  Hyder AA, Wali SA: Informed consent and collaborative research:
perspectives from the developing world. Dev World Bioeth 2006, 1:33–40.
9.  Okello G, Jones C, Bonareri M, Ndegwa SN, Mcharo C, Kengo J, Kinyua K,
Dubeck MM, Halliday K, Jukes MCH, Molyneux S, Brooker SJ: Challenges for
consent and community engagement in the conduct of cluster
randomized trial among school children in low income settings:
experiences from Kenya. BioMed Centeral Trials 2013, 14:142.
10. Molyneux CS, Peshu N, Marsh K: Understanding of informed consent in a
low-income setting: three case studies from the Kenyan Coast. Soc Sci
Med 2004, 59(12):2547.
11. Molyneux CS, Peshu N, Marsh K: Trust and informed consent: insights
from community members on the Kenyan coast. Soc Sci Med 2005, 61
(7):1463–1473.
12. Gikonyo C, Bejon P, Marsh V, Molyneux S: Taking social relationships
seriously: lessons learned from the informed consent practices of a
vaccine trial on the Kenyan Coast. Soc Sci Med 2008, 67(5):708–720.
13. Molyneux S, Gikonyo C, Marsh V, Bejon P: Incorporating a quiz into
informed consent processes: qualitative study of participants’ reactions.
Malar J 2007, 6:145.
14. Adams V, Miller S, Craig S, Samen A, Nyima S, Droyoung L, Varner M: The
challenge of cross-cultural clinical trials research: case report from the
Tibetan Autonomous Region, People’s Republic of China. Med Anthropol
Q 2005, 19(3):267–289.
15. Boga M, Davies A, Kamuya D, Kinyanjui SM, Kivaya E, Kombe F, Lang T,
Marsh V, Mbete B, Mlamba A, Molyneux S, Mulupi S, Mwalukore S:
Strengthening the informed consent process in international health
research through community engagement: The KEMRI-Wellcome Trust
Research Programme Experience. PLoS Med 2011, 8(9):e1001089.
16. Osamor PE, Kass N: Decision-making and motivation to participate in
biomedical research in southwest Nigeria. Dev World Bioeth 2012,
12(2):87–95.
17. Angwenyi V, Kamuya D, Mwachiro D, Marsh V, Njuguna P, Molyneux S:
Working with Community Health Workers as ‘volunteers’ in a vaccine
trial: practical and ethical experiences and implications. Dev World Bioeth
2013, 13(1):38–47.
18. Appiah-Poku J, Newton S, Kass N: Participants’ perceptions of research
benefits in an African genetic epidemiology study. Dev World Bioeth 2011,
11(3):128–135.
19. Tekola F, Bull S, Farsides B, Newport MJ, Adeyemo A, Rotimi CN, Davey G:
Impact of social stigma on the process of obtaining informed consent
for genetic research on podoconiosis: a qualitative study. BMC Med Ethics
2009, 10:13. 
20. Tekola R, Bull SJ, Farsides B, Newport MJ, Adeyemo A, Rotimi CN, Davey G:
Tailoring consent to context: designing an appropriate consent process
of a biomedical study in a low income setting. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2009,
21:e482.
21. Bull S, Farsides B, Tekola AF: Tailoring information provision and consent
process to research contexts: the value of rapid assessments. J Empir Res
Hum Res Ethics 2012, 7:37–52.
22. Marshall PA, Adebamowo CA, Adeyemo AA, Ogundiran TO, Vekich M,
Strenski T, Zhou J, Prewitt TE, Cooper RS, Rotimi CN: Voluntary
participation and informed consent to international genetic research.
Am J Public Health 2006, 96(11):1989–1995.
23. Richards MPM, Ponder M, Pharoah P, Everest S, Mackay J: Issues of consent
and feedback in a genetic epidemiological study of women with breast
cancer. J Med Ethics 2003, 29(2):93–96.
24. Marsh VM, Kamuya DM, Mlamba AM, Williams TN, Molyneux SS:
Experiences with community engagement and informed consent in a
genetic cohort study of severe childhood diseases in Kenya. BMC Med
Ethic 2010, 15(11):13.
25. Tindana P, Bull S, Amenga-Etego L, De Vries J, Aborigo R, Koram K, Kwiat-
kowski D, Parker M: Seeking consent to genetic and genomic research in
a rural Ghanaian setting: a qualitative study of the MalariaGEN experi-
ence. BMC Med Ethic 2012, 2:13–15.
26. De Vries J, Bull SJ, Doumbo O, Ibrahim M, Mercereau-Puijalon O,
Kwiatkowski D, Parker M: Ethical issues in human genomics research in
developing countries. BMC Med Ethics 2011, 18:12–15.
27. Rotimi CN, Marshall PA: Tailoring the process of informed consent in
genetic and genomic research. Genome Med 2010, 24:20.
28. Emanuel E, Wendler D, Killen J, Grady C: What makes clinical research in
developing countries ethical? The benchmarks of ethical research.
J Infect Dis 2004, 189:932–937.
29. World Medical Association: Declaration of Helsinki: Ethical Principles for
Medical Research Involving Human Subjects. In: Amended by the WMA
General Assembly; 2013.
30. Nuffield Council on Bioethic: The Ethics of Research Related to Healthcare in
Developing Countries. London: Nuffield Council on Bioethics; 2002.
31. Nuffield Council on Bioethics: he Ethics of Research Related to Healthcare in
Developing Countries; Follow-Up Discussion. London: Nuffield Council
Bioethics; 2005.
32. Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS):
International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human
Subjects. Geneva, Switzerland: Council for International Organizations of
Medical Sciences; 2002.
33. Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS):
International Guidelines for Ethical Review of Epidemiological Studies. Geneva:
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences; 1991,
draft rev; 2006.
34. Fadare JO, Porteri C: Informed consent in human subject research: a
comparison of current international and Nigerian guidelines. J Empir Res
Hum Res Ethics 2010, 5(1):67–73.
35. Marshall P: Ethical Issues in Research Design and Informed Consent to
Biomedical and Social Research in Resource Poor Settings. Geneva: World
Health Organization, Special Topics in Social, Economic, and Behavioral
Research Series of Programme for Research and Training in Tropical
Diseases (TDR); 2007.
36. Bhutta Z: Beyond informed consent. Bull World Org 2004, 82(10):771–777.
37. Kass N, Maman S, Atkinson J: Motivations, understanding and
voluntariness in international randomized trials. IRB: Ethics and Hum Res
2005, 27(6):1–8.
38. DeCosta A, D’Souza N, Krishnan S, Chhabra MS, Shihaam I, Goswami K:
Community based trials and informed consent in rural north India. J of
Med Ethics 2004, 30:318–323.
39. Jegede AS: Understanding informed consent for participation in
international health research. Dev World Bioeth 2009, 9(2):81–87.
40. Bull S, Lindegger GC: Ensuring consent to research is voluntary: how far
do we need to go? Am J Bioeth 2011, 11(8):27–29.
41. Rivera R, Borasky D, Rivera R, Borasky D, Rice R, Carayon F, Wong E: An
international researchers’ perspective. Am J Public Health 2007,
97(1):25–29.
42. Woodsong C, Karim QA: A model designed to enhance informed consent:
experiences from the HIV Prevention Trials Network. Am J Public Health
2005, 95:412–419.
Page 11
Marshall et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:38
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/38 
Page 11 of 11
43. Kass NE, Chaisson L, Taylor HA, Lohse J: Length and complexity of US and
international HIV consent forms from federal HIV network trials. J Gen
Intern Med 2011, 26(11):1324–1328.
44. MacQueen KM, Shapiro K, Karim QA, Sugarman J: Ethical challenges in
international HIV prevention research. Account Res 2004, 11:48–61.
45. Sankar P: Communication and miscommunication in informed consent
to research. Med Anthro Quarterly 2004, 18(4):429–446.
46. Dawson L, Kass NE: Views of US researchers about informed consent in
international collaborative research. Soc Sci Med 2005, 61:1211–1222.
47. Marshall P: Informed consent in international health research. J Empir Res
Hum Res Ethics 2006, 1:25–41.
48. Amon JJ, Baral SD, Beyrer C, Kass N: Human rights research and ethics
review: protecting individuals or protecting the state? PLoS Med 2012,
9(10):e1001325.
49. Marshall P: Human rights, cultural pluralism, and international health
research. Theor Med Bioeth 2005, 6:529–557.
50. Marshall PA: The individual and the community in international genetic
research. J Clinical Ethics 2004, 15(1):76–86.
51. Ezeome ER, Marshall PA: Informed consent practices in Nigeria. Dev World
Bioeth 2009, 9(3):138–148.
52. Rotimi C, Leppert M, Matsuda I, Zeng C, Zhang H, Adebamowo C, Ajayi I,
Aniagwu T, Dixon M, Fukushima Y, Macer D, Marshall P, Nkwodimmah C,
Peiffer A, Royal C, Suda E, Zhao H, Wang VO, McEwen J: International
HapMap Consortium: Community engagement and informed consent in
the International HapMap project. Community Genet 2007, 10(3):186–198.
53. Tangwa G: Between universalism and relativism: a conceptual
exploration of problems in formulating and applying international
biomedical ethical guidelines. J Med Ethics 2004, 30(1):63–67.
54. Marshall PA: The relevance of culture for informed consent in
U.S.-funded international health research. In Ethical and Policy Issues in
International Research: Clinical Trials in Developing Countries, Vol II. Bethesda,
MD: National Bioethics Advisory Commission; C-1-C38; 2001.
55. Denizen NK, Lincoln YS: The SAGE Handbook of Qualitatiive Research. 4th
edition. Thousand Oaks, Californnia: Sage Publications; 2011.
56. Green J: Thorogood: Qualitative Methods for Health Research. Thousand Oaks,
California: Sage Publications; 2013.
57. Strauss A, Corbin JM: Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and
Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage
Publications; 1998.
58. Friese S: Qualitative Data Analysis with ATLAS.ti. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications; 2012.
59. Denizen NK, Lincoln YS: Collecting and Interpreting Qualitative Materials. 4th
edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2012.
60. Boeije H: Analysis in Qualitative Research. London: Sage Publications; 2010.
61. Ponder M, Statham H, Hallowell N, Moon JA, Richards M, Raymond FL:
Genetic research on rare familial disorders: consent and the blurred
boundaries between clinical service and research. J Med Ethics 2008,
34:690–694.
62. Hallowell N, Parry S, Cooke S, Crawford G, Lucassen A, Parker M: Lay and
Professional Understandings of Research and Clinical Activities in Cancer
Genetics and Their Implications for Informed Consent. AJOB Primary Res
2010, 1(2):25–34.
63. Jenkins N, Lawton J, Douglas M, Walker S, Finnie R, Porteous M, Hallowell N:
How do index patients participating in genetic screening programmes
for familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) interpret their DNA results?
Patient Educ Couns 2013, 90:372–377.
64. International HapMap Consortium: Integrating science and ethics in the
International HapMap Project. Nat Rev Genet 2004, 5:467–475.
65. H3Africa, Human Heredity and Health in Africa. [URL: "http://www.h3africa.org/"] http://www.h3africa.org/.
doi:10.1186/1472-6939-15-38
Cite this article as: Marshall et al.: Voluntary participation and
comprehension of informed consent in a genetic epidemiological study
of breast cancer in Nigeria. BMC Medical Ethics 2014 15:38. 
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
