BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Discussion
  Summary
Background
Discussion
  Court decisions concerning informed consent in contemporary Japan
  Literature review regarding the characteristics of Japanese culture
    Harmony without overriding principles
    Tacit understanding requiring “telepathy”
    Cultural relativism
    Non-individual-oriented education and psychology
    Interdependence
    Different implications with the same appearance
  Misuse of informed consent and persistence in obtaining consent
    Misuse of informed consent
    Obtaining informed consent no matter what
Summary
Abbreviations
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
References
Page 1
Masaki et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/8
DEBATE  Open Access
Contemporary issues concerning informed
consent in Japan based on a review of court
decisions and characteristics of Japanese culture
Sakiko Masaki*†, Hiroko Ishimoto† and Atsushi Asai†
Abstract
Background: Since Japan adopted the concept of informed consent from the West, its inappropriate acquisition
from patients in the Japanese clinical setting has continued, due in part to cultural aspects. Here, we discuss the
current status of and contemporary issues surrounding informed consent in Japan, and how these are influenced
by Japanese culture.
Discussion: Current legal norms towards informed consent and information disclosure are obscure in Japan. For
instance, physicians in Japan do not have a legal duty to inform patients of a cancer diagnosis. To gain a better
understanding of these issues, we present five court decisions related to informed consent and information
disclosure. We then discuss Japanese culture through reviews of published opinions and commentaries regarding
how culture affects decision making and obtaining informed consent. We focus on two contemporary problems
involving informed consent and relevant issues in clinical settings: the misuse of informed consent and persistence
in obtaining consent. For the former issue, the phrase “informed consent” is often used to express an opportunity
to disclose medical conditions and recommended treatment choices. The casual use of the expression “informed
consent” likely reflects deep-rooted cultural influences. For the latter issue, physicians may try to obtain a signature
by doing whatever it takes, lacking a deep understanding of important ethical principles, such as protecting human
dignity, serving the patient’s best interest, and doing no harm in decision-making for patients.
There is clearly a misunderstanding of the concept of informed consent and a lack of complete understanding of
ethical principles among Japanese healthcare professionals. Although similar in some respects to informed consent
as it originated in the United States, our review makes it clear that informed consent in Japan has clear
distinguishing features.
Summary: Japanese healthcare professionals should aim to understand the basic nature of informed consent,
irrespective of their attitudes about individualism, liberalism, and patient self-determination. If they believe that
the concept of informed consent is important and essential in Japanese clinical settings, efforts should be made
to obtain informed consent in an appropriate manner.
Keywords: Informed consent, Japanese culture, Ethical principles, Ethical issues, Misuse, Healthcare professionals
Background
Beauchamp and Childress argued that virtually all codes
of medical ethics and institutional regulations should
require physicians to obtain informed consent from
patients prior to substantial interventions, with the pro-
tection of patient autonomy as the primary justification
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:sakikomaki@hotmail.co.jp"] sakikomaki@hotmail.co.jp
†Equal contributors
Department of Bioethics, Kumamoto University Graduate School of Life
Science, Kumamoto, Japan 
for this requirement. They also claimed that informed
consent is an individual’s autonomous authorization and
postulated seven structural elements [1], including thresh-
old elements (competence to understand and decide; vol-
untariness in deciding), information elements (disclosure
of material information; recommendation of a plan; un-
derstanding of the information and recommended plan),
and consent elements (decision in favor of the plan;
authorization of the chosen plan) [1]. We think that these
elements are quite clear and comprehensive, and could
© 2014 Masaki et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Page 2
Masaki et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/8 
Page 2 of 7
provide a useful framework for the critical review of vari-
ous contemporary issues surrounding informed consent
acquisition in Japan.
The concept of informed consent received a great deal
of attention during the 1980s in Japan. In 1990, informed
consent was translated into Japanese as “setsumei to
doi” (back-translated as “explanation and consent”). This
Japanese translation, however, carries a connotation that
informed consent is a duty owed to patients and does not
properly purport the notion that informed consent is a
patient’s right [2]. In other words, the Japanese translation
fails to grasp the “consent elements” of the framework de-
scribed above. Currently in Japan, informed consent is
often obtained without the patient’s understanding, physi-
cian’s recommendation, or adequate time to think [3]. In
Japan as well as in other countries, many difficult issues
regarding patient self-determination and acquisition of
informed consent remain even after an ethical norm to
obtain informed consent from patients in clinical settings
and for research projects has been developed and estab-
lished. They include compulsive interventions, treatment
decisions for incompetent patients or minors, and issues
surrounding treatment refusal [4,5].
In this paper, we discuss current situations and cultural
characteristics concerning informed consent in Japan to
outline the problems that we think are common and
relevant. First, we review five court decisions related to
informed consent and information disclosure. Next, we
discuss the characteristics of Japanese culture by reviewing
published opinions and commentaries. Then, we describe
two contemporary issues concerning informed consent
in current clinical settings in Japan: misuse of informed
consent and persistence in obtaining consent. Finally,
we present our opinion on current situations surrounding
informed consent in Japan. Our focus is on informed
consent in clinical settings; we do not address informed
consent in research settings.
Discussion
Court decisions concerning informed consent in
contemporary Japan
In the past three decades, the Japanese Supreme Court
has set forth decisions in four cases concerning truth-
telling and informed consent, and one district court
considered a case about the necessity of disclosure to
families of patients. The first case concerned disclosure
of a cancer diagnosis. A physician failed to inform a pa-
tient that she had gall bladder cancer, but instead told
her that she had a gall stone that required inpatient
care. However, the patient did not come back to the
hospital and, as a result, the physician did not inform
either the patient or the patient’s family. In 1995, the
Japanese Supreme Court concluded that a physician
does not need to disclose a cancer diagnosis on the 
ground that the physician can overlook a patient’s right
to self-determination, if, in their judgment, the actual
diagnosis could have an adverse impact on the patient
[2]. In this case, the principle of non-maleficence was
prioritized over respect for patient autonomy.
In the second case, the Japanese Supreme Court con-
sidered whether a physician is obligated to inform his
patient about a conservative, yet non-established, breast
cancer treatment [4]. At the time, mastectomy and con-
servative treatment were the only two options available
for the patient. The physician advised the patient that
while the conservative treatment for breast cancer had
been implemented, this method was not yet fully and
accurately understood. The physician also told the pa-
tient that her breast would be totally removed, but the
pectoral muscle would remain. Before surgery, the pa-
tient gave the physician a letter outlining the complex
sentiments of a woman who had been diagnosed with
breast cancer and faced the choice of continuing to live
and having her breast removed.
In 2000, the Court stated that there are instances in
which a physician is under an obligation to provide an
explanation, even for non-established treatments. In this
case, the conservative treatment had been implemented
at multiple medical institutions, and the results had been
positively assessed by participating physicians. The treat-
ment may have been suitable for the patient, particularly
if the patient showed a strong interest in the applicability
of the treatment to her situation [4]. The Court added that
mastectomy for breast cancer is an operation that involves
removal of the breast and can seriously affect the patient’s
mental and psychological state, as it changes her appear-
ance and impacts quality of life. Thus, physicians are obli-
gated to explain the conservative treatment for breast
cancer as an alternative treatment before the patient
decides on surgical removal of breast tissue. This re-
quirement is even more pronounced in this case com-
pared to other operations that do not have such an
impact on the patient’s appearance and/or quality of
life. Some argue that the physician should have given
the patient an opportunity to determine the course of
treatment and not deprive her of information about an
alternative treatment, only because the treatment had
not been established [4].
In the third case, the Japanese Supreme Court consid-
ered whether physicians should have given a blood trans-
fusion during surgery to a patient who had joined the
Jehovah’s Witnesses and firmly refused blood transfusions
[5]. Based on the hospital policy regarding surgery on pa-
tients who belong to the Jehovah’s Witnesses, the hospital
would respect the patient’s intention to refuse blood trans-
fusions and refrain from providing transfusions to the
extent possible. However, in the event that there was
no means of saving a patient’s life other than through a
Page 3
Masaki et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/8 
Page 3 of 7
blood transfusion, the hospital would give the patient a
transfusion irrespective of whether the patient or his/
her family had approved such treatment. During the
operation to remove the patient’s tumor, the amount of
bleeding reached more than two liters. Determining
that it was highly unlikely that the patient’s life can be
saved without a blood transfusion, the patient was given a
transfusion during surgery. In 2001, the Court determined
that when a patient expresses an intention to refuse any
medical treatment involving a blood transfusion because it
is against their religious beliefs, the right to make such a
decision must be respected as the patient’s personal right.
It would have been reasonable for the physician to explain
to the patient that irrespective of the patient’s or family’s
approval, it is the hospital’s policy to give a blood transfu-
sion if such a transfusion is required to save the patient’s
life. The patient could then have decided whether or not
to be operated on at that hospital [5,6]. As the physicians
failed to provide a sufficient explanation, they should be
held responsible for violating the patient’s personal rights,
because she was deprived of her right to decide whether
or not to be operated on. In this sense, they are liable to
compensate her for the mental distress she suffered.
In the fourth case, a physician continued seeing a patient
with terminal lung cancer in an ambulatory care clinic
without disclosing the cancer diagnosis to either the
patient or the patient’s family. The family was later told
at a different hospital that the patient suffered from ter-
minal lung cancer, and the patient subsequently died. In
2002, the Supreme Court concluded that if a physician
does not disclose a cancer diagnosis to a patient, the phys-
ician is under an obligation to contact the patient's family
directly and disclose the diagnosis, and discuss whether or
not the diagnosis should be told to the patient [2,7].
In the final case, a physician informed a patient that he
had prostate cancer and recommended that he receive
specialized medical care at another medical institution [7].
However, the patient did not want to undergo further
aggressive treatments and continued to see the same
physician. The patient died of cancer three years later.
Bereaved family members did not know about the patient’s
diagnosis and sued the physician, complaining that he had
a duty to inform the family regarding the diagnosis. In
2007, the Nagoya District Court concluded that a phys-
ician has no obligation to inform a patient’s family of a
cancer diagnosis as long as the patient is clearly informed,
that it should be the patient who decides whether or not
to undergo a treatment, and that if the physician fulfilled
his/her responsibility to provide sufficient explanation to
the patient and the latter made the treatment decision
him/herself, the physician can be considered to have
performed his/her legal duty adequately [7].
Thus, currently, physicians in Japan do not have a legal
duty to inform patients of a cancer diagnosis. They do 
not have a legal duty to conceal a cancer diagnosis from
the patients, either. However, physicians have a legal
duty to inform the family if the patient is not notified.
Conversely, the physician has no legal duty to tell the
patient’s family if the physician has already informed the
patient [7]. Historically in Japan, there was no requirement
for physicians to disclose the true diagnosis to a person
suffering from cancer; they only notified family members.
Even today, some physicians are reluctant to practice full
disclosure to patients when it comes to a cancer diagnosis.
This may represent one of the Japanese medical cultures
reminiscent of past practice.
Treatment refusal based on religious faith is supported
based on the personal rights of patients. Physicians have
a legal duty to inform a patient of as many alternatives as
possible, and court decisions demanding compensation
for damages based on inadequate information disclosure
continue. However, a right to self-determination at the
end-of-life has not been legally or socially established.
When death is not imminent, the right to refuse life-
sustaining treatment has not been considered at all in
Japan. The certainty of impending death appears to have
become the main prerequisite for respecting patient deci-
sions. In addition, no court, legislation, or guidelines have
ever presented a clear time limit or precise definition of
“impending” [8].
Literature review regarding the characteristics of
Japanese culture
In order to examine issues surrounding informed consent
in Japanese clinical settings, it is necessary to understand
the characteristics of Japanese culture as well as recent
court decisions and incidents. Cultural peculiarities in
Japan may explain some of the actions relevant to in-
formed consent in Japanese clinical settings. In the follow-
ing section, we review published papers on Japanese
cultural characteristics in the context of healthcare without
using stereotypical or careless assumptions [9].  Dividing
West and East equally would naturally be too simplistic.
There are various countries in both the East and West,
with differences among individuals, generations, families,
regions, and current events even within the same culture.
Some aspects change over time while others remain
constant. Certain aspects may be common across diverse
cultures. Individuals can also significantly change their
cultural perspectives during their lives. Taking this into
consideration, we briefly review and discuss Japanese
culture below.
Harmony without overriding principles
Izawa argued that the idea that harmony is the greatest
virtue enshrined in the Constitution established by Prince
Shotoku in Japan (604 AD) is still deeply rooted in mod-
ern Japan [10].  The Constitution demands that people
Page 4
Masaki et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/8 
Page 4 of 7
must not conclude important matters alone and that
serious matters must be discussed by a group. Matsuda
suggests in his 2010 paper that Japanese culture has
particular characteristics, including vagueness that does
not draw a definitive line between right and wrong, behav-
ior directed by others according to heteronomy rather
than autonomy, avoidance of conflicts and confrontation,
and indirect expression to avoid hurting others. He also
points out that Japanese tend to be non-analytic [11]. Asai
claimed that a fundamental principle in Japanese society
is to not give priority to one principle over another,
making it difficult to reach a specific conclusion on
ethical dilemmas or conflicting situations [9].
Tacit understanding requiring “telepathy”
Asai suggested that "telepathy" (tacit understanding) is the
preferred communication style in Japanese healthcare
settings, which has been perpetuated over many years
[12]. Those who regard tacit understanding as being a
natural form of human communication might demand
that others understand what they have in mind without
being told. In addition, Japanese people are thought to
be traditionally burdened with the trilemma of “won’t
speak,” “won’t decide,” and “won’t think” when it comes to
ethical issues [13].
Cultural relativism
It has been suggested that Japanese people do not pay
attention to universality and consistency in decision-
making and that they tend to be partial to relatives and
acquaintances as a consequence. Furthermore, cultural
relativism seems to be prevalent in justifying certain de-
cisions on the grounds that “We are Japanese” or “We live
in Japan now” [12]. A paper regarding self-determination
in death argued that some Japanese commentators
thought that self-determination is not desired, does not
apply to serious matters such as life and death, and that
respecting self-determination in death inflicts harm on
others [14].  Tanida also pointed out that, in Japanese
thought, a person does not exist as an individual, but as
a member of the family, community, or society. In this
society, an act is ‘good’ and ‘right’ when it is commonly
done; it is ‘bad’ and ‘wrong’ if nobody else does it [15].
Non-individual-oriented education and psychology
Sasaki argued that Japanese are trained to be cooperative
rather than autonomous and independent since child-
hood and that acting different from family members or
neighbors may require a significant amount of energy
and result in psychological distress, such as uneasiness
and guilt. The mentality of “Follow your child when you
grow old" in Japanese society has been suggested, and the
elderly sometimes entrust decisions about their healthcare
to family members. Families of elderly patients together 
with healthcare professionals might naturally take the
initiative regarding healthcare decisions for the patient
without their explicit consent. Thus, a family-centered
or group-centered approach has been predominant in
Japanese clinical settings [16]. Patience and modesty are
considered virtues, and disobedience to group decisions is
considered unacceptable.
Tamura also discussed dominant problematic mental-
ities. In Japanese society, one often feels the need to con-
sider family members’ thoughts and feelings when making
a decision. There is often internal or external pressure to
prioritize family members’  opinions over those of the
individual. Even when the family says that it is the person’s
decision, he or she may still feel that the feelings of other
family members should be prioritized [17]. Ignoring one’s
true desire is sometimes considered a virtue in Japan. From
childhood, people are taught to respect others, especially
parents, teachers, authorities, and older people [17].  A
follow-the-crowd mentality and unassertiveness are often
observed among Japanese people, as well as a tendency to
eschew free thinking and discussion regarding individuals,
hierarchy, and conventionalism at the workplace [13].
Interdependence
The literature view suggests the presence of traditional
norms, such as interdependence, entrusting others, and
filial duties [18,19]. The well-known Japanese psychiatrist
Doi argued that Japanese tend to expect others to consider
what they need and unconsciously require others to act
in their best interest [20]. A commentator claimed that
the predominantly Japanese idea to entrust important
decisions to others could have its ideological origin in
Buddhism [21]. Therefore, the Japanese mental tendency
pointed out by Doi could result in patients depending on
their physicians and other healthcare professionals when
decisions must be made regarding medical care. However,
when things go wrong, patients and their families may
criticize healthcare professionals and accuse them of being
solely responsible for the poor outcome.
Different implications with the same appearance
Despite the strong influence of Western cultures, imported
rules and concepts from the West may change in their im-
plications, functions, and even goals without changing their
appearances and thus become Japanesque in Japanese soci-
ety [11,12]. Even though the names of concepts and princi-
ples may remain the same, they are likely to be similar yet
different, and this likely reflects the strong, mixed influence
of Shintoism, Buddhism, and Confucianism.
Misuse of informed consent and persistence in
obtaining consent
In the following section, we discuss two contemporary
problems concerning informed consent in Japan and
Page 5
Masaki et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/8 
Page 5 of 7
consider why these situations occur. As clinicians involved
in patient care in several Japanese medical institutions,
we unanimously and firmly believe that these problems
currently exist, although we cannot present sufficient
empirical data based on well-designed descriptive studies
and do not claim that these issues are a universal
phenomenon across Japan. We think that some of the
problems can be ascribed to Japanese cultural charac-
teristics, as discussed below.
Misuse of informed consent
There are several expressions concerning informed consent
frequently used by Japanese healthcare professionals,
especially physicians, such as “I will/do (provide) informed
consent,” “I go to informed consent,” “I indicated informed
consent was provided,” and “There will be informed con-
sent.” For example, some physicians might say “I have just
done (provided) informed consent to my patient.” In the
first three cases, the subject is the physician. The subject in
the fourth case is unknown [9]. Although no report has
yet to describe the variable use of these expressions, some
academic societies and hospitals have official homepages
set up regarding this issue, and we found a textbook that
uses the expression, “We (I, you, or no subject) do informed
consent” [22-24].
According to the basic idea of informed consent, these
expressions do not make sense, and the expression should
be “A physician obtains informed consent from his or
her patient,” in which the subject of the sentence is the
physician. The process of obtaining informed consent
from the patient includes the physician disclosing relevant
information to the patient, presenting recommendations
to the patient, answering the patient’s questions, and dis-
cussing alternatives together. The function of physicians
should never be directly related to providing consent.
It goes without saying that it is the patient who gives
informed consent. A patient gives his or her physician
informed consent and the physician obtains it from the
patient. It is illogical that the physician ‘does (provides)’ or
‘places’ consent as part of the process.
However, as far as we know, it is not uncommon in
Japan for physicians to use expressions such as “I will do
(provide) informed consent.” The phrase "informed con-
sent" is often used to express an opportunity to disclose
medical conditions and recommend treatment choices.
For example, a physician could express dissatisfaction
to a colleague by saying “I have already carefully done
(provided) informed consent” after a patient asks several
questions about treatment plans. In the United States,
some physicians might have regarded the process of
consent acquisition as merely explaining to patients the
nature of their medical conditions together with a recom-
mended treatment plan in the 1980s, when disclosure was 
considered the primary (and perhaps sole) element of
informed consent [25].
Why does the misuse of informed consent occur and
continue in Japan? We suspect that the casual use of
words regarding informed consent reflects deep-rooted
cultural influences in Japanese society [26]. The idea that
the patient makes the final decision about his or her
medical care has not been recognized in Japanese clin-
ical settings [2].  Only the name and formalities related
to informed consent remain the same. The underlying
spirit of informed consent may be lost and replaced by
the traditional attitude that physicians decide what the
patient should do. Japanese informed consent, with the
physician as the subject, has possibly become similar, yet
different, than intended.
We suspect that the reason physicians make the deci-
sions and apply medical care on behalf of the patient in
clinical settings is because they do not know the history
behind the idea of informed consent, as the idea was
imported a few decades ago. It is also argued that Japanese
physicians might consider such knowledge unnecessary
because of Japanese exceptionalism, which is deeply perva-
sive whether they realize it or not. According to LaFleu,
Japanese exceptionalism implies that Western philo-
sophies and practices do and should have only limited
applications in Japan, and that Japan has a different set
of social, philosophical, and religious traditions [27]. This
justifies the limited adoption of Western bioethical princi-
ples and practice, with informed consent among them. In
addition, many Japanese patients might not always desire
self-determination due to their Japanese, heteronomous
character [11].
Some Japanese physicians may assume that they know
what their patients want through tacit communication
and take for granted that their patients may prefer treat-
ment options that prioritize medical benefits. Japanese
patients may also expect that their physicians, who are
medical authorities, will consider their needs and con-
sciously or unconsciously act in their best interest. We
suspect that the nature of informed consent in which
the subject is the physician has changed and lost the
fundamental goal of respecting patient autonomy, even
if the formalities remain the same. That is, it is similar
to, yet different from, authentic informed consent. We
also suspect that physicians who incorrectly use the
phrase “informed consent” do not anticipate that their
patients might refuse treatment because, in their minds,
they lead the informed consent process.
Another possible reason is that the term “informed
consent” has been directly incorporated into Japanese
phases (i.e., it is not translated into Japanese but rather
used as a Katakana word [Japanese-English]). Therefore,
some physicians might misunderstand the meaning of it
and say, “I will do the informed consent (in-form-con-
Page 6
Masaki et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/8 
Page 6 of 7
sent wo suru),” or “I will provide informed consent to a
patient,” rather than “I will obtain informed consent.”
Obtaining informed consent no matter what
In an aging Japanese society with a growing number of
nuclear families and elderly who live alone, acquiring
consent for incompetent elderly patients with no rela-
tives has become a major perplexing issue in the clinical
setting. An increasing number of healthcare professionals
and hospital managers have confronted situations in
which they cannot find anyone to provide informed
consent for medically necessary interventions for elderly
patients who lack the mental capacity to make decisions
[28]. For example, the Japanese psychiatrist Sato commen-
ted in his case report that obtaining informed consent for
life-saving treatments in patients with dementia who live
alone is often problematic [29].
One of the authors has actually been involved in sev-
eral discussions on this matter as a member of ethics
committees at different hospitals. There appears to be a
psychological tendency among healthcare teams and
hospital managers to assume that someone must provide
consent for medical treatment of incompetent patients
with no relatives in every situation without exception. They
may desperately try to obtain consent for a demented pa-
tient with no relatives from anyone available, including
staff from the nursing home where the patient resides, an
administrative officer in their community, or a completely
estranged relative who has not talked to the patient for
several decades. However, these people cannot serve as
appropriate surrogate decision-makers. Healthcare teams
often try to get someone’s signature on the consent form,
no matter whose consent it is. It would be ethically and
legally acceptable for healthcare professionals to conduct
medical interventions without consent, if the intervention
was beneficial to the patient and considered socially
acceptable [30].
Why do these situations arise in Japanese clinical set-
tings? The exact answer is unclear, and it seems impossible
to explain solely based on Japanese cultural disposition.
Yet, one possible reason is that healthcare professionals
and those involved want to use a signed consent form in
the event a problem occurs. Those who regard a signed
consent form as a pardon may think that their responsibil-
ity for subsequent issues can be reduced by the fact that
someone consented to undergo an intervention or that
the person who provided consent should be partially
responsible for whatever happens to the patient [3,31].
We argue that healthcare professionals, especially phy-
sicians, who try to obtain someone’s signature by doing
whatever it takes lack a deep understanding of important
ethical principles, such as protecting human dignity,
serving the patient’s best interest, and doing no harm in
decision making for patients. The idea that patients 
should be treated with their best interest in mind, even
if physicians cannot respect the patient’s autonomy and
obtain their consent, appears to be completely lost among
healthcare professionals in Japan. It can be argued that the
phenomenon of obtaining informed consent by doing
whatever it takes occurs because those concerned do not
logically consider medical ethics and simply do what they
are told by superiors (i.e., they should always get a signa-
ture on the consent form) without real conviction about
the purpose of informed consent. This is the product of
social formalism without logical comprehension: an act is
‘good’ and ‘right’ when it is commonly done; it is ‘bad’ and
‘wrong’ if nobody else does it [15].
Summary
In this paper, we discussed a number of decisions set forth
by the Japanese Supreme Court concerning informed con-
sent, characteristics of Japanese culture, and two contem-
porary issues that are common and relevant in Japan,
including misuse of informed consent and persistence in
obtaining consent. We suggested that there is a misunder-
standing regarding informed consent and lack of a com-
prehensive understanding of ethical principles among
healthcare professionals in Japan. It can be argued that
informed consent in Japan is similar to, yet different
from, original informed consent that was born in the US.
Healthcare professionals may fail to grasp and appreci-
ate differences in individual values, diversity of personal
world views, and ethical principles underlying the concept
of informed consent. These failures could be related to the
aforementioned characteristics of traditional Japanese
culture. We argue that Japanese healthcare professionals
should make efforts to understand the basic nature of
informed consent, irrespective of their attitudes about
individualism, liberalism, and patient self-determination,
and obtain informed consent in an appropriate manner
if they believe that the concept of informed consent is
important and essential in Japanese clinical settings.
Finally, as both educators and researchers in bioethics,
we believe that bioethics education that takes into con-
sideration Japanese cultural and social contexts may be
necessary for healthcare professionals in Japan in order
to prevent the misuse of informed consent and misun-
derstanding of important ethical principles. Bioethics
education which considers Western bioethics and Japanese
culture in a complementary manner may also help in
efforts toward the appropriate use of informed consent
in clinical settings [32]. For these efforts to be effective,
Japan’s long history and strong cultural tradition should
not be ignored.
Abbreviations
UNESCO: United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization.
Page 7
Masaki et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/8 
Page 7 of 7
Competing interests
Sakiko Masaki, Hiroko Ishimoto, and Atsushi Asai declare that that they have
no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
SM, HI, and AA have equally contributed to the conception, design,
acquisition, and interpretations of references; drafting the manuscript and
revising it critically for intellectual content; and have given final approval of
the version to be published.
Received: 7 July 2013 Accepted: 6 January 2014
Published: 4 February 2014
References
1.  Beauchamp TL, Childress JF: Rinciples of biomedical ethics. 6th edition. New
York: Oxford Press; 2009.
2.  Akabayashi A, Slingsby BT: Informed consent revised. Japan U.S.A JOB 2006,
6:9–14.
3.  Bito S (Ed): Guidance of informed consent. Sharing the knowledge about
informed consent(Pamphlet); 2008-2011. Tokyo: Tokyo Iryo Center; 2011.
4.  UNESCO: Casebook on human dignity and human rights, bioethics core
curriculum casebook series, no.1. Paris: UNESCO; 2011.
5.  UNESCO: Casebook on human dignity and human rights, bioethics core
curriculum casebook series, no.2. Paris: UNESCO; 2011.
6.  Inaba N: We want to know about medical lawsuit. Tokyo: Nikkei BP Press; 2010.
7.  Kuwahara H: Kono 10 nen-no Iryou Sosyou no trend (The trend of a medical
lawsuit in the past 10 years) (in Japanese). Tokyo: Nikkei BP Press; 2010.
8.  Asai A, Aizawa K, Kadooka Y, Tanida N: Death with dignity is impossible in
contemporary Japan. Eubios J Asian Int Bioethics 2012, 22:49–53.
9.  Asai A: Curious about “sufficient explanation and consent”, Kumamoto Nichinichi
newspaper. Kumamoto: Kumamoto Nichinichi Shinbun Company; 2013.
10. Izawa M: Gyaku-setsu no Nippon Rekisshikan (A paradoxical Japanese
historical view)(in Japanese). Shyogakkann Bunko: Tokyo; 2005.
11. Matsuda I: Bioethical concern based on the Japanese consideration of
culture and value⇀care of critically ill newborn. Jpn Perinat Period
Newborn Infant Med Congress Mag 2010, 46(4):924–932.
12. Asai A, Aizawa K: Genba de Yakuni tatu Rinri Kiso-ron (Ethics basic theory
which is helpful at workplace) (in Japanese). Palliat Med Study 2009,
11(1):34–39.
13. Asai A, Fukuyama M: Toward successful bioethics education, in Asia-pacific
perspectives on bioethics education. Bangkok: UNESCO; 2008.
14. Asai A, Sakamoto S: Self-determination of death in Japan: a review and
discussion. Eubios J Asian Int Bioethics 2007, 17:35–41.
15. Tanida N: ‘Bioethics’ is subordinate to morality in Japan. Bioethics 1996,
10:201–211.
16. Sasaki Y, Yamaguchi Y: Kouresya no Jiko Kettei wo sasaeru Kanngoennjyo
ni tuite (About the nursing assistance supporting elderly people's self-
determination) (in Japanese). Hosp Home Care 2010, 18:2–8.
17. Tamura C: The family-facilitated approach could be dangerous if there is
pressure by family dynamics. Am J Bioeth 2006, 6:16–18.
18. Davis A, Gallager A, Midou T: Nursing ethics. Tokyo: Igaku Eizo Kyoiku
Center; 2007.
19. Davis AJ, Tschudin V, Raeve L: Learning and educating nursing ethics. Tokyo:
Japan Nursing Association Publication Meeting; 2008.
20. Doi T: The anatomy of dependence. Kodansha International: Tokyo; 1973.
21. Miyashita M, Sanjo M, Morita T, et al: Good death in Japanese cancer care:
a nationwide quantitative study. Ann Oncol 2007, 18:1090–1097.
22. Japanese Nursing Associations: Nursing ethics of the ethical consideration and
correspondence under a notice and informed consent deployment. [URL: "http://www.nurse.or.jp/rinri/basis/kokuchi/index.htm"] http://
 www.nurse.or.jp/rinri/basis/kokuchi/index.htm.
23. Nakamura S: Pocket guideline about breast cancer. Tokyo: Igaku Shyoin; 2010.
24. For doing the informed consent. [URL: "http://www.dokkyomed.ac.jp/hosp-m/guide/63.html"] http://www.dokkyomed.ac.jp/hosp-m/guide/
 63.html.
25. Beauchamp F: In Encyclopedia of bioethics volume 3. 3rd edition. Edited by
Stephen G. New York: Stephan G. Thompson and Gale; 2004:1271–1280.
26. Tanida N: Informed consent. NPO Iyaku Bijiransu Center: Osaka; 2006.
27. LaFleur WR: More information, broader dissent on informed consent.
Am J Bioeth 2006, 6:15–16.
28. Nippon Ronen Igakkai: Japanese old age medical society position
manifestation. Tokyo: Nippon Ronen Igakkai; 2012. 
29. Sato R: Problems of informed consent in solo dementia patients
(in Japanese). Old-Age Psychiatry Mag 2008, 19(2):179–179.
30. Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare: The guideline on the determination
process in terminal care. Tokyo: Ministry of Health; 2007.
31. Asai A: Iryo-syoku no tameno Rinnsyou Rinri no kotoba 48 (48 words of clinical
ethics for Healthcare workers) (in Japanese). Tokyo: Japan Nursing Association
Publication; 2011.
32. Fuscaldo G, Russell S, Delany C: Enhancing cross-cultural understanding of
ethical issues in medical education. AJOB Prim Res 2010, 1(1):28–33.
doi:10.1186/1472-6939-15-8
Cite this article as: Masaki et al.: Contemporary issues concerning
informed consent in Japan based on a review of court decisions and
characteristics of Japanese culture. BMC Medical Ethics 2014 15:8.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
