BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods
  Results
  Conclusions
Background
Methods
  Design
  Setting
  Data collection instruments
  Sampling and enrollment procedures
  Data collection procedures
    Field observations
    In-depth interviews
  Compensation for participation
  Data analysis
Results
  Participant recruitment
    Hesitation to participate
    Discussion of participation with a family member
  Informed consent for interviews
  Interview environment
    Exceptions to gender rules
    Privacy in the waiting area
  Member checking
  Compensation for participation
  Motivation to participate
  Vulnerability
    Name sharing
    Interview recording
    Concern about negative consequences
Discussion
Conclusion
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgements
Author details
References
Page 1
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9
RESEARCH ARTICLE  Open Access
Procedures of recruiting, obtaining informed
consent, and compensating research participants
in Qatar: findings from a qualitative investigation
Amal Killawi1, Amal Khidir2, Maha Elnashar2, Huda Abdelrahim2, Maya Hammoud3, Heather Elliott4,
Michelle Thurston1, Humna Asad2, Abdul Latif Al-Khal5 and Michael D Fetters1*
Abstract
Background: Very few researchers have reported on procedures of recruiting, obtaining informed consent, and
compensating participants in health research in the Arabian Gulf Region. Empirical research can inform the debate
about whether to adjust these procedures for culturally diverse settings. Our objective was to delineate procedures
related to recruiting, obtaining informed consent, and compensating health research participants in the extremely
high-density multicultural setting of Qatar.
Methods: During a multistage mixed methods project, field observations and qualitative interviews were
conducted in a general medicine clinic of a major medical center in Qatar. Participants were chosen based on
gender, age, literacy, and preferred language, i.e., Arabic, English, Hindi and Urdu. Qualitative analysis identified
themes about recruitment, informed consent, compensation, and other research procedures.
Results: A total of 153 individuals were approached and 84 enrolled; the latter showed a diverse age range (18 to
75 years); varied language representation: Arabic (n = 24), English (n = 20), Hindi (n = 20), and Urdu (n = 20); and
balanced gender distribution: women (n = 43) and men (n = 41). Primary reasons for 30 declinations included
concern about interview length and recording. The study achieved a 74% participation rate. Qualitative analytics
revealed key themes about hesitation to participate, decisions about participation with family members as well as
discussions with them as “incidental research participants”, the informed consent process, privacy and gender rules
of the interview environment, reactions to member checking and compensation, and motivation for participating.
Vulnerability emerged as a recurring issue throughout the process among a minority of participants.
Conclusions: This study from Qatar is the first to provide empirical data on recruitment, informed consent,
compensation and other research procedures in a general adult population in the Middle East and Arabian Gulf.
This investigation illustrates how potential research participants perceive research participation. Fundamentally,
Western ethical research principles were applicable, but required flexibility and culturally informed adaptations.
Keywords: Research ethics, Recruitment, Informed consent, Cultural competence, Middle East, Research
participation, Vulnerability, Confidentiality, Qualitative research, Research compensation
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:mfetters@umich.edu"] mfetters@umich.edu
1Department of Family Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48104,
USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2014 Killawi et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Page 2
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 2 of 13
Background
With globalization, the growing numbers of international
partnerships in health services research pose challenges
and opportunities [1].  For international investigations,
Western researchers such as the authors are accountable
in their home institutions to Western ethical principles.
When there are different standards between Western in-
stitutions and host country collaborators, tension can arise
over preferred approaches [2]. For example, when U.S. re-
searchers participate in international projects, they are
bound to U.S. regulations [3], and the required approach
to informed consent becomes based on Western ethical
standards [3,4]. However, there are concerns about the ap-
propriateness of applying a ‘Western’ approach to recruit-
ment and consent procedures among culturally diverse
groups in non-Western countries [3-6] and by extension
among culturally diverse groups within Western societies
[7]. Areas of debate address: pressure to participate [3,8],
limited comprehension of informed consent [3,5,8], verbal
versus written documentation of informed consent [3,5,8],
language and literacy barriers [3,8], confidentiality [9], and
individual vs. community decision-making processes [3,5,8].
While some researchers advocate for universal ethical
principles in research [5,10-13], others argue that stan-
dards must be adjusted for culturally diverse settings
[4,7,8]. In support of the latter, Fadare and Porteri illus-
trate how Nigeria incorporates cultural considerations for
human subjects in its national research guidelines in ac-
cordance with the Helsinki Declaration of the World
Medical Association and the International Ethical Guide-
lines for Biomedical Research of the Council for Inter-
national Organizations of Medical Sciences [2].  In
addition, empirical research illustrates that researchers on
the ground feel cultural influences need consideration. For
example, in a study with American researchers conducting
research in developing countries, Dawson and Kass [3]
found that most respondents believed U.S. regulations
should allow more flexibility in informed consent regula-
tions compared to prevailing Western standards. In a sur-
vey of 203 researchers conducting human subject research
in developing countries, Hyder and Wali [5], found that
written consent was not used by approximately 40% of the
researchers. Solving these challenges requires culturally
informed strategies to obtain and document informed
consent [3,8].
In the Middle East and Arabian Gulf, only a very lim-
ited literature informs the debate about culturally
adapted procedures for recruiting, obtaining informed
consent, and compensating health research partici-
pants. A search of PubMed’s extensive database of
medical literature, of Google and Google Scholar’s ar-
chives, Global Health Database, Articles Plus, PsycInfo,
Social Sciences Citation Index/Web of Science, and
Scopus’s depository of resources revealed only 11 articles 
addressing methodological procedures of recruitment and
informed consent for research in this region. Emanating
from Qatar, Oman, Egypt, and other countries in the
Middle East and Arabian Gulf, these papers provide
insight on seven topics: (1) influence of cultural idiosyn-
crasies on the level of disclosure and the informed consent
process in clinical care [14]; (2) differences in interpreting
ethical research principles [15-17];  (3) challenges imple-
menting Western research principles, particularly informed
consent [18,19]; (4) difficulty of obtaining informed con-
sent from illiterate individuals [20]; (5) difficulty with re-
cruitment [9,21], (6) perceptions about informed consent
specific to biobanking research [22], and (7) the import-
ance of utilizing the expertise of community and non-
scientific leaders to ensure recruitment and consent
procedures are consistent with the host country’s cultural,
political, and social practices [23]. None of the articles ad-
dress participants’  reactions to being offered compensa-
tion for participating in research.
Surprisingly, only two of these 11 papers provide a
glimpse of outcomes of recruitment and informed con-
sent procedures for research with Arab populations.
Kahan and Al-Tamimi (2009) present data about their
research recruitment experience with Arab Americans in
San Diego, California with adults aged 18–29 using
snowball sampling, flyers, presentations to university
campus organizations, and through graduate research
assistants; nearly two-thirds of participants had some
college or graduate education. To our knowledge, the
only previous study reporting empirically on experience
with obtaining informed consent for research in the
Middle East was conducted by Nakkash and others
(2009) with Palestinian refugees 10–14 years of age in
Lebanon. Based on their field observations, the authors
identify challenges related to disclosure, comprehension,
capacity, voluntariness and consent, and argue for cul-
tural adaptations while upholding the intended ethical
principles [18].
The purpose of this paper is to address the gap in the
literature on procedures for recruiting, obtaining in-
formed consent, and compensating participants in health
research in the Middle East and Arabian Gulf Region.
The findings are based on the research team’s field ob-
servations and interviews of participants during one
stage of a multistage research project about health care
quality assessment in Qatar.
Methods
Design
This research utilized an ethnographic approach to con-
duct a qualitative study as one component of a multi-
stage, mixed methods parent study focused on developing
a self-administered healthcare quality assessment instru-
ment in the four languages of Arabic, English, Hindi, and
Page 3
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 3 of 13
Urdu [1].  Briefly, the first stage of the parent study in-
volved cultural adaptation of the adult survey of the Con-
sumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems
Survey (CAHPS) [24].  The second stage of the parent
study involved qualitative interviews regarding patient
perspectives on health care quality. Based on our field ob-
servations during the second stage, extensive field notes
were collected about procedures of recruiting, obtaining
informed consent and compensating participants of the
study. The field notes and comments about recruitment,
informed consent, compensation and other field proce-
dures from the interviews served as the two sources of
data for this project. Human subjects approval for the
study was granted from the University of Michigan, Weill
Cornell Medical College in Qatar, and Hamad Medical
Corporation (HMC) [1,24].
Setting
This study was conducted in the extremely high-density
multicultural setting of Doha, Qatar [25].  Qatar has a
population of approximately 1.9 million people [26] with
the majority comprised of expatriate workers from all
over the world temporarily residing in Qatar [20,26,27].
Health care services at HMC are subsidized and consid-
ered a governmental public service for Qatari nationals
and Qatari residents. HMC, the premier health care pro-
vider in Qatar, served as the specific data collection site. 
because it is culturally more acceptable in public places in
Qatar, including healthcare settings, for women to move
into both male and female waiting areas, and thus more
efficient for the study. The RAs wearing an official white
research coat approached patients or family members in
the outpatient waiting room of the clinic to inform them
about the study. Inclusion and exclusion criteria are
depicted in Table 1. Recruitment sought roughly equal
representation within each group by literacy (low versus
high). After careful consideration of primary populations
in the region [1], low literacy was defined as 9th grade and
below and high literacy as some high school education or
greater. While most linguistic groups corresponded with
specific cultural groups, English serves as the lingua franca
for many cultural groups in Qatar that speak English as a
second language. The team exercised maximum variation
sampling [28] to achieve cultural diversity in the English
language group to avoid over-representation of any spe-
cific groups. Eligible individuals who enrolled for inter-
views gave verbal consent that was audio recorded. These
individuals received the information/waiver of written in-
formed consent sheet at this time. This sheet included a
statement that participation in the study would not impact
participants’ receipt of health care. Additionally, the RAs
emphasized this point when recruiting and interviewing
participants. Interviews ranged from 15–60 minutes in
duration.
Data collection instruments
The project instruments included a recruitment script,
an interview guide, and a single sheet containing both
information about the research and a waiver of written
informed consent. All documents were developed with
the goal of a fifth grade reading level. All documents (ex-
cept the waiver of informed consent template that was
already available in Arabic and English) were developed
in English and then independently translated. Each
translated document was reviewed by two translators
who compared the translations to develop a best final
version.
Sampling and enrollment procedures
We targeted the recruitment of approximately 80 subjects,
about 20 participants per language for in-depth interviews.
Our study employed all-female research assistants (RAs) 
Data collection procedures
Field observations
Field observations served as the primary source of data
for this study and were conducted under the human
subjects approvals for the project. The RAs collected
field jottings [29] about the events, behaviours, and en-
vironment during recruitment and data collection proce-
dures that they expanded into full field notes after
return to the research office. They recorded the number
of individuals who were approached, declined, enrolled,
excluded, and reasons for exclusions. The RAs discreetly
recorded gender, cultural affiliation, approximate age,
and reason for declining that individuals volunteered
without prompting. No identifiable personal health in-
formation was collected from individuals who declined.
For individuals who were enrolled, the RAs tracked how
many of them retained the information/waiver of written
Table 1 Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria
• Speaks as first language the target language—primary language was defined as a language that the
participant grew up speaking and/or reading from his or her childhood, or as determined by sociocultural
norms such as work environment of his or her home country
• Has lived in Qatar for at least 12 months in the past 3 years
• Provides verbal informed consent 
Exclusion criteria
• Declines interest in participating
• Has a severe debilitating illness
precluding participation
• Does not speak the target language
Page 4
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 4 of 13
informed consent sheet, how many provided contact in-
formation, and how many spontaneously shared their
name with the RA as an indication of trust.
In-depth interviews
The interviews were conducted primarily for the parent
study on developing a culturally adapted survey on
health care quality. The interview guide included ques-
tions about the individual’s health and illness experi-
ences, healthcare practices, challenges encountered to
receive health care, recommendations for improvement
in services, and demographic information. While the in-
terviews were not focused on procedures of recruiting,
obtaining informed consent, and compensation, many
interviews provided supplementary information to the
field observations. The RAs interviewed participants in
the outpatient waiting area of the general medicine clinic
of HMC. The waiting area was chosen as the location
for interviews for two reasons after a careful discussion
amongst team members. First, cultural norms in Qatar
dictate that interactions between genders occur in public
space in view of others except for purely medical reasons
or necessity depending on the task. The mostly Muslim
and all-female RAs felt it would be culturally inappropri-
ate for them to be in a private room with a man. Second,
participants were interviewed while waiting for their
doctor’s appointments. Since the hospital uses a number
system, participants preferred to stay in the waiting area
with full visibility of the number display used to call
patients. When available and deemed to be culturally ac-
ceptable, the RAs occasionally used vacant patient
rooms for interviews.
Compensation for participation
Participants who completed interviews were offered a
pre-paid mobile phone card called a Hala Card in the
amount of 100 QR ~ $30 USD, as compensation for their
participation. Compensation was not offered until the
end of the interview because during pilot testing, con-
cern emerged that the offer of compensation might of-
fend individuals of financially sound backgrounds or
others who were not accustomed to participating in re-
search studies. The RAs were also concerned that offer-
ing the Hala cards at the beginning might put them
under undue pressure to give compensation to individ-
uals who left for appointments before completing the
interview and who might not come back.
Data analysis
Based on the RA field notes, we calculated percentages
of participation as well as descriptive statistics of the en-
rolled participants. The audio-recorded interviews were
transcribed in the native language, and the transcription
checked by a second reviewer. To protect the privacy of 
individuals, place names and any possible identifying
information were changed. For Arabic, Urdu, and Hindi,
the transcripts were independently translated into English,
compared for similarity, and differences were reconciled
by consulting with a third bilingual researcher. Iteratively,
three team members (AK, HE, and MF) immersed them-
selves in the data by reading and open coding transcripts
independently to develop preliminary codes. They re-
viewed and refined the codes and definitions during regu-
lar meetings. Emergent themes were incorporated into the
coding scheme, and coding definitions were refined using
general consensus of team members. Two analysts (AK
and HE) independently coded and compared the coding
of two transcripts for calibration, while a third (MF) re-
solved any disagreements. With calibration complete,
the primary analyst (AK) coded all remaining transcripts
and had weekly consultations with team members to
clarify any concerns. The qualitative analysis software
ATLAS.ti [30] was used for data management and ana-
lysis procedures.
To make the large qualitative dataset manageable, data
transformation was employed whereby the coded quali-
tative themes were counted. Major codes were used to
generate a summary for review, and then the search was
refined for output by language and gender. After the ini-
tial analysis of the textual data from the field observa-
tions and transcripts, and numerical data from the
demographic instrument and recruitment procedures,
we integrated these diverse sources of data into a narra-
tive format for the results.
Results
Participant recruitment
The research assistants approached 153 individuals; after
eligibility exclusions and patient declinations, a total of
84 individuals (43 women and 41 men) were included as
research participants (Tables 2 and 3). Individuals were
excluded primarily for not meeting sampling criteria
(Table 4).  Thirty (20%) individuals declined to partici-
pate. More women (n = 19) than men (n = 11) declined
participation, with the highest number of declinations in
the Arabic language group (n = 20),  and the highest
number total occurring among women in the Arabic
language group (Tables 2 and 4).  At times, no specific
reason for declining was provided; primary reasons in-
cluded concern about the length of the interview and
concern about the interview being recorded (Table 4).
Overall, the participation rate among those who were
approached and eligible was 74% (84/114).
Based on our analysis of the qualitative data, we iden-
tified a series of themes and sub-themes about recruit-
ment, informed consent, and compensation as presented
below.
Page 5
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 5 of 13
Table 2 Distribution of individuals approached, declined, excluded, and enrolled by language and gender
Approached (153) total  Declined  Excluded  Enrolled
Male Female Subtotal Male Female Subtotal Male Female Subtotal Male Female
Arabic 20  32  52  5  15  20  4  4  8  11  13
English 12  13  25  1  0  1  1  3  4  10  10
Hindi 27  13  40  2  2  4  15  1  16  10  10
Urdu 18  18  36  3  2  5  5  6  11  10  10
Total 77  76  153  11  19  30  25  14  39  41  43
50% 50%  37% 63% 20%  64% 36% 25%  49% 51% 
Subtotal
24
20
20
20
84
55%
Hesitation to participate
During recruitment, some individuals expressed hesitation
when approached for enrollment in the study. Some (n = 6)
individuals premised their consent to participate only after
the RAs provided them with a guarantee that they would
not have to share their name or reveal their identity; this oc-
curred mainly in the Hindi language group (n = 5). Three
participants were concerned about having to answer per-
sonal questions and needed assurance that they could refuse
to answer any question during the interview.
During the recruitment and informed consent process,
some individuals hesitated upon learning that the inter-
view was going to be recorded. Among all individuals
approached, twelve people (9 women and 3 men) ex-
pressed concern about the recording. Six of them de-
clined for this reason, and four others hesitated but
ultimately chose to participate. Among all language
groups, more people in the Hindi (n = 5) and Arabic
(n = 5) groups expressed concern, and more people in
the Arabic group (n = 5) refused to participate in the in-
terviews due to recording procedures. Some individuals
(n = 8) were reluctant due to the length of the interview
and needed to return to their jobs. As individuals were
recruited while waiting for their appointments, some
people (n = 3) hesitated due to fear of losing their turn
to see the doctor.
Discussion of participation with a family member
A few women preferred to discuss whether or not to
participate with a family member. Husbands played an
essential role in the decision-making process in five in-
stances. One woman declined participation because she
needed to ask her husband for permission. Upon learn-
ing that the interview would be recorded, two women
sought and were granted permission to participate by
their husbands. As for the other two women, they con-
sulted with their husbands, though it was unclear if they
did so (1) to get permission, (2) to consider the hus-
band’s flexibility due to dependency on him for transpor-
tation, (3) for consideration of timing/scheduling or (4)
for assistance with the interview. Mothers and daughters
also played a role in the decision-making process. In one 
case, a mother approved of her adult daughter’s partici-
pation, whereas another mother declined to participate
after her two daughters discouraged her.
Informed consent for interviews
Some participants read the information/waiver of writ-
ten informed consent sheet; others asked the RAs to
read it to them or provide them with a verbal overview
due to being illiterate, not having their reading glasses,
or being short on time. Of the 78 individuals tracked, 60
(77%) chose to keep the information/waiver of written
informed consent sheet, and there was no identifiable
difference by language or gender.
Interview environment
Exceptions to gender rules
Although interviews with female participants were mostly
conducted in the women’s waiting rooms and interviews
with male participants in the men’s waiting rooms, there
were some instances of flexibility relative to gender rules.
In five instances, the RAs interviewed male participants in
vacant patient rooms usually with the door open, without
objections. Additionally, some participants and their fam-
ily members used the waiting room of the other gender.
For example, a woman was interviewed in the men’s wait-
ing area because she wanted her husband to be present
during the interview. In another example, a woman had
her husband join her for the interview in the women’s
waiting room after permission from the head nurse.
Privacy in the waiting area
Despite the location of the busy outpatient waiting
room, most participants completed the interview. Some
participants, more often women (n = 10) than men (n = 3),
were accompanied by various people to their doctor’s
appointment including spouses, mothers, children, rela-
tives, maids/helpers, and friends. As “incidental research
participants”,  their participation occurred unexpectedly
in a supportive way of the individual enrolled. At times
they re-phrased questions and offered comments during
the interview. The RAs felt that generally the presence
of others did not inhibit participant responses; in one
Page 6
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 6 of 13
Table 3 Demographics of interview participants
Variable  Definition  Count %
Gender
Male  41  49
Female  43  51
Age (years)
18-24  2  2
25-34  18  21
35-44  14  17
45-54  28  33
55-64  14  17
65-74  8  10
75 and older  0  0
Education
No Education No school and/or no formal 7  8
education
Some primary Some primary, elementary, grade 3
school or equivalent 
4
Primary  Completion of primary, elementary, 8
grade school or equivalent 
10
Some middle school Some middle school or the
equivalent 
9  11
Middle School Completion of middle school
or the equivalent 
2  2
Some High School Some high school or equivalent 1  1
High School  High school graduate or
equivalent 
17  20
Some College Some college or equivalent 7  8
College  College graduate or equivalent 14  17
Post-College More studies after completion
of college or equivalent 
16  19
Home Region
Northern Europe  8  10
Northern America  1  1
Northern Africa  8  10
Eastern Europe  1  1
South-Eastern Asia  5  6
Southern Europe  1  1
Southern Africa  0  0
Southern Asia  41  49
Western Europe  1  1
Western Africa  1  1
Western Asia  15  18
Central Asia  1  1
Australia and New Zealand  1  1
Years Lived in Qatar*
0-5  22  26
6-10  17  20
11-20  11  13 
Table 3 Demographics of interview participants
(Continued)
21-30
31-40
40 <
Unknown
Religion*
Muslim
Hindu
Christian
Something else
Prefer not to say
*Percentages do not add to 100% due to rounding. 
17
5
10
2
53
6
22
1
2 
20
6
12
2
63
7
26
1
2
instance, an interview generated the interest of a patient
who was sitting nearby. A potential downside was noted
by one RA who felt that participants shared more infor-
mation when interviewed in a separate room.
Member checking
At the conclusion of the interview, participants were
asked if they were interested in receiving information
about the results of the study, a process called member
checking [31].  Of all participants initially approached
and who provided contact information, most were will-
ing to provide their contact information to receive study
results, with proportionally more participants in the
Arabic group (n = 22) and less participants in the Hindi
group (n = 8) doing so. Some people provided their ad-
dress after the interview was completed and the recorder
was turned off. Most participants (n = 48) shared their
address in Qatar, though some shared an email, phone
number, or address in their home country.
Compensation for participation
There were various responses to presenting the compen-
sation after the interview, ranging from gratefulness, re-
luctance, and outright declinations (Table 5). Despite the
interviews being interrupted for appointments, most
participants returned to complete the interview without
knowing about the compensation.
Motivation to participate
Motivation to participate varied among individuals. Some
participants expressed disapproval of the health system
and wanted to share their complaints, while others felt
that the interview provided them an opportunity to share
their experiences and offer recommendations. One of the
most important motives for participating in the study was
altruism. Participants expressed hope that their partici-
pation would help improve the system. One woman said,
“…if at least one person gets…better treatment…I am
Page 7
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 7 of 13
Table 4 Reasons potential participants were excluded from or declined participation by language
Reasons for exclusions from the research by language (n = 39)
Not fluent in target
language 
*Other  Did not meet
literacy criteria 
Total Percent by
language group
Arabic  2  4  2  8  21%
English  1  3  0  4  10%
Hindi  10  2  4  16  41%
Urdu  3  7  1  11  28%
Total  16  16  7  39
Percent  41%  41%  18%
Reasons for declining to participate in the research by language (n = 30)
Did not want to participate
in interview 
Declined due to
time constraint 
Did not want
the recording 
**Other  Total Percent by
language group
Arabic 6  4  5  5  20  67%
English 0  1  0  0  1  3%
Hindi 3  0  1  0  4  13%
Urdu  2  3  0  0  5  17%
Total  11  8  6  5  30
Percent^ 37%  27%  20%  17%
*Includes the following reasons: individual has been in Qatar less than a year, started but did not complete the interview, is not a patient, did not have experience
in Hamad, had already been interviewed, recording equipment failed, patient was oxygenated and could not be interviewed, and recording was inaudible.
**Answers occurring once included individual being part of Hamad staff, being too tired to participate, had to ask permission from husband, prevented from
participation by daughter, and unable to answer questions.
^Percentages do not add to 100% due to rounding.
happy…That’s why when you asked me for this…research, I
wanted to spend my time.” Another added, “…I  feel
obliged…I  will also get the benefit…Because…’til the
baby…cr(ies), mother don’t give milk. So, ‘til we tell they
will not know. There won’t be improvement.”
Vulnerability
Despite many individuals being forthcoming with informa-
tion about their experiences, a sense of vulnerability from
participating emerged as a recurring theme throughout the
recruitment and informed consent process among a sizeable
minority of participants.
Name sharing
Through the normal discourse in a conversational style ap-
proach to interviewing, conversations sometimes shifted to
the participant’s name. Most participants (n = 71, 85%)
shared their names with the RAs, with men (n = 36) and
women (n = 35) equally sharing. However, a minority of par-
ticipants (n = 13, 15%) did not share with some expressing
concerns about revealing their identity; participants in the
Hindi language group (n = 8) were proportionately the least
likely to share their name.
Interview recording
Individuals had a range of responses upon learning that
the interviews would be recorded. During recruitment,
some individuals declined to participate outright, and 
others consented after assurance from the RAs that the
recordings would be deleted and that participants were
not required to reveal their identity. Concern about the
recording was also raised during the interview phase. In
addition to the nine women who expressed concern dur-
ing recruitment and informed consent as noted earlier,
an additional five women expressed concern during the
actual interview. There were concerns about the record-
ing in all language groups, with the most concern
expressed by individuals in the Arabic (n = 8) and Hindi
(n = 7) language groups.
Some participants requested the RAs to pause the re-
cording at different times during the interview, as illus-
trated by a Qatari man: “Before- (I) raise this, I want to
tell you a word, don’t record it.” An Indian woman
paused the recorder every time she wanted to share a
negative experience: “No. I don’t want all this to be re-
corded. I believe you but please don’t record. You can
write down if you want.” A British woman used hand
gestures to convey negative feelings and did not
complete her sentences, as observed by the RA: “she…
(left her) sentences incomplete…and (used) gestures to
avoid saying. . . words. The interviewer had to say these
words so that these expressions also get recorded. . . She
spoke more openly when (the) conversation was not being
recorded.” Some participants shared more about their
experiences after the interview was finished and the
recorders were turned off. For example, a Pakistani
Page 8
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 8 of 13
Table 5 Responses of participants to offer of compensation
Expressed gratitude.
Participants often thanked the RAs for the Hala card, sometimes
making a prayer for them. 
RA: Ah, thank you so much and to express my gratitude for your time and effort,
I want to give you a fifty riyal Hala Card.
P: No [laughs].
RA: It’s not a big thing really.
P: No, no… My love.
RA: Thank you so much for your time.
P: God bless you.
Jordanian woman
Exhibited surprise.  P: Wow!
Some participants were pleasantly surprised to receive the card. RA: As a token of appreciation.
P: (Laughing) Wow!
RA: That you… you gave your important suggestions, it was your time was
valuable still you waited for us to finish the interview.
P: That’s great.
Pakistani woman
Engaged in polite bartering.
Others politely declined the card, resulting in a back and forth
cultural exchange about whether or not they should accept the
compensation. Some RAs playfully pleaded with participants to
accept the cards as a reward for their participation. 
RA: …. to express my thankfulness I would like to give you fifty riyals Hala Card
for the time that you had spent (S: [laughs]) and the valuable information that
you gave me…
P: I don’t need it really
RA: …no it’s just as a gift, a gift [laughs]
P: alright, I won’t say no
Bahraini man
RA: … And as an appreciation for giving us the time, we would like to give you a
Hala Card of fifty riyals.
P, RA: (Laughing)
P: Thank you, you don’t have to do that.
RA: No, it’s okay.
P: No, you have to have it.
RA: (Smiling) No, no, no.
P: No, no, you have to have it
RA: I can’t have it. I have to give it to you.
P: Oh, that’s a shame.
British woman
Commented that compensation was unnecessary. RA: …This is for you…
Some participants felt the cards were unnecessary, as they didn’t
use them or should be given to others who are more in need. 
P: What’s that, what’s that?
RA: For taking part in the research.
P: Give it to somebody else if he needs it.
British man
It’s alright. No, because I don’t use these cards.
British man
Okay, is this charity?
Pakistani man
Clarified motivation for participation.
Some participants clarified their motivation for participating in the
study was for altruistic purposes. 
If at least one person gets a better treatment because of my sayings, I am happy.
I am happ(ier) than this reward.
Indian woman
This is as my duty, means, it is not…aah…I mean this is not about money at all.
Egyptian woman
Page 9
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 9 of 13
Table 5 Responses of participants to offer of compensation (Continued)
Stated they were unfamiliar with card.  P: What is a Hala Card?
A few people were unfamiliar with the Hala Card and did not know
how to use it. The RAs explained that the Hala Cards are to be used
with their mobile phones. 
RA: For the mobile.
P: Okay.
Egyptian woman
RA: …this is a simple appreciation, a present for your time and your
collaboration…
P: What am I supposed to do with this?
RA: Use it.
P: Where to use it?
RA: This is Hala Card; use it for your telephone.
Palestinian woman
Expressed concern about negative consequences. No, still if I take this card then there is no problem for me?
Some participants were concerned that accepting the reward at the  Bangladeshi man
end of the interview would result in negative ramifications for them. 
We will not fall into trouble because of this no?
Nepali man
RA = Research assistant, P = Participant.
woman shared a negative experience, but would not
allow the RA to turn the recorder back on, even though
she had no objection to the RA writing about it in her
presence.
Concern about negative consequences
A few people expressed concern about participation in
the study resulting in negative consequences for them or
their families. Among all 153 individuals approached,
four women and three men expressed this concern, with
the issue being raised mainly in the Hindi language
group (n = 5), followed by the Urdu (n = 1) and English
(n = 1) groups, and no observed references in the Arabic
group. Concern about negative repercussions was
expressed at multiple points during the interview
process, specifically during recruitment, the interview,
member checking, and compensation.
During the interviews, a few participants were cautious
in voicing negative feedback about the healthcare sys-
tem. A British woman apologized for giving generalized
answers, as she was worried about where her answers
might end up. A Pakistani woman wondered about her
husband’s job being impacted. An Indian woman was co-
operative, but was not willing to fully share when the re-
corder was on ‘because they may consider it as a
complaint and something will happen to us.’  She inci-
dentally ran into the RA a few days after the interview,
and inquired about sharing further information.
Concerns about negative consequences emerged even
with inquiries about member checking as two partici-
pants refused to provide their contact information to re-
ceive the study results. A Pakistani man cited concern
about his visa being cancelled, and a Bangladeshi man 
seemed conflicted and eventually, he decided not to share
his address:
“No, if I give my address it is not good no? …If something
wrong happens to me then it is not correct to give it no?…I
will not give. I have all addresses. I have (in) Bangladesh,
(in) Qatar also…I  am (a) company person (company
worker…Now if…. I give you my address, then what will
people say? Eating food of Qatar and not saying good to it.
He is saying that India, Bangla (desh) is good…That’s why
I don’t want to give.” During the compensation phase, two
participants were concerned that accepting the Hala Card
would result in negative ramifications as expressed by a
Nepali man, “We will not fall into trouble because of this,
no?” Even though the majority of participants were willing
to give their suggestions for improving healthcare, a mi-
nority of participants conveyed a sense of vulnerability.
Discussion
There are few empirical studies on recruitment, in-
formed consent, compensation, and other research pro-
cedures [3] in countries other than the United States
and Western Europe, with none in particular to the
Middle East and Arabian Gulf other than a single study
with adolescent refugees [18]. To our knowledge, this is
the first study in the Middle East and Arabian Gulf to
provide empirical data on recruitment and informed
consent procedures in a general adult population invited
to participate in research. Our study also provides the
only empirical data available about the responses of par-
ticipants in the Middle East and Arabian Gulf to com-
pensation and member checking procedures.
We noted some interesting trends relevant to recruit-
ment. More individuals in the Arabic language group
Page 10
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 10 of 13
declined participation than in any other language group,
and three times more women than men in this group
declined. As the number of declinations by men were
close to the other groups, it is difficult to discern if there
is a cultural pattern. However, the declinations among
women were greater among Arabic speaking women
than all other groups. One possible explanation can be
found in the results from women who volunteered a rea-
son for declining, and several individuals felt compelled
to discuss with a family member whether to participate.
While there were nine Qataris enrolled in the study,
overall we did not notice any patterns suggesting differ-
ences between them and other Arabic speaking individ-
uals. Future research could provide further information
about gender and cultural differences.
We believe our success in recruitment, informed con-
sent procedures, and participant enrollment was possible
because we used culturally adapted procedures. We uti-
lized the expertise of the Qatari research team members
to ensure implementation of recruitment and consent pro-
cedures that were culturally adapted to Qatar’s cultural,
political, and social practices [1]. We also employed cul-
turally competent and language concordant RAs familiar
with the cultural dynamics of individuals living in Qatar.
With regard to gender, we employed all-female RAs pri-
marily to avoid breaching cultural sensitivities about gen-
der interactions. Utilizing male RAs to recruit female
individuals is more likely to affront cultural sensitivities
about gender interactions and thus have a negative impact
on the research, compared to female RAs recruiting male
individuals. Although we had to recruit in gender specific
waiting areas, having the female RAs wear white research
coats conveyed their official status and helped to temper
cultural guidelines of gender separation. Our RAs were
also cognizant of the fact that in many non-Western col-
lectivist societies, individuals may be bound to others in a
web of social relations which can impact decision-making
processes [18]. Thus, the RAs allowed individuals, espe-
cially women, to seek input from family members before
participation, and they allowed family members to con-
tribute to the interviews as “incidental research partici-
pants” if acceptable to the enrolled participant. While the
team considered whether incidental research participants
should provide separate informed consent, the team felt
this would be too burdensome and disruptive to the dis-
cussions as they naturally unfolded.
Approximately half of all recruited individuals had low
literacy, but we overcame this by having the RAs work
directly with participants in their own language. Gener-
ally, we did not encounter difficulties obtaining informed
consent from low literacy individuals in Qatar, in contrast
to previous findings [20].  Although most participants
retained the information/waiver of written informed con-
sent sheet, we are unsure if the others were just not 
interested, preferred not to retain any linkage to the study,
could not read, or had other reasons. We obtained verbal
consent instead of written informed consent because in
many non-Western societies, signatures are usually re-
served for formal transactions associated with major life
events [18]. Requests for written consent could rouse sus-
picion or concern, and asking illiterate participants to sign
documents they are unable to read or fully comprehend
can be threatening [4] or imply lack of trust [23]. Signa-
tures would leave a record of participation, so individuals
who preferred anonymity would have been precluded
from participating. Interestingly however, we found that
enrolled participants did not hesitate to provide their ver-
bal consent despite it being audio-recorded. If executed as
intended, written and verbal consent are ethically equiva-
lent; thus, written consent shouldn’t be necessary. The
willingness to provide verbal consent while hesitating to
provide written consent illustrates the cultural aversion to
signing documents.
To summarize our observations on informed consent
procedures, we found culturally sensitive approaches to
include: being flexible relative to family involvement in
the consent process, explaining the study in the simplest
terms possible to avoid overwhelming participants with
too much information while still allowing them to make
an informed choice, having forms in and interviewers
who speak participants’ languages, being prepared for re-
searchers in the field to read informed consent materials,
avoiding written requirement for signature or substitut-
ing verbal consent when appropriate, and using waiver
of informed consent when appropriate.
Our study is the first to offer empirical data about the
responses of participants in Qatar to compensation and
member checking procedures. Most returned to com-
plete the interview despite having no knowledge about
the compensation, although there were varying degrees
of interest in accepting the compensation. The data
demonstrate that there were some participants who were
taken aback and adamantly declined compensation. Un-
answered questions remain as to the optimal timing and
location of offering compensation. As for the member
checking invitation, most participants were willing to
provide contact information to receive study results.
There was a difference between groups, with participants
in the Arabic group most often sharing their contact in-
formation and the Hindi group least often doing so. This
may reflect a greater sense of vulnerability among partic-
ipants in the Hindi group.
Cultural adaptations also meant compromising privacy
during interviews to respect cultural norms around gen-
der interaction and to alleviate participants’ fears of los-
ing their place in queue for their appointment. Although
Western ethical standards may suggest privacy to be
critical, we found that conducting interviews in a public
Page 11
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 11 of 13
space generally did not inhibit the responses of the major-
ity of our participants. Despite the gender norms of the
country, we found that in the five instances of female RAs
interviewing male participants in a room, individual pref-
erences ultimately determined whether a participant was
comfortable being interviewed in private. Gender norms
may not have applied as rigidly since the RAs were viewed
as part of the healthcare staff and because it is more ac-
ceptable for men and women to interact in healthcare set-
tings when there is no reasonable alternative.
Although many participants openly discussed their opin-
ion of the healthcare system, a few expressed trepidation
that their participation might result in negative conse-
quences for them or their families. We suspect that vulner-
ability fears may be due to a number of reasons. First, many
of the participants were expatriate workers from countries
where human rights cannot be assumed, and this lens could
inevitably carry into Qatar. Second, there is relatively less 
public knowledge about research participation in the Ara-
bian Gulf and in many of the developing countries that the
expatriates call home, so lack of familiarity with research
could cause mistrust. Third, it is possible that some indi-
viduals may have had negative experiences in society, e.g.
in the workplace, and through this lens interpreted that
their research experiences might be similar. Fourth, par-
ticularly in the case of a working spouse, some may not
want to contradict or compromise preferences or policies
of a spouse’s employer. The RAs quickly learned the im-
portance of confidentiality of personal information, and
adapted by emphasizing that private information would
not be collected and that information given could not be
linked to the participants. Regardless of the low probabil-
ity of negative implications for such individuals, it is im-
portant for researchers working in the Arabian Gulf,
especially given so many expatriates, to be aware of how
people may perceive the consequences of participating in
Table 6 Considerations for recruitment and consent in the Arabian Gulf
Issue  Context  Recommendation
Hesitation to participate Individuals may have multiple concerns -Assure individuals that sharing one’s name is not necessary, and avoid
during recruitment about participation. collecting such information unless critical to the study.
-Advise subjects the researchers will not disclose any personal information
the participant is not comfortable disclosing.
-Refrain from audio and video recordings if not essential, and consider offer
of hand written field notes only.
-Reassure individuals that participating will not impact their care.
Informed Consent Some non-Western communities reserve -Be flexible relative to family involvement.
signing of documents for formal events. 
-Explain the consent process to participants but don’t overwhelm participants
with too much information.
-Allow for verbal consent or waiver of written informed consent.
-Consider language and literacy barriers; be prepared with bilingual documents
and interviewers.
Circumstances of where Cultural rules may dictate gender
and when to interview separation. 
-Consider corner of waiting area with option for a private room as safe place
where interviews can occur between men and women in a publicly visible place.
-Allow participants to stay in the waiting room to alleviate their fears of losing their turn.
-Allow participants to finish interviews after their appointment if needed.
-Trust local staff to make the decision to choose location.
Involvement of family In non-Western communities,
members as “incidental decision-making processes tend to be
research participants”  more collective than individualistic. 
-Allow individuals to seek input from family members, and this could range
from permission to participate, i.e., participant is subordinate to the person they
discuss it with, otherwise it may be a negation of agreement or assent of a
valued family member’s input.
-Consider flexibility regarding boundaries around participation.
Member checking Individuals may not be familiar with -Invite participants to learn more about the results of the study.
research studies. Some may be unable to
provide their contact information. 
-Provide assurances of confidentiality.
Compensation Offer of compensation could be
offensive or unfamiliar. 
-Consider discussion of compensation after interview is completed.
Vulnerability Individuals may have vulnerability
fears due to their sociocultural
and residency status. 
-Reassure participants that confidentiality of participation will be protected.
-Emphasize safety of disclosing information.
Page 12
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 12 of 13
research. We recommend that research procedures be de-
signed to address the underlying concerns that participants,
even though a minority, may have about vulnerability
throughout all stages of the process. Overall, we did find
that many participants felt empowered to provide informa-
tion to the researchers and appreciated the opportunity to
discuss their experiences and offer recommendations to
improve the Qatari health system.
Investigators conducting international health research may
face multiple challenges during the research process, particu-
larly if Western ethical standards are used without consider-
ation of local traditions and social contexts. Table 6 provides
recommendations for researchers conducting research in the
Arabian Gulf Region.
There have been many efforts to establish national re-
search ethics guidelines in the Middle East and Arabian
Gulf, with most of the Arabian Gulf countries making
more advanced steps than other countries in the Middle
East [32]. Researchers are expected to balance universal
ethical standards with local standards [8,32];  therefore,
ethical research principles should be upheld in as much
as they are appropriate to the local context [2,18].  We
agree with Fadare and Porteri’s position, who state,
“While international research ethics guidelines have an
important role in setting basic and acceptable standards,
there remains a window for local adaptation, especially
in resource-poor and culturally diverse countries [2].”
All studies have possible limitations. As the study was con-
ducted in one health care setting in Doha, the degree that
recommendations from this study will hold in other settings
needs further exploration. Our study employed all-female
RAs; utilizing male RAs may have had different implications
for the recruitment and informed consent process. Inter-
viewing participants in a busy outpatient waiting room ren-
dered data collection feasible, though this choice may have
limited the information participants provided, such as criti-
cisms or private information. Future research could compare
outcomes such as participation rates and data quality when
data collection occurs in public vs. private settings to clarify
the advantages each setting might offer. While the RAs en-
deavored to observe carefully, there may have been other
meaningful events that they did not notice or document. Fi-
nally, qualitative text from interviews was volunteered by the
participants in response to open-ended questions, so the re-
ported numbers represent minimum estimates when qualita-
tive responses were quantified. Caution should be exercised
in generalizing the prevalence of the various positions stated
since participants were not randomly sampled.
Conclusion
This empirical study from Qatar provides the first com-
prehensive consideration of recruitment, informed con-
sent, compensation, and other research procedures in
Middle East and Arabian Gulf Region. Based on these 
findings, we conclude that Western approaches to re-
cruitment, consent, and compensation are compatible in
Qatar but with the caveat that researchers should consider
potential cultural influences. Specific issues meriting con-
sideration include the data collection environment, gender
relations, preferred informed consent procedures, sensitiv-
ity about compensation, possible involvement of family
members as incidental research participants, and privacy
concerns due to a perceived sense of vulnerability. With
attention to these cultural influences, our investigation
achieved a very good participation rate. Given the limited
literature about research participation in the Middle East
and Arabian Gulf Region, additional studies on the per-
spectives of researchers and research participants would
be helpful in exploring the challenges of conducting re-
search in non-Western contexts, abiding by Western IRB
standards, and ethically incorporating cultural adaptations.
We conclude that researchers embarking on health re-
search in the Middle East and Arabian Gulf Region should
consult closely with colleagues on the ground to assess
and account for local cultural sensitivities.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
AK conducted the qualitative analysis and drafted the manuscript. AKh
assisted in drafting the manuscript and along with ME and HA, participated
in the design and coordination of the study. HA and HAs participated in
data collection. MH participated in the design of the study. MT participated
in coordination of the study. HE assisted with data analysis. AA assisted with
design and recruitment. MF conceived of the study, participated in its design
and coordination, assisted with analysis, and helped to draft the manuscript.
All authors read, revised, and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This research was made possible through the generous support of the Qatar
National Research Fund Program, Qatar Foundation (NPRP08-530-3-116)
under the title, Providing Culturally Appropriate Healthcare Services in Qatar:
Development of a Multilingual ‘Patient Cultural Assessment of Quality’
Instrument. The authors appreciate the assistance of the following project
team members for their work in data collection and data entry, as well as
translation services: Julie Bosredon, Nabila Chishty, Ashwini Deshmukh,
Fatima Hamour, Meghan Maria Pais, and Nabeeha A. Qadeer. A special thank
you to Beth Ragle for her assistance with manuscript preparation.
Author details
1Department of Family Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48104,
USA. 2Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar, Education City, PO Box 24144, Doha,
Qatar. 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, 1500 E.
Medical Center Drive, L4000 Women’s, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 4Department
of Health Management and Policy, School of Public Health, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 5Department of Medical Education, Hamad
General Hospital, PO Box 3050, Doha, Qatar.
Received: 2 January 2013 Accepted: 12 December 2013
Published: 4 February 2014
References
1.  Hammoud MM, Elnashar M, Abdelrahim H, Khidir A, Elliott HAK, Killawi A,
Padela AI, Al Khal AL, Bener A, Fetters MD: Challenges and Opportunities
of US and Arab Collaborations in Health Services Research: A Case Study
from Qatar. Glob J Health Sci 2012, 4(6):148–159.
Page 13
Killawi et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:9
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/9 
Page 13 of 13
2.  Fadare JO, Porteri C: Informed consent in human subject research: a
comparison of current international and Nigerian guidelines. J Empir Res
Hum Res Ethics 2010, 5(1):67–73.
3.  Dawson L, Kass NE: Views of US researchers about informed consent in
international collaborative research. Soc Sci Med 2005, 61(6):1211–1222.
4.  Upvall M, Hashwani S: Negotiating the informed-consent process in
developing countries: a comparison of Swaziland and Pakistan. Int Nurs
Rev 2001, 48(3):188–192.
5.  Hyder AA, Wali SA: Informed consent and collaborative research:
perspectives from the developing world. Dev World Bioeth 2006,
6(1):33–40.
6.  Bhutta ZA: Beyond Informed Consent. Bull World Health Organ 2004,
82(10):771–777.
7.  Lakes KD, Vaughan E, Jones M, Burke W, Baker D, Swanson JM: Diverse
Perceptions of the Informed Consent Process: Implications for the
Recruitment and Participation of Diverse Communities in the National
Children's Study. Am J Community Psychol 2012, 49(1–2):215–232.
8.  Marshall PA: “Cultural competence” and informed consent in
international health research. Camb Q Healthc Ethics 2008, 17(2):206–215.
9.  Halabi JO: Nursing research with refugee clients: a call for more
qualitative approaches. Int Nurs Rev 2005, 52(4):270–275.
10. Macklin R: Informed consent for research: international perspectives.
J Am Med Wom Assoc 2000, 55(5):290–293.
11. IJsselmuiden CB, Faden RR: Research and informed consent in
Africa–another look. N Engl J Med 1992, 326(12):830–833.
12. Holmes W: Informed consent in medical research. Minimum ethical
standards should not vary among countries. BMJ 1997, 314(7092):1479.
13. Angell M: The ethics of clinical research in the Third World. N Engl J Med
1997, 337(12):847–849.
14. Del Pozo PR, Fins JJ: Islam and informed consent: notes from Doha.
Camb Q Healthc Ethics 2008, 17(3):273–279.
15. Rashad AM, MacVane PF, Haith-Cooper N: Obtaining informed consent in
an Egyptian research study. BMC Med Ethics 2007, 29(8):9.
16. Abdur RM, Afzal M, Abou-Zeid A, Silverman H: Ethical practices for health
research in the Eastern Mediterranean region of the World Health
Organization: A retrospective data analysis. Plos One 2008, 3(5):e2094.
17. Khalil SS, Silverman HJ, Raafat M, El-Kamary S, El-Setouhy M: Attitudes,
understanding, and concerns regarding medical research amongst
Egyptians: a qualitative pilot study. BMC Med Ethics 2007, 8:9.
18. Nakkash R, Makhoul J, Afifi R: Obtaining informed consent: observations
from community research with refugee and impoverished youth. J Med
Ethics 2009, 35(10):638–643.
19. Al-Riyami A, Jaju D, Jaju S, Silverman HJ: The adequacy of informed
consent forms in genetic research in Oman: a pilot study. J Med Ethics
2009, 35(10):638–643.
20. Milder JE, Novelli VM: Clinical, social and ethical aspects of HIV-1
infections in an Arab Gulf State. J Trop Med Hyg 1992, 95(2):128–131.
21. Kahan D, Al-Tamimi A: Strategies for recruiting Middle Eastern-American
young adults for physical activity research: a case of snowballs and
Salaam. J Immigr Minor Health 2009, 11(5):380–390.
22. Ahram M, Othman A, Shahrouri M: Public support and consent preference
for biomedical research and biobanking in Jordan. Eur J Hum Genet 2012,
21(5):567–570.
23. Abdel-Messih IA, El-Setouhy M, Crouch MM, Earhart KC: Developing cultural
competence and overcoming ethical challenges in the informed consent
process: An experience from Egypt. J Res Adm 2008, 39(2):33–40.
24. Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research (AHRQ): CAHPS. [URL: "http://www.cahps.ahrq.gov/about.htm"] http://www.
[URL: "http://www.cahps.ahrq.gov/about.htm"] cahps.ahrq.gov/about.htm; [URL: "http://www.cahps.ahrq.gov/"] http://www.cahps.ahrq.gov/.
25. Elnashar M, Abdelrahim H, Fetters MD: Cultural competence springs up in
the desert: The story of The Center for Cultural Competence in Health
Care at Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar. Acad Med 2012,
87(6):759–766.
26. Qatar Statistics Authority: Population Structure. [URL: "http://www.qsa.gov.qa/eng/PopulationStructure.htm"] http://www.qsa.gov.qa/eng/
 PopulationStructure.htm.
27. Paschyn CM: Anatomy of a globalized state. Think 2012, 16. [URL: "http://christinapaschyn.com/2012/featured/qatar-globalized-state-immigration/"] http://
 christinapaschyn.com/2012/featured/qatar-globalized-state-immigration/.
28. Hancock B, Ockeleford E, Windridge K: An Introduction to Qualitative
Research. [URL: "http://www.rds-yh.nihr.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/5_Introduction-to-qualitative-research-2009.pdf"] http://www.rds-yh.nihr.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/
 5_Introduction-to-qualitative-research-2009.pdf.
29. Sanjek R: Fieldnotes - The Makings of Anthropology. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University; 1990. 
30. Scientific Software Development: ATLAS.ti software. [URL: "http://www.atlasti.com/index.html"] http://www.atlasti.com/
 index.html.
31. Onwuegbuzie AJ, Leech NL: Validity and Qualitative Research: An
Oxymoron? Quality & Quantity 2007, 41(2):233–249.
32. Alahmad G, Al-Jumah M, Dierickx K: Review of national research ethics
regulations and guidelines in Middle Eastern Arab countries. BMC Med
Ethics 2012, 13:34.
doi:10.1186/1472-6939-15-9
Cite this article as: Killawi et al.: Procedures of recruiting, obtaining
informed consent, and compensating research participants in Qatar:
findings from a qualitative investigation. BMC Medical Ethics 2014 15:9.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
