BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods
  Results
  Conclusions
Background
Methods
  Data management
  Ethical considerations
Results
Discussion
  Study limitations
  Conclusions
Additional files
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Authors’ information
Acknowledgement
Author details
References
Page 1
Ochieng et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/40
RESEARCH ARTICLE  Open Access
Informed consent practices for surgical care at
university teaching hospitals: a case in a low
resource setting
Joseph Ochieng1*, Charles Ibingira1, William Buwembo1, Ian Munabi1, Haruna Kiryowa1, David Kitara2, Paul Bukuluki3,
Gabriel Nzarubara4,5 and Erisa Mwaka1
Abstract
Background: Informed consent in medical practice is essential and a global standard that should be sought at all
the times doctors interact with patients. Its intensity would vary depending on the invasiveness and risks
associated with the anticipated treatment. To our knowledge there has not been any systematic review of consent
practices to document best practices and identify areas that need improvement in our setting. The objective of
the study was to evaluate the informed consent practices of surgeons at University teaching Hospitals in a low
resource setting.
Methods: A cross-sectional study conducted at three university teaching hospitals in Uganda. Self-guided
questionnaires were left at a central location in each of the surgical departments after verbally communicating
to the surgeons of the intention of the study. Filled questionnaires were returned at the same location by the
respondents for collection by the research team. In addition, 20 in-depth interviews were held with surgeons
and a review of 384 patients’ record files for informed consent documentation was done.
Results: A total of 132 (62.1%) out of 214 questionnaires were completed and returned. Respondents were
intern doctors, residents and specialists from General surgery, Orthopedic surgery, Ear, Nose and Throat,
Ophthalmology, Dentistry, Obstetrics and Gynaecology departments. The average working experience of
respondents was 4.8 years (SD 4.454, range 0–39 years). 48.8% of the respondents said they obtained consent all
the time surgery is done while 51.2% did not obtain consent all the time. Many of the respondents indicated
that informed consent was not obtained by the surgeon who operated the patient but was obtained either at
admission or by nurses in the surgical units. The consent forms used in the hospitals were found to be
inadequate and many times signed at admission before diagnosing the patient’s disease.
Conclusions: Informed consent administration and documentation for surgical health care is still inadequate at
University teaching hospitals in Uganda.
Keywords: Informed consent practices, Surgery, Uganda
Background
Informed consent in medical practice is essential and a
global standard that should be sought at all the times
doctors interact with patients [1-10]. It’s intensity varies
depending on the invasiveness and risks associated with
the anticipated treatment [11]. The importance attached
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:ochiengjoe@yahoo.com"] ochiengjoe@yahoo.com
1Anatomy Department, School of Biomedical Sciences Makerere University, P.O
7072, Kampala, Uganda
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
to ethical practice and associated informed consent
varies from doctor to doctor and this is further influenced
by working environment, level of knowledge, experience
and societal values and beliefs. In spite of these factors,
patients’  autonomy should be respected as doing so is
actually respecting the patients’ rights as an individual to
make decisions that affect their lives [11-15]. It should be
noted that respecting individual’s rights is one way to
ground respect of autonomy.
© 2014 Ochieng et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Ochieng et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/40 
Page 2 of 5
Surgery is an invasive practice and would require a more
rigorous informed consent process for improved shared
decision making because of the higher frequency and in-
tensity of associated risks as compared to general medical
care. Since Surgery is performed on a routine basis at the
University teaching hospitals, surgeons should be well
grounded in ethical and professional practice so as to role
model for their students.
While a number of studies on informed consent have
been carried out in the region in the recent past, they have
focused on informed consent during research [16-21]. To
our knowledge there has not been any systematic review of
informed consent practices for surgical care, and thus no
documented best practices. This study was intended to
evaluate what the surgeons at teaching hospitals do regard-
ing informed consent because it impacts their trainees’
knowledge and practice.
Methods
This was a cross-sectional study conducted at three
university teaching hospitals in Uganda. A surgeon was
defined as any doctor (specialist or not) who routinely
performed surgical procedures. Data was collected
using self administered questionnaires, in-depth inter-
views and, evaluation of the informed consent process
and documentation in these hospitals.
The self administered interview used a semi-structured
questionnaire that employed a mainly qualitative approach
(Additional file 1).  Questions in this questionnaire were
adopted from previous studies [16,17]. It included ques-
tions like what constituted informed consent, how it is ob-
tained, whether obtained at all times, who obtains and
what type of information is exchanged between doctors
and their patients. In-depth interviews were done purpos-
ively to seek clarification on the information that had been
captured by the returned questionnaires (Additional file
2). In addition 384 patients files randomly selected, were
reviewed for documentation of the informed consent
process to evaluate if patients’ condition was clearly con-
firmed to the patient including diagnosis, proposed proce-
dures, risks and benefit of the treatment as well as long
term effects following treatment. It also looked at clear
recording of the name of the surgeon in charge and the
person who obtained consent. The records review was
intended to back up information captured from the ques-
tionnaires [16]. Two hundred fourteen questionnaires and
informed consent forms were distributed to the surgical
units of the respective University teaching Hospitals. Sur-
geons from the following surgical departments participated
in the study; General surgery, Orthopedic surgery, Ear-
Nose-Throat, Ophthalmology, Dentistry, Obstetrics and
Gynaecology. Participants were given ample time of at least
one week to fill the questionnaires and reminders sent to
those who delayed to return the filled questionnaires. 
Data management
Qualitative data was collected and recorded in note
form. Data was checked in the field to ensure that all
the information had been properly collected and re-
corded. This process was repeated to ensure completeness
and consistency. Thematic and content analysis was car-
ried out whereby field notes were categorized according to
the research themes and interpreted in line with the study
objectives and research questions. Relevant comparisons
were made between the different groups of informants.
The survey data was entered into Epidata version 3.2
(Epidata association, Denmark) and exported to SPSS
version 17 where after checking for duplicate entries a
preliminary analysis of each variable was made to identify
additional range and omission errors. Averages for ques-
tions that required quantitative answers and frequency
tables for questions that required a choice among several
given alternatives were calculated.
Ethical considerations
Ethical approval was sought from the Makerere University
School of Biomedical Sciences Research and Ethics
Committee and the Uganda National Council for Science
and Technology. Permission to conduct the study was
obtained from the respective hospital administrations.
Informed consent was obtained before recruitment of any
participant into the study while participant’s identifying
information was kept confidential.
Results
One hundred thirty-three of two hundred fourteen
questionnaires were completed and returned, 384
patients’  record files were reviewed and 20 in-depth
interviews conducted.
The response rate for the questionnaires was 62.1% with
mean age of the surgeons at 33.1 years (SD 8.420, range
22 to 64 years).  There were more males (80.5%) than
females (19.5%).  About 60.2% had a bachelors’  medical
degree, 33.8% had masters’ degrees and 3% had doctorate
degrees. The respondents had a mean working experience
of 4.8 years (SD 6.454, range 0–39 years). About 29.3% of
the respondents were intern doctors or residents in a sur-
gical discipline, 16.5% were from general surgery, 16.5%
from Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 9.8% from dentistry,
13.5% from orthopedics, 6% from ophthalmology, while
4.5% were general practitioners.
The average number of patients operated per participant
was 10.4 (SD 20.2) per week.
Though 99.2% of respondents agreed that informed
consent was necessary before any surgical procedure only
48.8% reported routinely obtaining consent all the time they
performed surgery (Table 1). There were varying responses
concerning the timing of the informed consent process
Page 3
Ochieng et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/40 
Page 3 of 5
Table 1 Cross tabulation of obtaining informed consent all the time by specialization
Specialty  Yes (%)  No (%)  Total  % of overall total
Intern doctors  18 (50)  18 (50)  36  28.8
Specialists  21 (44.7)  26 (55.3)  47  37.6
Postgraduates 10 (41.7)  14 (58.3)  24  19.2
General practioners 12 (66.7)  6 (33.3)  18  14.4
Total  61 (48.8)  64 (51.2)  125  100
The general practioners included both medical officers and dental surgeons with a bachelors degree and had completed internship. 
Odds ratio
1
0.81 (0.31 to 2.11)
0.71 (0.22 to 0.28)
2 (0.54 to 7.92)
with majority (42.1%) saying that informed consent should
be obtained before any surgical procedure (Table 2).
88.6% of the respondents obtained informed consent
from patients at their last surgical operation. 34% of the
respondents did not know the definition of informed
consent. In response to who to secure consent, majority
thought that informed consent should be obtained by
the surgeon performing the procedure though a number
of others believed that a nurse or any other qualified
health worker on the ward where the patient is admitted
should obtain informed consent. Other responses in-
cluded; informed consent was obtained by the admitting
nurse/doctor; by signing the consent form or is obtained
verbally or implied consent.
All hospitals included in the study did not have proper
consent forms. The only evidence of document consent
was the admission form signed by all patients at admission
for in-patient care. Signing of the admission form in many
cases occurs before a patient’s diagnosis is established and
thus no treatment plan is included. Informed consent docu-
mentation in the patient’s records was most of the times
inadequate.
In response to how much information should be availed
to the patient during the informed consent process, most
Table 2 When informed consent should be sought
Frequency Percent
Before any procedure  56  42.1
When patient is fully conscious 9  6.8
On admission  5  3.8
Elective and emergency surgery  10  7.5
Soon after examination 14  10.5
For complex treatment  19  14.3
Anytime  7  5.3
Medical research  2  1.5
Above 18 with stable mind  1  0.8
On change of drugs  1  0.8
Several treatment options  1  0.8
24 Hrs before procedure  2  1.5
Not answered  6  1.5
Total  133  100 
of the surgeons responded that patients should be given
enough information and nothing should be withheld. Re-
spondents suggested that the following information should
be included on the information sheet of the consent form:
the patients’ condition, management options, all treatment
and surgical procedure risks involved, benefits of the pro-
cedure, details of the operation, outcome and possible
complications as much as a patient can understand.
Discussion
The estimated number of doctors working in the surgi-
cal units at the three teaching hospitals was 214 which
was the number of questionnaires handed out. A total of
132 (62.1%) out of 214 questionnaires were completed
and returned which is better than a 52% recorded in a
previous related study [19]. Another related study gave a
response rate of 63% [22]. This also highlights the fact
that staff at university teaching hospitals in Uganda tend
to be reluctant to respond to surveys.
The average age of the surgeons was 33.1 years. The
average age was low because many of the respondents
were either doctors doing their internship or graduate stu-
dents pursuing their masters degree training. In addition,
the majority of the employees at the university and associ-
ated teaching hospitals are actually in the age group 30–
40 years [19]. Medical doctors in Uganda are usually at
least 25 years of age at the time of qualification if trained
in Uganda. However, since the surgical units have clinical
officers who participate in surgery, the four respondents
with a diploma also contributed to the younger age of 22
and these are clinical officers who participate in surgical
procedures at the hospitals.
The 60.2% of respondents with Bachelor’s degree was
high because many of the respondents were either intern
doctors or postgraduate students who tend to respond to
surveys better than their senior counter parts. In addition,
they all perform surgery and contribute to teaching of
medical students in our setting. There were no significant
differences in obtaining informed consent among doctors
among the different specialties, levels of education or ex-
perience as shown in Table 1.
Obtaining informed consent among respondents was
seen improving among those from internship to those in
general practice but then went down during graduate
Page 4
Ochieng et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/40 
Page 4 of 5
training. Also specialists were more than 20% less likely
to obtain informed consent as compared to intern doc-
tors (Table 1).
There were more males than females which are a reflec-
tion of the fact that most of the surgery based clinicians
are actually male. There are relatively fewer females in the
surgical specialties in Uganda.
The average number of patients operated per week
was 10.4 and this is because of the high burden of dis-
ease and low numbers of doctors in our setting, hence
increased work load for the few available doctors at pub-
lic hospitals [23-25].
Almost all, (99.2%) of the respondents agreed that in-
formed consent is necessary though only 48.8% reported
obtaining consent all the time surgery is done. Despite
the fact that emergency surgery occurs at these hospi-
tals, the magnitude of such operations with no next of
kin available to give informed consent cannot be as high
as 51.2% meaning that sometimes doctors do not obtain
informed consent from their patients with no genuine
reason (Table 1). It is also true that for emergency sur-
gery with no available next of kin, the senior hospital ad-
ministration should consent on behalf of the patients. In
this study, 88.6% of the respondents said they had ob-
tained informed consent at their last surgical operation.
However, the quality of such consent may be lacking
since no adequate documentation of informed consent
was available from reviewed patient records.
There was a big variation among respondents as to when
consent should be sought (Table 2) indicating a discrepancy
in the knowledge and practice of informed consent by sur-
geons. The responses are quite different from the expected
practice where informed consent is a process of dialogue
between the patient and the provider [26-28]. Hence the
need to address these differences with a focus on streamlin-
ing the informed consent process in the country.
In response to how informed consent is obtained, 34% of
the respondents described it as follows; consent is got by
the admitting nurse/doctor; by signing the consent form;
obtained verbally; and implied consent. This highlighted
the fact that knowledge and practice of informed consent
were not well appreciated. A number of other respondents
indicated that informed consent is usually obtained by the
anesthesiologists or anesthetic clinical officers.
Additionally, many of the respondents interviewed said
that nurses are used to obtain consent for surgery from
patients. The respondents reasoned that sometimes the
patients are so many and the nurses would help in con-
senting while the doctors did the operating which is a
form of task shifting. All the above responses indicate
the lack of appreciation of what constitutes adequate in-
formed consent.
It should be stressed that informed consent should be
obtained by the surgeon who is going to operate and it 
is a continuous process that starts as soon as the doctor
meets the patient and should continue after the oper-
ation to facilitate the patient’s understanding of the pro-
cedure, benefits, anticipated risks of the operation and
the post operative follow up period.
Despite the fact that there are many deficits in the in-
formed consent process highlighted by this study, chal-
lenges associated with obtaining consent during clinical
care are not limited to our setting but affect other parts
of the world though the reasons could be different [22].
The magnitude of this problem thus calls for a more
comprehensive approach to obtaining informed consent by
development of an informed consent template that has ad-
equate information and room for modification to facilitate
the informed consent process. Additionary, refresher train-
ing and continuing education with focus on medical ethics
can be made mandatory for all medical practitioners.
Study limitations
Self reporting bias may affect the outcome of the study
since some respondents may not report what they actu-
ally practice.
The high level of non-response may give a different in-
terpretation of the findings
The alternatives in the questionnaires were not mutu-
ally exclusive which could have caused confusion to the
respondents.
Conclusions
Informed consent administration and documentation for
surgical care is still inadequate at University teaching
hospitals in Uganda. Surgeons need to be educated into
what constitutes informed consent and the importance
of adhering to such requirements.
There is need for development of an informed consent
template with adequate information and room for modi-
fication to facilitate the informed consent process.
Additional files
 Additional file 1: Self administered Questionnaire for Doctors.
 Additional file 2: Interview guide for in-depth interview.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interest.
Authors’ contributions
JO performed Literature search, study design, data collection, data analysis,
data interpretation, drafting, writing, proof reading and approval of
manuscript; CI performed Literature search study design, proof reading and
approval of manuscript; WB study design, data collection, proof reading and
approval; HK study design, data collection, proof reading and approval; DK
study design, participated in data collection, proof reading and approval; PB
proof reading and approval; IM data analysis, proof reading and approval; GN
study design, data collection, proof reading and approval; EM study design,
data collection, data analysis proof reading and approval. All authors read
and approved content of the final manuscript.
Page 5
Ochieng et al. BMC Medical Ethics 2014, 15:40
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6939/15/40 
Page 5 of 5
Authors’ information
JO is a Medical Doctor and Bioethicist, he is a senior lecturer and chair,
Department of Anatomy at School of Biomedical Sciences, Makerere
University; CI is an associate professor and Dean School of Biomedical
Sciences, Makerere University; WB is a dental Surgeon and senior lecturer in
the Department of Anatomy at Makerere; DK is a general surgeon and chair,
Department of Surgery Gulu University; PB is a senior lecturer in social
administration, Makarere University; HK is a dental surgeon and assistant
lecturer in the Department of Anatmy, School of Biomedical Sciences
Makerere University; IM is a medical doctor and an assistant lecturer in the
Department of Anatomy; GN is a general surgeon and a professor of
Anatomy, St. Augustine International University; EM is an orthopaedic
surgeon and senior lecturer in the Department of Anatomy, School of
Biomedical Sciences Makerere University.
Acknowledgement
The project was supported by the MESAU MEPI Programmatic Award
(No: 1R24TW008886) from the Fogarty International Center. The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the Fogarty International Center or the National
Institutes of Health. Our appreciation to the: health workers at the teaching
hospitals for participating in the research and Department of Anatomy staff,
Makerere University for their support during the conduct of the study.
Author details
1Anatomy Department, School of Biomedical Sciences Makerere University, P.O
7072, Kampala, Uganda. 2Surgery Department, Gulu University, Gulu, Uganda.
3Department of Social Administration College of Humanities and Social
Sciences, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda. 4Anatomy Department,
Kampala International University, Ishaka, Uganda. 5Anatomy Department, St.
Augustine International University, Kampala, Uganda.
Received: 11 October 2013 Accepted: 13 May 2014
Published: 19 May 2014
References
1.  O’Neill O: Some Limits of Informed Consent. Symposium on Consent and
Confidentiality; [URL: "http://www.jme.bmj.com"] http://www.jme.bmj.com.
2.  Nandeau DP, Rich JN, Brietzke SE: Informed Consent In Pediatric Surgery,
Do Parents Understand The Risks? AMA; 2010: [URL: "http://www.archoto.com"] http://www.archoto.com.
3.  Akkad A, Jackson C, Kenyon S, Dixon-Woods M, Taub N, Habiba M: In-
formed consent for elective and emergency surgery: questionnaire
study. Int J Obstet Gynaecol 2004, 111:1133–1138.
4.  Dawes PJD, Davison P: Informed consent: what do patients want to
know? J R Soc Med 1994, 87(3):149–152.
5.  Bhattacharyya T, Yeon H, Harris MB: The medical-legal aspects of informed
consent in orthopaedic surgery. J Bone Joint Surg 2005, 87:2395–2400.
6.  American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Bioethics: Informed
consent, parental permission, and assent in pediatric practice.
Pediatrics 1995, 95(2):314–317.
7.  Food and Drug Administration: Food and Drug Administration. Available at
 http://www.fda.gov/.
8.  Iserson KV, Sanders AB, Mathieu D: Autonomy and informed consent. In
Ethics in Emergency Medicine. 2nd edition. Tucson, AZ: Galen Press Ltd; 1995.
9.  Kaplan RM: Shared medical decision making: a new tool for preventative
medicine. Am J Prev Med 2003, 81:81. 26.
10. King JS, Moulton BW: Rethinking informed consent: the case for shared
medical decision-making. Am JL & Med 32(4):429–501.
11. Beauchamp TL, Childress JF: Principles Of Biomedical Ethics. Fifthth edition.
Oxford University Press; 2001:77–103.
12. Frosch DL, Kaplan RM: Shared decision making in clinical medicine: past
research and future directions. Am J Prev Med 1999, 17:285–294.
13. Briss P, Rimer B, Reilley B, Coates RC, Lee NC, Mullen P, Corso P, Hutchinson AB,
Hiatt R, Kerner J, George P, White C, Gandhi N, Saraiya M, Breslow R, Isham G,
Teutsch SM, Hinman AR, Lawrence R: Promoting informed decisions about
cancer screening in communities and healthcare systems. Am J Prev Med
2004, 26:67–80.
14. The PLoS Medicine Editors: Making the “right” health care decisions: why
values matter. PLoS Med 2009, 6(8):e1000136. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000136.
15. Gillon R: Medical ethics: four principles plus attention to scope. BMJ 1994,
309:184. doi:10.1001/jama.292.4.435. 
16. Ochieng J, Bukuluki P: Perception, understanding and practice of ethics
during research involving humans. East Cent Afr J Surg 2007, 12(1):7–11.
17. Ochieng J: Value and importance of informed consent to researchers at
makerere university. Ann Trop Med Publ Health 2012, 5(1):16–19.
18. Ronald K, Paul K, Stephen K, Elly K, Sewankambo NK: Assessing the quality
of informed consent in a resource-limited setting: a cross-sectional
study. BMC Med Ethics 2012, 13:21.
19. Ibingira CBR, Ochieng J: Attitudes and perceptions about the research
and ethics committee in Kampala, Uganda. Int J Med 2010, 3(2):347–351.
20. Boga M, Davies A, Kamuya D, Kinyanjui SM, Kivaya E, Kombe F, Lang T,
Marsh V, Mbete B, Mlamba A, Molyneux S, Mulupi S, Mwalukore S:
Strengthening the informed consent process in international health
research through community engagement: the KEMRI-Wellcome trust
research programme experience. PLoS Med 2011, 8(9):e1001089.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001089.
21. Ochieng J, Ecuru J, Nakwagala F, Kutyabami P: Research site monitoring
for compliance with ethics regulatory standards: review of experience
from Uganda. BMC Med Ethics 2013, 14:23.
22. Henley L, Benatar SR, Robertson BA, Ensink K: Informed consent – a survey
of doctors’ practices in South Africa. S Afr Med J 1995, 85(12):1273–1278.
23. Burch VC, McKinley D, van Wyk J, Kiguli-Walube S, Cameron D, Cilliers FJ, Long-
ombe AO, Mkony C, Okoromah C, Otieno-Nyunya B, Morahan PS: Career Inten-
tions of Medical Students Trained in Six Sub-Saharan African Countries; 2011.
 http://www.educationforhealth.net.
24. Inke M, Ingo I: Health worker motivation in Africa: the role of non-
financial incentives and human resource management tools. Hum Resour
Health 2006, 4:24.
25. Hirschhorn LR, Lulu O, Andrew F, Norbert D, Paul W: Estimating health
workforce need s for antiretroviral therapy in resource-limited settings.
Hum Resour Health 2006, 4:1.
26. O’Neill O: Some limits of informed consent. J Med Ethics 2003, 29:4–7.
27. James L, Bernat MD, Lynn M, Peterson MD: Patient-centered informed
consent in surgical practice. Arch Surg 2006, 14(1):86–92.
28. Yvonne Chan MS, Jonathan C, Irish MD, Stephen J, Wood MB, Lorne E,
Rotstein MD, Dale H, Brown MB, Patrick J, Gullane MB, Gina A, Lockwood
MM: Patient education and informed consent in head and neck surgery.
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002, 128(11):1269–1274.
doi:10.1186/1472-6939-15-40
Cite this article as: Ochieng et al.: Informed consent practices for
surgical care at university teaching hospitals: a case in a low resource
setting. BMC Medical Ethics 2014 15:40.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
