BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Introduction
  Methods
  Results
  Conclusions
Introduction
  Thalassemia
Methods
  Questionnaires
  Statistical analysis
Results
  Clinical outcome
  Questionnaires
Discussion
  Discrepancy between doctors and patients
    Communicated and perceived risks
    Acceptability of risk
    Influences in decision making
  Consent: precious or unnecessary?
  Beneficence, autonomy and self-aware consent
Conclusions
Abbreviations
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgements
Author details
References
Page 1
Pisu et al. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2014, 9:13
http://www.peh-med.com/content/9/1/13
RESEARCH  Open Access
Reassessing the approach to informed consent:
the case of unrelated hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation in adult thalassemia patients
Salvatore Pisu1,2*, Giovanni Caocci3,4*, Ernesto d’Aloja1,2, Fabio Efficace5, Adriana Vacca4, Eugenia Piras4,
Maria Grazia Orofino6, Carmen Addari6, Michela Pintor1,2, Roberto Demontis1, Federica Demuru2, Maria Rita Pittau1,
Gary S Collins7 and Giorgio La Nasa3,4
Abstract
Introduction: The informed consent process is the legal embodiment of the fundamental right of the individual to
make decisions affecting his or her health., and the patient’s permission is a crucial form of respect of freedom and
dignity, it becomes extremely important to enhance the patient’s understanding and recall of the information given
by the physician. This statement acquires additional weight when the medical treatment proposed can potentially
be detrimental or even fatal. This is the case of thalassemia patients pertaining to class 3 of the Pesaro classification
where Allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) remains the only potentially curative treatment.
Unfortunately, this kind of intervention is burdened by an elevated transplantation-related mortality risk (TRM: all
deaths considered related to transplantation), equal to 30% according to published reports. In thalassemia, the role
of the patient in the informed consent process leading up to HSCT has not been fully investigated. This study
investigated the hypothesis that information provided by physicians in the medical scenario of HSCT is not
fully understood by patients and that misunderstanding and communication biases may affect the clinical
decision-making process.
Methods: A questionnaire was either mailed or given personally to 25 patients. A second questionnaire was
administered to the 12 physicians attending the patients enrolled in this study. Descriptive statistics were
used to evaluate the communication factors.
Results: The results pointed out the difference between the risks communicated by physicians and the risks
perceived by patients. Besides the study highlighted the mortality risk considered to be acceptable by
patients and that considered to be acceptable by physicians.
Conclusions: Several solutions have been suggested to reduce the gap between communicated and
perceived data. A multi-disciplinary approach may possibly help to attenuate some aspects of communication
bias. Several tools have also been proposed to fill or to attenuate the gap between communicated and perceived data.
But the most important tool is the ability of the physician to comprehend the right place of conscious consent in the
relationship with the patient.
Keywords: Patient-doctor relationship, Communication bias, Conscious consent
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:salvatore.pisu@libero.it"] salvatore.pisu@libero.it; [URL: "mailto:gcaocci@alice.it"] gcaocci@alice.it
1Department of Public Health, Clinical and Molecular Medicine, University of
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy
3Hematology, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari,
Italy
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2014 Pisu et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Pisu et al. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2014, 9:13
http://www.peh-med.com/content/9/1/13 
Page 2 of 9
Introduction
There is worldwide agreement that principle of informed
consent is intended to reflect the concept of patients’ au-
tonomy and self-determination and to be the legal em-
bodiment of the right of each individual to make decisions
about his or her own health care [1]. In Italy, the legal basis
for informed consent is well established by article 32 of the
Italian Constitution that asserts that patients cannot be
forced to submit to a medical treatment, unless the treat-
ment is required by law. However, if the need to respect the
patient’s autonomy and its contribution to the good of the
patient are not well understood, this unquestionable right
of patients cannot be properly respected. We contend that
obligations arising from moral or legislative precepts do not
adequately reflect the true value of informed consent.
The importance of informed consent is habitually
stressed by several scholars referring to a quote of 1914
by Justice Cardozo that states: «Every human being of
adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what
shall be done with his own body; and a surgeon who per-
forms an operation without his patient’s consent commits
an assault, for which he is liable in damages» [2]. But a
true interpretation of informed consent actually dates
back as far as 1895, when George Surbled stated that
«patients have the right to refuse any kind of trial or ther-
apy merely barricading themselves behind their wish with-
out any justifications. In fact they are the only masters of
their life, then of their body that they can use as they like»
[3].  This statement acquires additional weight when the
proposed medical treatment may potentially be detrimen-
tal or even fatal. But what should inspire the concept of in-
formed consent? By honor of their profession, physicians
have the moral responsibility to identify reasonable treat-
ment options for each patient and then to discuss with
them the benefits and potential risks of these treatment
options, answer their questions as openly and honestly as
possible to identify the option they feel is most appropriate
and finally to accept the patient’s choice (so long as they
can do so in good conscience). The fundamental goal of
this long procedure that consists in transmitting the infor-
mation and obtaining informed consent, is to ensure that
patients, are fully aware and conscious both of the natural
threats of their disease and of the potential possibilities of
recovery. The true essence of informed consent is to trans-
fer the knowledge of the risks and benefits from the one
who knows them (namely, the physician) to the one who
has to go through and experience them (the patient). Since
β-Thalassemia major is a disorder in which this challenge
is particularly relevant, mutual understanding among phy-
sicians and patients is essential in this process.
Thalassemia
β-thalassemia is a severe hereditary haemolytic anaemia
that arises from the reduced or absent synthesis of the 
haemoglobin subunit beta. Clinical findings include severe
anaemia, hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis, diabetes mellitus,
hypogonadism, growth retardation, sexual immaturity,
moderate to severe pulmonary syndromes and cardiac dis-
orders. Myocardial disease is by far the most important
life-limiting complication and is responsible for about 70
percent of deaths in these patients [4].
Allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT)
remains the only potentially curative treatment [5].  On
the other hand, transfusion and iron chelation therapies
are a valid alternative in patients who are compliant with
treatment recommendations. In fact, the availability of
better treatment strategies has considerably improved the
survival and complication-free survival rates in these pa-
tients [6-8].
Unfortunately, unrelated HSCT in thalassemia patients
pertaining to the class 3 of the Pesaro classification
(mostly adult patients with presence of hepatomegaly,
portal fibrosis and a history of irregular iron chelation) is
burdened by a high transplantation-related mortality risk
(TRM: all deaths that are considered to be associated with
transplantation), equal to 30% according to published re-
ports [9-11]. Graft versus Host Disease (GVHD), i.e. a re-
action of donated bone marrow against the patient’s own
tissue, is a major cause of post-transplantation morbidity
and mortality but, although the use of new protocols has
consistently reduced the risk of toxicity, the percentage of
TRM is still high [12]. Hence, patients without an HLA-
identical sibling donor are left with the difficult choice of
whether they should continue traditional therapy, which
can offer a life expectancy of fifteen years or more, or
accept the high risk of unrelated HSCT in the hope of de-
finitively eradicating the disease. This latter point marks
the fundamental difference between thalassemia and other
diseases, such as leukemia or myeloma, which are charac-
terized by their unfavorable prognosis and the lack of an
alternative to HSCT [13].
It is well known that in medicine it is mandatory for
patients and physicians to thoroughly discuss the advan-
tages, limits, and complications of the all so far available
potentially effective therapeutic approaches. Indeed, several
clinical reports have stressed the importance of communi-
cation strategies and of their introduction into routine
medical practice [14,15]. This study combines the results
of unrelated HSCT, performed in 34 adult class 3 thalas-
semia patients, with the main communication factors be-
tween patients and physicians. In thalassemia the role of
the patient in the informed consent process leading up to
HSCT has not been fully investigated so far.
We decided to evaluate whether communication biases,
heuristics, distorted processes of recall and misunder-
standing could affect the clinical decision-making process
and compromise the informed consent process for unre-
lated HSCT. We also address the legal and deontological
Page 3
Pisu et al. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2014, 9:13
http://www.peh-med.com/content/9/1/13 
Page 3 of 9
issues with particular emphasis on the physician-patient
healing relationship and the moral aspects of clinical
decision-making. Informing patients of all the factors in-
volved in their health care is the primary responsibility of
the physician who can thereby guarantee a more “self-
aware” informed consent process to patients.
We hypothesized that the information provided by
physicians in the medical scenario of HSCT might not
be fully understood by patients and that misunderstand-
ing and communication biases may affect the clinical
decision-making process. Several errors in judgment may
cause bias in communication between patients and physi-
cians. Under a condition of uncertainty or in case of high
risk, human beings are prone to take mental shortcuts
commonly known as “heuristics”. Cognitive psychologists
have categorized several heuristics: availability (tendency
to judge an event by the ease with which relevant exam-
ples are recalled), anchoring (to use an initial piece of in-
formation to make subsequent judgments); framing effects
(to reach a decision based on the ‘framework’ within which
the information was given); blind obedience (to indiscrim-
inately follow the decision of an authority) [16]. Heuristics
are commonly used by patients within the informed con-
sent process and they seem to be at least partly responsible
for the discordance observed between the perceptions of
patients and their treating physicians with regard to the
risks and benefits of treatment [17]. 
Table 1 Patient features
Variable
All patients
Median recipient age (years, range)
Gender
Male
Female
Death
Rejection
Grade II-IV acute GVHD (in dead pts)
Grade II-IV acute GVHD (in live pts)
Chronic GVHD
Alive with graft
Gender
Male
Female
Median test age (years, range)
≤ 20
≥ 20
School level at the time of HSCT
High
Low
GVHD: Graft Versus Host Disease. 
Frequency
21 (16-37)
16/34
18/34
9/34
0
6/9
3/25
3/25
25/34
12/25
13/25
25 (18-35)
13
12
14/25
11/25 
%
47
53
27
0
67
12
12
73
48
52
52
48
56
44
Methods
Thirty-four consecutive adult class 3 thalassemic patients
(16 males and 18 females) aged more than 16 years (median
21, range 16 - 37) were transplanted from an unrelated
donor after a myeloablative regimen in two different Italian
bone marrow transplantation centers. Patients’ clinical fea-
tures are shown in Table 1. Every informed consent session
and all the information provided to patients were fully doc-
umented to get a realistic picture of the meeting. All the
physicians involved collected and discussed in advance lit-
erature data on GVHD and mortality risk rates during a
consensus conference. The analysis of the informed consent
process was conducted on the 25 surviving patients (12
males and 13 females) after obtaining a written informed
consent from them or from their parents in the case of chil-
dren under the age of 18 years. A questionnaire was either
emailed or given personally to patients. A second question-
naire was administered to the 12 physicians who treated
the patients enrolled in this study. Written informed con-
sent was provided by the patients according to the Declar-
ation of Helsinki. The study was approved by the Ethics
Board of the University of Cagliari, School of Medicine.
Questionnaires
The questionnaires were developed in collaboration with a
multidisciplinary team including an expert psychologist, 
surgeons and nurses. Physicians and patients were asked
to recall the time when they respectively informed and
were informed for the first time of the possibility of unre-
lated HSCT. The questionnaire that was administered
both to physicians and patients contained the following 6
items, assessed with the visual 7 item Likert-type scale or
percent values (Table 2): 1) the transplant-related mortal-
ity risk perception on a seven-item Likert-type scale; 2)
the mortality risk rate communicated by the physician and
recalled by the patients (this item was intended to detect
whether there was a possible frame effect between numeric
variables provided by the physicians and those recalled
by the patients); 3) the percent value of mortality risk
that was considered acceptable to undergo the trans-
plant procedure; 4) the perception of GVHD as a life-
threatening condition; 5) how much previous additional
information (from family, friends with thalassemia, TV,
internet etc.) had influenced the choice of undergoing
HSCT (this item allowed to detect a potential availability
heuristic);  6) the strength of the patient’s motivation to
undergo HSCT before the informed consent session with
the physician (this item allowed to detect an eventual an-
choring heuristic).
The information was conveyed by the physician with the
aid of numeric values such as a percentage or by showing
Kaplan Meyer overall survival and TRM curves previously
Page 4
Pisu et al. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2014, 9:13
http://www.peh-med.com/content/9/1/13 
Page 4 of 9
Table 2 Communication factors explored among patients
and physicians
Items of the questionnaire
1  Transplant-related mortality risk perception
(1 to 7 Likert Scale)
2  Percent value of mortality risk communicated and recalled
(% value from 5% to 50%)
3  Percent value of mortality risk considered acceptable to undergo the
transplant procedure
(% value from 5% to 50%)
4  Perception of GVHD risk as a life-threatening condition
(1 to 7 Likert Scale)
5  How much previous information (other patients, friends, TV, Internet)
had influenced the patient before informed consent
(1 to 7 Likert Scale)
6  Motivation to undergo HSCT before informed consent
(1 to 7 Likert Scale)
GVHD: Graft Versus Host Disease.
published in literature. In order to verify the results of
the informed consent session over time, we wrote them
all, e.g. failure and death rates, in a case history. These
notes helped us compare the real rates the patients were
told with the rates the patients remembered.
Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistics were used to evaluate communica-
tion factors. The data we collected were summarized by
reporting the proportion of patients answering each
item. Association between patient preferences and de-
mographical characteristics was evaluated by logistic re-
gression analysis. Different groups were compared using
the t-test for independent samples. Post-transplant sur-
vival probability was estimated using the Kaplan and
Meier method [18].
Results
Clinical outcome
The Kaplan-Meier survival and TRM probabilities for the
34 patients studied were 73.5% and 26.5% respectively.
Nine patients died of transplantation-related causes at a
mean time of 170 days (range 17-470) after the HSCT pro-
cedure. Six of these patients presented acute GVHD (67%).
Among the 25 surviving, transfusion-independent patients,
3 (12%) developed grade II-IV acute GVHD and 3 (12%)
developed mild chronic GVHD. The median follow-up of
surviving patients was 5.9 years (range 0.9-8.4).
Questionnaires
The 25 surviving transfusion-independent patients returned
the questionnaire after a median of 20 days, with answers
to all the 6 items. The median time between HSCT and the
survey was 12 months. The median age of patients at the
time of the survey was 25 years (range 18-35). All the 12 
treating physicians involved in the informed consent and in
the clinical decision-making process completed the ques-
tionnaire. Table 3 shows the score differences between phy-
sicians and patients.
The mortality risk perceived by the patients, assessed
on a 7-item Likert scale, was significantly lower if com-
pared to the risk perceived by the physicians (3.6 vs 4.9,
p = 0.001). The mean mortality risk rate that was actually
communicated by the physicians was 30%, while the rate
that was later recalled among the patients was significantly
lower (20%). No demographic features influenced the pa-
tient’s recall of the mortality risk rate. Interestingly, the
mortality risk that was considered to be acceptable by the
physicians was significantly lower compared to the mor-
tality risk that was considered to be acceptable by the pa-
tients (19.6 vs 29.6, p = 0.005). Among patients, this rate
was significantly lower in the female patients than in the
male ones (25% vs 34%, p = 0.003).
The perception of the risk of GVHD as a life-threatening
condition (assessed on a 7-item Likert scale) was again sig-
nificantly lower among the patients if compared to physi-
cians (4.1 vs 5.4, p = 0.006).  Female patients perceived a
higher risk than male patients (5.2 vs 3.1, p = 0.024). The
other demographic features that were analyzed such as the
age or the level of education had no influence on the pa-
tient’s perception of severe GVHD as a life-threatening
condition.
Finally, patients were strongly self-motivated to undergo
HSCT before the informed consent process (4.8 on a 7
seven-item Likert-type scale).  According to physicians’
evaluation, patients had been strongly influenced by infor-
mation they had previously obtained from non-professional
sources (4.6 on a 7 seven-item Likert-type scale).
Discussion
The majority of therapies expose patients to some degree
of risk. In fact, the beneficial effects of drugs and thera-
peutic approaches are always counterbalanced by un-
desired consequences. Therefore, it becomes essential for
the physician and the patient to discuss beforehand the
appropriateness of cure and/or treatment options, in order
to achieve the patient’s best interest. (The) Physician must
be able to balance beneficence and maleficence when con-
sidering the feasibility of treatment. Exploration of com-
munication strategies between physicians and patients/
relatives may lead to a better understanding of the factors
that play a prominent role in the consent and in its com-
prehension. In general, patients who are satisfied with
communication can cope with treatment-related stress bet-
ter. Several authors emphasize the importance of imparting
individually tailored information. In seeking consent, phy-
sicians must supply patients and/or participants with an
adequate amount of information but, more importantly,
they must make sure that the information has been fully
Page 5
Pisu et al. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2014, 9:13
http://www.peh-med.com/content/9/1/13 
Page 5 of 9
Table 3 Differences between patients and physicians perceptions
Transplant-related mortality risk perception
(1 to 7 Likert Scale)
Percent value of mortality risk communicated and recalled
(% value from 5% to 50%)
Percent value of mortality risk considered acceptable to undergo the transplant procedure
(% value from 5% to 50%)
Perception of GVHD as a severe life-threatening condition
(1 to 7 Likert Scale)
How much previous information had influenced the patient before informed consent
(1 to 7 Likert Scale)
Motivation to undergo HSCT before informed consent
(1 to 7 Likert Scale)
*Two-tailed t test significant value; GVHD: Graft Versus Host Disease; SE: standard error. 
Physicians
(N = 12)
mean
(SE)
4,9
(0,3)
30.0
(2.6)
19.6
(2.5)
5.4
(0.4)
4.6
(0.4)
4.6
(0.5) 
Patients
(N = 25)
mean
(SE)
3.6
(0.2)
20.4
(1.4)
29.6
(2.2)
4.1
(0.2)
2.2
(0.3)
4.8
(0.3) 
p value
0,001*
0,005*
0,005*
0,006*
0,006*
NS
understood [19,20]. The degree and the quality of informa-
tion that should be disclosed to the patient represent a key
question. A recent Cochrane review [21] identified ‘efforts
by researchers to investigate interventions which seek to
improve information delivery and consideration of infor-
mation to enhance informed consent. although we were
not able to say with confidence which types of interven-
tions are preferable’. A common approach in the legal and
bioethical community seems to consider either spontan-
eous, that is the information given spontaneously in spoken,
written or video form and responsive disclosure, that
comprises the information given in response to the pa-
tient’s questions [22]. In this model, widely adopted also in
the Italian wards, a dual procedural aim is reached. The
patient-physician relationship may rely on one side on the
standard medical information a reasonable person may
need to make the decision in question, while on the other
hand the physician may enrich the information on the
basis of the individual patient needs and doubts (in a tai-
lored information protocol).
Although the number of patients involved in our study
is robust enough to depict the entire phenomenon (25%
of the Italian Pesaro class-3 transplanted patients with
β-Thalassemia Major), (it) is not sufficient to draw a de-
finitive conclusion. Despite this, we believe that our ex-
perience can be significant and instructive in the field of
hematology to better understand the importance of in-
formed consent in the patient-physician relationship.
The non-standardization and the non-psychometrical
validation of the questionnaires used in the study is an-
other potential limitation of our study. The Cochrane re-
view [21] underlines that high levels of heterogeneity
associated with many of the main analyses may encourage 
the meta-analysis results to be interpreted with caution
and these limits are present in the vast majority of studies
on informed consent. In fact, as we needed to assess our
patients in a short time and no validated questionnaires
allowing evaluation of the patients’ ability to recall the in-
formation provided during the informed consent process
in this particular field of hematology were available, we
decided not to undertake a validation process that would
have required a long time.
Three issues of crucial importance need to be stressed
at this point: 1 – the different way physicians and patients
communicate and perceive risk; 2 – the different ways
physicians and patients determine which level of risk is ac-
ceptable; 3 – the nonprofessional sources influencing the
decision-making process.
Discrepancy between doctors and patients
Communicated and perceived risks
The data obtained in this study confirmed a clear differ-
ence in the communication and in the perception of
HSCT-related risks among the patients and the physicians
involved in the clinical relationship. Patients recalled a
mortality risk rate that was lower than the mortality risk
rate they were actually told by the physicians (20% vs
30%). It is interesting to observe that female patients were
more aware of the potential risks of the procedure. There
may be several reasons for this miscomprehension. It is
possible that during the informed process, patients felt
anxious because of the uncertainty of the clinical out-
come, and were therefore prone to anchor their choice to
personal hope or to an initially positive impression. In fact,
patients’ motivation to undergo HSCT before the discus-
sion with the physician was very high (mean value of 4.6
Page 6
Pisu et al. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2014, 9:13
http://www.peh-med.com/content/9/1/13 
Page 6 of 9
on a 1-7 item Likert scale).  Nevertheless, the question-
naires could not confirm a role for “availability heuristics”
(mean value of 2.2 on a 1-7 item Likert scale). This dis-
cordance may be partly attributed to the way in which
physicians assessed the benefits and risks of HSCT. In-
deed, when physicians present HSCT in terms of chances
of survival (positive frame),  they paint a scenery that is
psychologically much more acceptable than it would be if
the procedure were proposed in terms of chances of death
(negative trend). Ideally, a balance of both negative and
positive views should be always presented [23]. Physicians
not only have to improve their communication skills [24],
but they also have to be sure that patients can remember
in the best possible way the information provided during
the consent process [25].
Patient’s recollection plays a fundamental role in the
informed consent process: ordinary recollection pro-
cesses may lead to distortions of crucial information, but
even, patients may misremember information gained,
due to different attitude toward the weighing informa-
tion process before and after their decision. It has been
shown that patients are likely to forget information
based on verbatim memory (i.e. risks and complications
rates), and to ground their choice on gist memory, which
reflects enduring understanding and interpretation [26].
Unfortunately, informed consent is generally based on the
communication of data, numbers and/or rates. In recent
years, there has been a revolution in communication strat-
egies. Manual information systems have increasingly been
integrated by computer-based technologies capable of
implementing the quality of communication. In particular,
visual communication has been shown to be extremely ef-
fective in strengthening communication [23,27]:  indeed,
the majority of people seem to find it easier to remember
pictures than words. However, these efforts were generally
not so successful or showed mixed results in some pa-
tients [28].  Other strategies like corrected feedback, as
Festinger et al suggest, may improve the recall of informa-
tion, but the time interval required to realize this proced-
ure is too long to be used in unrelated hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation [29]. Surely, by improving our know-
ledge of the various communication strategies as visual
graphs, movies, alternative formats to present and frame
risk information- it may be possible to attenuate some of
the current biases encountered within the decision-making
process with the patient. However, we also have to investi-
gate or assess the responsibility of the physician within the
communication process, above all his/her understanding
of the real role of informed consent in the relationship
with the patient.
Acceptability of risk
Our results show that there is a significant difference
comparing the acceptability of mortality risk in physicians 
and patients, i.e. 20% and 30% respectively, and comparing
female and male patients, with the former being more
realistic (34% vs. 25%). A higher mortality risk is likely
to be accepted more easily by people with a serious and
chronic disease than healthy individuals as the former
have a stronger motivation to recover. This kind of reac-
tions is not only comprehensible, but even acceptable.
The way people react to illness was studied by Elisabeth
Kubler Ross who indicated acceptance as the last stage
and denial/refusal as the first one [30]. Diseases change
the way people perceive illness and disease-related risks.
In fact, if there is a real possibility of recovery, people suf-
fering from a disease are disposed to accept high risks and
severe side effects differently from healthy individuals.
Therefore physicians have to be aware that patients per-
ceive their disease and disease-related risks differently
from them and that they should not conduct the informed
consent process subjectively, but only focusing on scien-
tific evidence.
Influences in decision making
Another intriguing item that emerged from our analysis
concerns the moment at which patients take their thera-
peutic decision. Our results show that patients are strongly
persuaded to undergo HSCT before starting the informed
consent process. During the information process this event
may undermine patient attentiveness to the information
provided by physician, and undermine physicians motiv-
ation to provide detail if the physician believes that the pa-
tient has already made his/her decision. At a more in-
depth analysis, a medical choice made by patients before
they are provided with all the necessary information by
their treating physician, albeit legal and acceptable
threatens, the medical role of a ‘trusted guide on the ill-
ness journey’ [22]. The ratio of the information process re-
lies on the need to bridge the knowledge gap between
physician and patient, due to the cultural difference exist-
ing on the knowledge of medical issues. The main aim of
the informed consent process is to give the patient all the
scientific tools that are necessary to let him/her freely and
deliberately decide for his/her own good. What if the
physician is not longer identified (anymore) as the trusted
scientific source of the ‘gold standard’ in information and
treatment? Do physicians have a (the) duty to respect the
patient’s therapeutic choice or refusal, even when such
choices are not grounded in an accurate understanding of
verified or validated assessment (their technical evalu-
ation) of the available and shared medical protocols, as
was the case in the recent Italian debate on FDA/EMA/
AIFA unauthorized protocol (proposed by the Stamina
Foundation) on the therapeutic use of stem cells? May
naïve suggestions (or misinformation) coming from the
web or from other questionable sources supplant a sound
medical information process? In such scenario, a patient’s
Page 7
Pisu et al. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2014, 9:13
http://www.peh-med.com/content/9/1/13 
Page 7 of 9
autonomy and a physician’s of beneficence both appear
to be threatened and finding a shared decision making
process becomes imperative.
Consent: precious or unnecessary?
Our observations show that the consent process is not a
mere bureaucratic procedure and that physicians should
emphasize its importance more forcefully [31]. In fact, in-
formed consent is sometimes considered as a bureaucratic
burden or a legal myth [32], or even as an ineffective sign-
ing procedure [33], that regrettably continues to be used in
a paternalistic way by some healthcare professionals [34].
Some physicians also use informed consent as a method
of defensive medicine to protect themselves and not to
preserve patients and their own dignity [35].
Conversely physicians should foster the patient-physician
relationship and implement the informed consent process
that entail respecting patients’ autonomy, acting for their
good and empowering them to make decisions in line with
their own values. On the other side patients’  decision
may be grounded in unscientific and irrational basis
even when the physician has provided them with accurate
information.
All the issues that have been analyzed so far seem to cast
doubts on the fundamental basis of the informed consent
doctrine. A deep gap between the quality and the quantity
of the clinical information provided by physicians and the
one gathered and recalled by patients has been demon-
strated. If these data are representative of a more general
phenomenon, all the legal and ethical considerations on
the fundamental basis of consent lose their importance.
The clinical decision to undergo or to refuse the HSCT
treatment is taken apart from the relevant issues concern-
ing procedural security and personal values.
The validity of individual consent resides in the physi-
cian’s ability to convey exhaustive and essential informa-
tion and, (contemporarily, depends upon) in the patient’s
ability to properly interact with the doctor that will allow
him/her to fully understand and recall the information
provided. Before seeking the patient’s agreement, the
physician has the fundamental duty to inform the patient
completely and to make sure that he or she is aware of,
and has genuinely understood, the risks and benefits both
of the proposed treatment [36] and of alternative proce-
dures and treatments. A new advance in the informed
consent process can be approachable only in a new and
right equilibrium between the pursuit of beneficence and
reverence for autonomy.
Beneficence, autonomy and self-aware consent
Over the last 50 years, patient(’s) freedom has become
the hallmark of the patient-physician relationship, while
beneficence has progressively lost the central position it
had held in the past. 
Precisely, the shift from beneficence to autonomy in-
troduced a new approach to clinical decision-making
that led to the doctrine of informed consent. Today, au-
tonomy is widely considered to be one of the four mas-
ter principles of bioethics and plays a prominent role in
the medical setting. However, although the recognition
of the value of autonomy has certainly been one of the
most important achievements in the field of bioethics so
far, autonomy and beneficence should not be considered
separately as Beauchamp and Childress contend [37], or
as contrasting principles, as Engelhardt asserts [38].
In our opinion, the concept of autonomy should not be
considered as an independent principle and beneficence
should not be identified with paternalism as Will main-
tained [31]. In fact, they are both cornerstones of the doc-
trine of informed consent, and beneficence cannot be
achieved if patient’s autonomy is not respected.
The importance of autonomy is therefore closely related
to the principle of beneficence. In fact, the good of the pa-
tient cannot be achieved if patients are not supported in
their right to autonomous choice. Then, it is mandatory to
consider autonomy as an unavoidable condition to attain
the good and not a principle beside beneficence. Hence,
beneficence and autonomy are inseparable concepts, but
not inseparable principles, essentially because autonomy is
not a principle [33]. Pellegrino and Thomasma success-
fully emphasized the principle of beneficence, but they
have never challenged the idea of autonomy as a principle
[39]. From our point of view, informed consent becomes
an indisputable means to support autonomy, in order to
achieve beneficence [40-42].  However, only beneficence
can be recognized as a principle.
Consent was initially designed not only to preserve pa-
tients’ independence during the decision-making process
[31], but also to allow physicians to act for the good of
patients by promoting their understanding and, conse-
quently, their right to choose or refuse the proposed
treatment freely.
In fact, the good of patients cannot be achieved by a
mere supply of information that may even be misleading
in some cases. The term “informed consent” is itself so
ambiguous that some authors have suggested to replace
it with “Information for consensus”, as in the Italian de-
ontological medical code [31]. However, this expression is
still unclear, as it does not entail patients’ understanding
during the consent process [43,44].  In fact, physicians
often provide patients with a large amount of information,
but they don’t verify whether patients understand the key
points of the conversation.
This observation has led us to shift from the concept
of “informed consent” to the more appropriate one of
“self-aware consent” [45]. We are well aware of the de-
bate around consciousness, that led several authors to
stress the importance on the unconscious events arising
Page 8
Pisu et al. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2014, 9:13
http://www.peh-med.com/content/9/1/13 
Page 8 of 9
from the patient-physician relationship. In particular,
scholars who identify mental events with brain events are
inclined to consider the process of legal consent as an
illusion or, even, as a myth [46]. In this article we have
already stressed the importance of unconscious events
but, at the same time, we are deeply convinced that a self-
aware consent can be obtained if all the factors involved
are taken into account. Actually, the pursuit of self-aware
consent is paramount. While, on the one hand, consent
implies the concepts of information and contextualization,
on the other, it is awareness that plays the most crucial
role in our opinion. For this reason, physicians must not
only pay attention to all the factors that are important to
obtain this goal, but they also must identify the subcon-
scious and unconscious barriers as much as possible. In
our opinion, that is not a burden, but a fascinating task
that helps physicians respect and promote patient’ auton-
omy when trying to reach beneficence. We believe that
patients’  choice can be deliberately autonomous only
if it is aware. In fact, autonomy and awareness are not
correspondent: a decision could only apparently seem au-
tonomous, and actually be not real aware.
We believe that the right way to build a correct proced-
ure of consent must be searched in a sort of mediation be-
tween all of the factors involved in the relationship: the
patient’s need to be respected in his/her autonomy and free-
dom and, at the same time, the doctor’s need to be recog-
nized in his/her moral integrity and knowledge in the field.
The goal is to reach a real empowerment of the patient
to be part of a shared-decision making model [47] in
which ‘a patient may take some responsibility for her or
his own health care rather than merely being loaded with
a great deal of complex information’ [22]. In this context
physicians could provide their patient with moral recom-
mendations about his/her responsibility without becoming
necessarily paternalistic.
We agree with Mazur who identifies at least six dimen-
sions in the decision-making process that should be taken
into account by the physicians involved in HSCT proce-
dures: harms, benefits, scientific evidence, clinical experi-
ence, estimation experience and psychological experience
involving estimates [48]. In our opinion, another dimen-
sion, i.e. self-aware consent, should be added. Self-aware
consent is a valid procedure only at the time that the pa-
tient is giving consent; in fact, if some conditions are going
to change, i.e. clinical picture, environmental conditions,
consent must be reconsidered. Indeed, consent is some-
how a dynamic procedure that portrays a specific situation
at an established moment rather than a static process given
once and for all.
Conclusions
Self-aware consent is crucial in the patient-physician re-
lationship and its achievement can be affected by several 
dilemmas. A multi-disciplinary approach (medical, psycho-
logical and ethical) may possibly help to smooth some of
the challenging issues characterizing the information pro-
cedure. Several ways have been suggested to fill or attenuate
the gap between communicated and perceived information,
but physicians’ ability to value the informed consent within
their relationship with patients undoubtedly plays a key role
[21]. The pursuit of self-aware consent is paramount and
physicians have to realize that respecting patients’ freedom
is part of the goal of their profession and that self-aware
consent in a shared-decision making model rather than
informed consent is the only ground where freedom can
be respected.
Abbreviations
HSCT: Allogenic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation; GVHD: Graft Versus
Host Disease; TRM: Transplantation-Related Mortality.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
GLN and GC designed and coordinated the study, interpreted data and
wrote the first draft; FE and GSC coordinated data analysis and
interpretation; AV, EP, RL, MGO and CA recruited patients and administered
survey instruments; ED addressed the ethical and legal aspects and helped
draft the manuscript; RD, MP and MRP addressed the legal aspects; FD
addressed the ethical aspects; SP addressed the ethical aspects and wrote
the last version of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to say thank to Samantha Pinna for refining the
English language and style and for her professional assistance in writing the
manuscript.
Author details
1Department of Public Health, Clinical and Molecular Medicine, University of
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. 2Mediterranean Center of Clinical Bioethics, University
of Cagliari-Sardegna Ricerche, Cagliari, Italy. 3Hematology, Department of
Medical Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. 4Bone Marrow
Transplantation Center, Hospital “R. Binaghi”, Cagliari, Italy. 5Health Outcome
Research Unit, Gruppo Italiano Malattie Ematologiche dell’Adulto (GIMEMA),
Data Centre, Rome, Italy. 6Department of Biomedical Science and
Biotechnology, Pediatric Clinic of the Bone Marrow Transplant Centre,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy. 7Centre for Statistics in Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Received: 28 July 2013 Accepted: 29 June 2014
Published: 12 August 2014
References
1.  Paterick TJ, Carson GU, Allen MC, Paterick TE: Medical informed consent:
general considerations for physicians. Mayo Clin Proc 2008, 83:313–319.
2.  Schloendorff vv the society of the New York Hospital: 1914. 211 NY 125 105
NE 92 1914 Lexis 1028.
3.  Surbled G: La Morale dans ses Rapports avec la Medicine et l’Hygiene. Paris: V.
Retaux et fils; 1905:216–217.
4.  Rund D, Rachmilewtz E: Beta thalassemia. New Engl J Med 2005,
353:1135–1146.
5.  Borgna-Pignatti C, Rugolotto S, De Stefano P, Zhoo H, Cappellini MD, Del
Vecchio GC, Romeo MA, Forni GL, Gamberini MR, Ghilardi R, Piga A, Cuccu A:
Marrow transplantation in patients with thalassemia major treated with
transfusion and deferoxamine. Haematologica 2004, 89:1187–1193.
6.  Borgna Pignatti C, Rugolotto S, De Stefano P, Piga A, Di Gregorio F,
Gamberini MR, Sabato U, Melevendi C, Cappellini MD, Verlato G: Survival
Page 9
Pisu et al. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine 2014, 9:13
http://www.peh-med.com/content/9/1/13 
Page 9 of 9
and disease complications in thalassemia major. Ann New York Acad Sci
1998, 850:227–231.
7.  Taher A, Jefri A, Elalfly MS, Al Zir K, Daar S, Rofail D, Baladi JF, Habr D,
Kriemler-Krahn U, El-Beshlawy A: Improved treatment satisfaction and
convenience with deferasirox in iron-overloaded patients with beta
thalassemia: results from the ESCALATOR trial. Acta Haematol 2010,
123:220–225.
8.  Cao A, Galanello R: Beta Thalassemia. Genet Med 2010, 12:61–76.
9.  La Nasa G, Giarnini F, Colatelli F, Arras M, De Stefano P, Leda A, Pizzati A,
Sanna MA, Vacca A, Lucarelli G, Contu L: Unrelated donor bone marrow
transplantation for thalassemia: the effect of extended haplotypes.
Blood 2002, 99:4350–4356.
10. Caocci G, Pisu S, Argioulu F, Giardini C, Locatelli F, Vacca A, Orofino MG,
Piras E, De Stefano P, Addari MC, Ledda A, La Nasa G: Unrelated donor
bone marrow transplantation in adult patients with thalassemia.
Bone Marrow Transplant 2006, 37:165–169.
11. Locatelli F: Outcome of unrelated donor bone marrow transplantation for
thalassemia major patients [abstract]. Blood 2011, 118:149.
12. Bernardo ME, Piras E, Vacca A, Giorgiani G, Zecca M, Bertaina A, Pagliara D,
Contoli B, Pinto RM, Caocci G, Mastronuzzi A, La Nasa G, Locatelli F:
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in thalassemia major:
results of a reduced-toxicity conditioning regimen based on the use of
treosulfan. Blood 2012, 120:473–476.
13. Merckaert I, Libert Y, Bron D, Jaivenois MF, Martiat P, Slachmuyalder JL,
Razavi D: Impact of life-threatening risk information on the evolution of
patient’ anxiety and risk recall: the specific context of informed consent
for experimental stem cell transplant. Patient Educ Couns 2009, 75:192–198.
14. Mazur DJ, Hickam DH: Patients’ preferences for risk disclosure and role in
decision making for invasive medical procedures. J Gen Intern Med 1997,
12:114–117.
15. Kerr J, Engel J, Schlesinger-Raab A, Sauer H, Holzel D: Communication,
quality of life and age: results of a 5 year prospective study in breast
cancer patients. Ann Oncol 2003, 14:421–427.
16. Redelmeier DA: The cognitive psychology of missed diagnoses. Ann Intern
Med 2005, 142:115–120.
17. Meropol NJ, Weinfurt KP, Burnett CB, Balshem A, Benson AB 3rd, Castel L,
Corbett S, Diefenbach M, Gaskin D, Li Y, Manne S, Marshall J, Rowland JH,
Slater E, Sulmasy DP, Van Echo D, Washinfion S, Schulman KA: Perceptions of
patients and physician regarding phase-1 cancer clinical trials: implications
for physician-patient communication. J Clin Oncol 2003, 21:2589–2596.
18. Kaplan ER, Meier P: Non parametric estimation from incomplete
observation. J Am Stat Assoc 1958, 53:457–481.
19. Schofield PE, Butow PN, Thompson JF, Tattersall MH, Beeney LJ, Dunn SM:
Psychological responses of patients receiving a diagnosis of cancer.
Ann Oncol 2003, 14:48–56.
20. Ptacek JT, Eberhardt TL: The patient-physician relationship. Breaking bad
news: a review of the literature. J Am Med Assoc 1996, 276:492–496.
21. Kinnersley P, Philips K, Savage K, Kelly MJ, Farrell E, Morgan B, Whistance R,
Lewis V, Mann MK, Stephens BL, Blazeby J, Elwyn G, Edwards AGK:
Interventions to promote informed consent for patients undergoing
surgical and other invasive healthcare procedures (review). Cochrane Libr
2013, (7):CD009445.
22. Gillett G, Walker S: The evolution of informed consent. J Law Med 2012,
19(4):673–677.
23. Paling J: Strategies to help patients understand risk. Br Med J 2003,
327:745–748.
24. Elwyn G, Edwards A, Gwyn R, Grol R: Towards a feasible model for shared
decision making: focus group with general practice registrars. Br Med J
1999, 319:753–756.
25. Sardell AN, Trierweiler SJ: Disclosing the cancer diagnosis. Procedures that
influence patient hopefulness. Cancer 1997, 72:3355–3365.
26. Reyna VF, Hamilton AJ: The importance of memory in informed consent
for surgical risk. Med Decis Making 2001, 21:152–155.
27. Fortin JM, Hirota LK, Bond BE, O’Cobbor AM, Col NF: Identifying patient
preferences for communicating risk estimates: a descriptive pilot study.
BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2001, 1:2.
28. Agre P, Kurtz RC, Krauss BJ: A randomized trial using videotape to
present consent information from colonoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc
1994, 40:271–276.
29. Festinger DS, Dugosh KL, Croft JR, Arabia PL, Marlowe DB: Corrected
feedback: a procedure to enhance recall of informed consent to 
research among substance abusing offenders. Ethics Behav 2010,
20(5):387–399.
30. Kubler Ross E: On Death and Dying. London UK: Routledge; 1973.
31. Mallardi V: The origin of informed consent. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital 2005,
25:312–327.
32. Laforet EG: The fiction of informed consent. J Am Med Assoc 1997,
235:1579–1584.
33. Devettere RJ: Pratical Decision Making in Health Care Ethics. Washington D.C:
Georgetown University Press; 2000:99–100.
34. Will JF: A brief historical and theoretical perspective on patient
autonomy and medical decision making. Chest 2011, 139(3):669–673.
35. Shorter E: The troubled history of doctors and patients. New York: Simon and
Shuster ed; 1985.
36. Sreenivasan G: Does informed consent to research require
comprehension? Lancet 2003, 362:2016–2018.
37. Beauchamp TL, Childress JF: Principles of Biomedical Ethics. New York-Oxford:
Oxford University Press; 2009.
38. Engelhardt HT: The foundations of Bioethics. New York-Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 1996.
39. Pellegrino ED, Thomasma D: For the Patient Good. The Restoration of
Beneficence in Health Care. New York-Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1988.
40. Caocci G, La Nasa G, d’Aloja E, Vacca A, Piras E, Pintor M, Demontis R, Pisu S:
Ethical issues on unrelated hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in
adult thalassemia patients. BMC Med Ethics 2011, 12:4.
41. d’Aloja E, Pintor M, Paribello F, Pisu S: Neither freedom nor autonomy
without beneficence. Arch Intern Med 2008, 168:548–549.
42. Jacoby LH, Maloy B, Cirenza E, Shelton W, Goggins T, Balint J: The basis
of informed consent for BMT patients. Bone Marrow Transplant 1999,
23:711–717.
43. Terri RF, Bradley EH, Towle VR, Allore H: Understanding the treatment
preferences of seriously ill patients. New Engl J Med 2002, 346:1061–1066.
44. Lee SJ: Putting shared decision making into practice. ASH Education Book.
2002:473–477.
45. Pisu S, Caocci G, La Nasa G, De Stefano F: The Role of Consent in the
Relationship between Physician and Patient. In Decision Making on
Medicine and Health Care. Edited by Tolana PC. New York: Nova Biomedical
Books; 2008:1–5.
46. Gillet G: Intention, autonomy, and brain events. Bioethics 2009, 23(6):330–339.
47. d’Aloja E, Floris L, Muller M, Birocchi F, Fanos V, Paribello F, Demontis R: Shared
decision-making in neonatology: an utopia or an attainable goal? J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 2010, 23(3):56–58.
48. Mazur DJ: The new medical conversation. Boston: Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers; 2003:99–100.
doi:10.1186/1747-5341-9-13
Cite this article as: Pisu et al.: Reassessing the approach to informed
consent: the case of unrelated hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
in adult thalassemia patients. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in
Medicine 2014 9:13.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
