BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction
Methods
Results
  Food allergy prevalence by level of evidence
    a). Food allergy defined by oral food challenge
    b). Food allergy based on history of clinical reaction and demonstration of food-specific IgE
    c). Food allergy based on by questionnaire (self or parental reporting)
    d). Countries currently lacking any prevalence data
  Food allergy prevalence trends by country/region
    a) Time trends
    b) Differences in prevalence between regions
    c) Common Food Allergens by region
    d) Types of food allergy by region
  Infant feeding patterns by region
    a) Introduction of complementary feeding
    b) Infant formula usage
  Paediatric allergy services and anaphylaxis services by country/region
  Adrenaline autoinjectors and allergy action plans
Discussion
Conclusions
Additional file
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgement
Author details
References
Page 1
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21  journal
REVIEW  Open Access
A global survey of changing patterns of food
allergy burden in children
Susan L Prescott1,2,3,13*, Ruby Pawankar1,2,4, Katrina J Allen1,2,5, Dianne E Campbell2,6, John KH Sinn2,7,
Alessandro Fiocchi8, Motohiro Ebisawa9, Hugh A Sampson10, Kirsten Beyer11 and Bee-Wah Lee12
Abstract
While food allergies and eczema are among the most common chronic non-communicable diseases in children in
many countries worldwide, quality data on the burden of these diseases is lacking, particularly in developing
countries. This 2012 survey was performed to collect information on existing data on the global patterns and
prevalence of food allergy by surveying all the national member societies of the World Allergy Organization, and
some of their neighbouring countries. Data were collected from 89 countries, including published data, and
changes in the health care burden of food allergy. More than half of the countries surveyed (52/89) did not have
any data on food allergy prevalence. Only 10% (9/89) of countries had accurate food allergy prevalence data, based
on oral food challenges (OFC). The remaining countries (23/89) had data largely based on parent-reporting of a
food allergy diagnosis or symptoms, which is recognised to overestimate the prevalence of food allergy. Based on
more accurate measures, the prevalence of clinical (OFC proven) food allergy in preschool children in developed
countries is now as high as 10%. In large and rapidly emerging societies of Asia, such as China, where there are
documented increases in food allergy, the prevalence of OFC-proven food allergy is now around 7% in pre-schoolers,
comparable to the reported prevalence in European regions. While food allergy appears to be increasing in both
developed and developing countries in the last 10–15 years, there is a lack of quality comparative data. This survey also
highlights inequities in paediatric allergy services, availability of adrenaline auto-injectors and standardised National
Anaphylaxis Action plans. In conclusion, there remains a need to gather more accurate data on the prevalence of food
allergy in many developed and developing countries to better anticipate and address the rising community and health
service burden of food allergy.
Keywords: Food allergy, Allergic disease, Allergy epidemic, Allergy prevention, Food allergens
Introduction
Food allergy has emerged as an unanticipated ‘second
wave’ of the allergy epidemic [1], dramatically increasing
the burden of allergic diseases in infants and preschool
children [2,3]. In some highly industrialized regions the
prevalence of food allergy in infancy has reached 10% [3]
and there are now reports that rates of food allergy are
now following the steep gradient of economic transition
in rapidly developing countries [4]. While the rising glo-
bal burden of asthma [5], rhinitis [6] and eczema [7] has
been well-documented over the past 20 years through
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:susan.prescott@uwa.edu.au"] susan.prescott@uwa.edu.au
1World Allergy Organization, Milwaukee, USA (headquarters)
2International Inflammation (in-FLAME) Network, of the Worldwide
Universities Network (WUN), Perth, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
world-wide epidemiological research programs such as
the ISAAC Study (International Study of Asthma and
Allergies in Childhood), there have been, as yet, no equiva-
lent published data on food allergies on a global platform.
Although several centres collected data enriched for
food allergy in association with more ISAAC recent
surveys [8-10] global trends have not been well studied,
likely because in the early 1990’s when ISAAC was
established food allergy was relatively uncommon and
more difficult to accurately ascertain than other allergic
outcomes by questionnaire.
While there have been Systematic Reviews on food
allergy prevalence, these largely capture data from
Western Europe and North America where the majority
of studies have been performed; many more than a dec-
ade ago [11]. The majority of these reports were based
© 2013 Prescott et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Page 2
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21 
Page 2 of 12
only on self-reported food reactions rather than object-
ive measures of true IgE-mediated food allergy, and the
few that used the gold standard, oral food challenges
(OFC) did not have consistent or standardized criteria in
defining outcomes [11]. New multi-centre well designed
food allergy prevalence studies using OFC and IgE
measures (notably the EuroPrevall birth cohort) are
now underway and will more accurately determine the
prevalence and cost food allergy [12]. The EuroPrevall
study (more than 12,000 children) is also predomin-
antly focused in Europe, although it has been extended
east to examine an anticipated 37,000 children in the
emerging economies of Russia, China, and India –
countries comprising 40% of the global population and
in transition from traditional to modern lifestyles [13].
However, the accurate determination of the food allergy
burden in many other developing regions of the world
remains an important unmet need.
The main purpose of this study was to utilize the glo-
bal network of the World Allergy Organization (WAO)
to provide a current ‘snapshot’ of the level of knowledge
on the prevalence, patterns and burden of food allergens
throughout the 93 national and regional member soci-
eties of WAO, and in particular reveal regions where
more data is needed. We also sought to determine the
level of service provision for food allergy, urban–rural
preventionhealth-care access, availability of adrenaline
auto injectors and standardized national food allergy
anaphylaxis action plans in each country. This was also
an opportunity to obtain some level of information
about infant feeding practices in these diverse countries.
Methods
This was a collaborative project between the WAO and the
Worldwide Universities Network (WUN). The Survey tar-
geted the 93 peak national and regional member societies
of WAO, with instructions to be completed by the most
qualified experts in paediatric food allergy in each country.
A working group from the WUN International Inflamma-
tion (inFLAME) Network was established to develop the
web-based questionnaire in February 2012. This included
clinicians specialized in general paediatrics, paediatric al-
lergy, neonatology, gastroenterology, nutrition and dietetics
and epidemiology (each as members of both WAO and
WUN). Questions were developed and discussed in a work-
shop format and then circulated to the wider inFLAME
Network for comment. The resulting questionnaire was
ratified by the WAO Special Committee on Food Allergy
and Nutrition in June 2012, and disseminated through the
WAO secretariat to the 93 regional/national societies in
September 2012 (where possible data were also collected
from neighboring non-WAO member countries). The re-
spondents were identified by their own societies as the
most qualified people to complete the questionnaire. 
Each country was asked to provide any data to support
any change in food allergy (both IgE and non-IgE forms
as defined by WAO criteria [14] provided) focusing on
the last 10 years, and provide the source and level of evi-
dence that their answer was based on, including pub-
lished research, national data, changing health-care
burden or to indicate if there was insufficient data in
their region to provide an answer. Regions reporting a
change in prevalence were asked to indicate the age
group most affected (infants <1 year; 1–5 year olds; or
children >5 years) again with the nature and source of
data that this was based on. All were asked if there was
published information of any kind available regarding
the overall prevalence of food allergy in their country,
and to provide any data available on the estimated per-
centage of children in their population who have food al-
lergy (all ages and for preschool [<5 years] and for
school aged children [>5 years], if data available). They
were also asked to indicate the most common clinical
presentations of food allergy including (1) acute
IgE-mediated food allergy (i.e. onset generally within 1–
2 hours with angioedema, urticaria, vomiting or anaphyl-
axis);  (2) non IgE-mediated food allergies (i.e. more
delayed gastrointestinal symptoms only e.g. reflux, con-
stipation, colic, chronic diarrhea, blood in stool, without
IgE associated symptoms) or (3) mixed IgE and non-IgE
food allergy (children with features of both acute onset
symptoms and more chronic symptoms, such as eczema,
exacerbated by foods).  Each country representative re-
spondent was asked to indicate the 5 most common
food allergen triggers in order of prevalence for infants
and children younger than 5 years, and a separate list
for children older than 5 years. For each answer the re-
spondents were asked to provide the source of data, if
any. Information was also collected on the availability of
adrenaline auto-injectors for treatment of anaphylaxis in
each country (including if these are subsidized by the
health care system and whether they are available widely
or only through selected health services or to selected
patient groups). The use of National Anaphylaxis Action
Plans was also determined for each country (i.e. whether
patients with a risk of anaphylaxis because of known
allergy are given the same nationally standardized man-
agement plan).  General information was also collected
about the population size of each country and the num-
bers of trained paediatric allergists in the region. Finally,
respondents were asked to provide information on early
infant feeding and weaning practices including average
duration of breastfeeding, age of introduction of comple-
mentary feeding foods, kinds of solid foods first used
and whether there were any specific allergy prevention
guidelines in relation to infant feeding. A six-month
period was allowed for all responses to be received.
Where there was more than one respondent from a
Page 3
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21 
Page 3 of 12
country (i.e. more than one national allergy society, or
multiple responses for any other reasons) the data was
selected based on the highest level of evidence provided.
In each case a literature search was performed by the in-
vestigators to confirm the cited data source, and to look
for any additional evidence. Where data were also
provided and/or published for neighboring non-WAO
member counties this has also been included. The
findings are presented for each country separately and
arranged by geographical region.
Results
Data from 89 countries (Figure 1) were compiled to for-
mulate a global picture of food allergy, including 12
countries in Western Europe, 5 Nordic countries and 17
in Central/Eastern Europe, 18 countries in Asia and
Oceania, 15 countries in the Americas, 10 in the Middle
East and 12 countries in Africa (Additional file 1: Table
S1, on line repository). This included 83 WAO member
countries and 6 non-member countries (Figure 1). These
were categorized by the best level of evidence available
for each country, with the highest level based in food 
allergy prevalence defined by oral food challenges (OFC)
in unselected populations (Additional file 1: Table S1).
The next best level of evidence was based on a suggest-
ive clinical history confirmed by allergen skin prick test-
ing (SPT) or other measures of food-specific IgE, also in
unselected populations. Studies that relied only on self-
reporting (such as questionnaire or phone survey data)
were categorized as the lowest level of evidence for
defining population food allergy prevalence.
Food allergy prevalence by level of evidence
a). Food allergy defined by oral food challenge
Over one-half of the countries (51/89) had no food al-
lergy prevalence data of any kind. Only 10% (9/89) of
countries had accurate food allergy prevalence data
based on OFC (Additional file 1: Table S1).  In infants
and preschool children (<5 years),  food allergy preva-
lence based on OFC ranged from 1% in Thailand [15] to
10% in Australia [3] (Figure 2).  Notably, new studies
from south-western China show a comparable preva-
lence of OFC-proven food allergy in infants (3.8% [16],
6.2% [17], 7.7% [18]) as reported in European countries
Figure 1 List and distribution of countries who participated in the survey or which had published data available on food allergy prevalence.
Page 4
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21 
Page 4 of 12
Figure 2 Summary of food allergy prevalence from studies that provided data for children aged 5 years or less. Studies are categorised
according to level of evidence; OFC proven food allergy (black bars); food allergy based on symptoms and sensitisation (grey bars) or
questionnaires/parental reporting (yellow bars).
such as the UK (4%) [19],  Denmark (3.6%) [20] and
Norway (6.8%) [21]. The proportion of school-aged chil-
dren (> 5 years) with OFC-proven food allergy was lower
in all regions, ranging from <1% in Turkey (0.16%) [22]
to 2.5% in the UK [23] although there were very few
studies using OFC in this age group (Figure 3). In keep-
ing with these findings a German study that studied 739
children across all ages (0–17 years, mean age 9.2 years)
also found OFC-confirmed food allergy in 4.2%,  with
higher rates in younger children [24] (Figure 4).
b). Food allergy based on history of clinical reaction and
demonstration of food-specific IgE
There have also been relatively few studies to determine food
allergy prevalence based on a specific IgE testing in combin-
ation with a convincing clinical history, however these report
food allergy rates in a similar range as the OFC-based studies
[25-29]. In preschool children food allergy prevalence based
on history and food-specific IgE was 3.2% in northern
Europe (Sweden) [27] with very similar rates in Asia (3.4% in
Taiwan) [26] (Figure 2).  However, the prevalence in older
children (based on symptoms and IgE testing) varied from
only 0.3% (in Korea) [25] to 5.3% in Sweden [27] and 7.6% in
Taiwan [26] (Figure 2). One of the very few African studies
to investigate both food allergy symptoms and food specific
IgE, in Ghanaian school children (5– 16 years), documented
a high rates of reported food reactions (11%) and positive 
SPT (5%) [28]. However this is of uncertain significance as
there was no clear association between reported adverse re-
actions to food and SPT or specific IgE levels [28]. Notably
this rate of food-specific IgE is quite similar to other studies
in Africa which revealed that 5.4% of unselected Xhosa high
school students in Cape Town (n = 212) are SPT positive to
foods [30], although clinical data were not available in the
latter study.
c). Food allergy based on by questionnaire (self or parental
reporting)
The majority of data currently available on food allergy
prevalence are only based on self-reporting or parent-
reporting questionnaire data (Additional file 1: Table S1).
These generally yield much higher rates of food allergy
than reports based on OFC or specific IgE-confirmed food
allergy. In Canada [31] and the USA [32] survey reports
suggest childhood food allergy prevalence rates of around
7-8%, with similar rates reported in the middle east (UAE)
and some regions of Europe (Spain [33], Poland [34], the
Netherlands [35] and France [36]).  Even higher rates,
around 15%, have been reported in other areas of western
Europe such as the UK [12] and Germany [12],  and in
Iceland [12] and Colombia. Notably, self-reported life-
time prevalence of food allergy in African countries such
as Mosambique (n = 509) is as high as 19% [37] and self-
reported food allergy from a survey of 400 households in
Page 5
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21 
Page 5 of 12
Figure 3 Summary of food allergy prevalence from studies that provided data for children older than 5 years. Studies are categorised
according to level of evidence; OFC proven food allergy (black bars); food allergy based on symptoms and sensitisation (grey bars) or
questionnaires/parental reporting (yellow bars).
Tanzania (ages not given) has been reported as high as
17% [38]. In South America (Colombia), a cross-sectional
population survey (n = 3099) revealed 10% of 1–8 year
olds and 12% of 9–16 year olds report food allergy [39],
which is comparable to rates reported in Spain [12] and 
Italy [12]. On the other hand, lower rates of self/parent-re-
ported food allergy have been published for countries in
Asia, including Japan [40-42], Hong Kong [43] and Korea
[44], where prevalence is reported to be around 5% or less.
Similarly, the self/parent-reported prevalence of food
Figure 4 Summary of food allergy prevalence from studies that provided data for children of all ages (generally ranging 0–18 years).
Studies are categorised according to level of evidence; OFC proven food allergy (black bars); or questionnaires/parental reporting (yellow bars).
Page 6
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21 
Page 6 of 12
allergy in some European countries, such as Slovenia [34],
Estonia [8],  Switzerland [34],  Greece [34] and Belgium
[34] has also been less than 5% in some studies. In Israel
the prevalence of self-reported food allergy was also found
to be, on average, less than 5% (3.2% in Jewish children
and 5.0% in Arabic children) [10].
Evidence that food allergy rates are likely to be over-
estimated come from countries where there are both
OFC data and parent-reported food allergy. For example
in a Turkish study of 3500 schoolchildren aged 6–9-
years, parent-reported food allergy (5.7%) was signifi-
cantly higher than the prevalence confirmed by OFC
(0.80%) [45]. Similarly in Germany, parent-reported food
reactions was 14.5% in baseline data from siblings of
1570 German infants enrolled in EuroPrevall [12] com-
pared with 4.2% in a population study (n = 739) in which
symptomatic children proceeded to allergy testing and
OFC [24]. Inaccuracy of self/parent-reported food allergy
is also evident in the wide variability between studies in
the same country. For example, parent-reported food al-
lergy was as high as 32% in 1513 Polish children enrolled
in EuroPrevall [12] whereas in another study (telephone
survey) of 8,825 children across 10 European regions
only 8.3% of Polish children were reported to have food
allergy [34].
d). Countries currently lacking any prevalence data
Regions of the world where food allergy prevalence data
(of any kind) are particularly lacking are Central and South
America, Africa, Eastern Europe and the Middle East.
Food allergy prevalence trends by country/region
a) Time trends
The vast majority of countries reported an increase in
food allergy prevalence in the preceding 10 years, al-
though in most cases this was based on increasing health
care burden (Additional file 1: Table S1). There was pub-
lished evidence to support an increasing prevalence from
Australia [2,46], Japan [41], China [18], Korea [47], USA
[48] and Norway [21,49]. In the Chinese study, the same
methodology was used in the same population 10 years
apart and showed a doubling of challenge-proven IgE-
mediated food allergy from 3.5% in 1999 to 7.7% in 2009
[18].  Another 39 countries reported an increase based
on rising health care burden. Several countries provided
published evidence of stable prevalence, including the
UK [50], Finland [51,52] and Canada [53,54]. Relatively
few countries (mostly in Europe) claimed stable preva-
lence based on health care service burden (rather than
published data),  including Greece, Austria, Romania,
Georgia, the Czech Republic and Brazil. No country re-
ported a declining burden of food allergy. For the
remaining 35 countries there was insufficient data to de-
termine (or even estimate) a change in prevalence. 
In countries reporting an increase in food allergy, most
(73%) reported that this was seen in children less than
5 years of age (Additional file 1: Table S1), although this
was generally based on changing health care burden rather
than published data. Of the 45 countries reporting an
increase, 12 (27%) reported the greatest increase in infants
< 1 year, 18 (40%) in 1–5 year olds, and only 2 (4.4%) in
children older than 5 years. Of the remainder, 10 (22%)
did not specify an age group and 3 countries (7%) indi-
cated only that the increase was in children < 5 years
(without specifying further).
b) Differences in prevalence between regions
Based on the most accurate measures (OFC) the highest
reported prevalence of food allergy is in Australia. This
was based on a large scale (n = 5,000) population–based
cross-sectional study of food allergy in 12 month old in-
fants in Melbourne, Australia [3].  Analysis of the first
2848 infants assessed indicated 10% have challenge-
proven IgE-mediated food allergy (8.9% with egg allergy
and 3.0% with peanut allergy) [3]. There were also very
high rates of atopy with 18.0% showing food sensitization
[3].  While this is higher than rates of challenge-proven
food allergy reported in other westernized regions, such as
Europe where rates are reportedly between 4-7% [19-21],
it is notable in rapidly developing countries such as China
the prevalence of challenge-proven food allergy is also ap-
proaching 8% in some studies [18]. It should be noted that
different methods and different extracts were used to as-
sess food sensitization. For example, some studies used
native foods (such as raw egg [3]) where others used com-
mercial extracts for skin prick testing.
At present there is very little quality data on food al-
lergy from other regions in Asia, or from South America
or from Africa where there are unexpectedly high rates
of food sensitisation [28,30].
c) Common Food Allergens by region
The most common food allergens in children less
than 5 years of age were relatively similar across all re-
gions, generally including cows milk, egg, peanuts and
seafood, with regional variations in the relative fre-
quency of these (Additional file 1: Table S2). In Oceania
(Australia [3] and New Zealand) and Asia [16,40,44,55]
egg allergy appears to be more common than milk al-
lergy, whereas the reverse is true in the Americas
[31,32,39,56] and the Middle east, cows milk allergy is
consistently reported as more common. In Europe the
pattern is more variable but both egg and cows milk
tend to be the two most common allergens in this age
group. In Asia seafood (fish and shellfish) are also con-
sistently in the ‘five most common food allergens’  in
preschool children, with some unusual allergens re-
ported, such as ant eggs [15].
Page 7
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21 
Page 7 of 12
In older children (>5 years) there is slightly more di-
versity in most common food allergens reported, but
peanuts, tree nuts, seafood, egg and milk tend to be
common to most regions. In many European countries,
fruit allergens such as apple and kiwi feature consistently
as common allergens [34] and this was also seen in Cen-
tral and South American countries [39,56] (Additional file
1: Table S2). Peanut and other nuts tend to be among the
most common allergens reported in Australia, Western
Europe and the USA. In Eastern Europe egg remains the
most common allergen in a number of counties at this age
[34,45,57,58].  In the Middle East sesame is frequently
among the five most common allergens [10]. Beef allergy
is among the most common in Turkish children both
<5 years [59] and > 5 years of [45,57,59]. The few other re-
gions that report allergies to meats among the five most
common allergens include Poland [34],  Colombia [39],
and Mozambique [37], although data are limited.
d) Types of food allergy by region
The patterns of food allergy presentations also varied by
region (Additional file 1: Table S2). Acute IgE-mediated
symptoms are generally the most common form of food
allergy, particularly in North America, Western Europe,
Australia and the Middle East. Although this is also true
in some regions of Asia (China, Japan, Hong Kong and
Singapore) others report mixed presentation with pa-
tients more commonly showing both non-IgE and IgE-
mediated features (Korea, Thailand, Phillipines, Malaysia,
Indonesia and Bangladesh).  Similarly in Eastern Europe
non-IgE mediated symptoms (Belarus, Bulgaria) or mixed
non-IgE and IgE-mediated symptoms (Lithuania, Slovenia,
Estonia, Croatia and Latvia) are more common. Mixed
features are also more typical in South Africa, Ghana
and Mozambique. In South and Central America some
countries report IgE symptoms as the most common
(Argentina, Cuba, Brazil and Mexico) whereas other re-
port mixed features (Colombia and Honduras) or non-
IgE mediated presentations (Uruguay and Chile) as the
most common.
Infant feeding patterns by region
a) Introduction of complementary feeding
The reported age and type of complementary food intro-
duction, based upon reported common practice, not offi-
cial recommendations, is shown in Additional file 1:
Table S2. In the significant majority of countries (35/42,
83%) it was reported that complementary feeding is most
commonly started between 4–6 months, including both
developed and developing regions of South America,
Eastern Europe, South Africa, and across the whole Asian
region. The main exceptions were in the Middle East
where ‘solid’ foods are reportedly introduced even earlier
at 3–4 months in some regions (Egypt, Jordan and Kuwait). 
Only Austria and Uruguay reported commonly introducing
solid foods after 6 months of age.
The first complementary foods in most regions in-
cluded rice cereals, fruits and vegetables with regional
differences reflecting dietary variations (Additional file 1:
Table S2). Rice cereal is among the most common first
foods in Australia, North America and some areas of
Europe. Rice and fruits are also common first foods in
Asia. Vegetables and fruits are the most common start-
ing foods in many European countries. Legumes, rice
and vegetables are reported to be the first foods in the
Middle Eastern regions.
As anticipated, parents are reported to be commonly
concerned about trying to prevent allergic disease in the
more westernized regions such as North America (and
Mexico), Western Europe, Oceania (Australia and New
Zealand),  Nordic regions and some regions in Asia
(Japan and Korea). In other regions of Asia, South and
Central America, Africa and the Middle East, experts re-
port that parental concern about allergy is reported to
be generally less common or rare.
b) Infant formula usage
We did not attempt to gather accurate data on breast-
feeding patterns as this is either published elsewhere or
not available in some regions. However we did seek to
obtain some information on the use of infant formulas,
although this was based on clinician practices and expe-
riences rather than published data (Additional file 1:
Table S2). While this information is crude, the trends do
suggest frequent early (perinatal) use of formulas (i.e.
prior to hospital discharge) in a number of regions, and
use by parents in the first 4 months. In particular, rela-
tively high rates of complementary feeding in the first
4 months were reported in South Africa, Eastern Europe
(Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Croatia and Georgia), Brazil,
Mexico and Israel. Lower rates of early formula use were
noted in other Middle Eastern countries, Nordic coun-
tries, Asia, Oceania and the UK.
Paediatric allergy services and anaphylaxis services by
country/region
Each regional society was asked to provide the number
of registered trained paediatric allergists (or equivalent)
in their country, and based on the population size, that
was used to determine the number of specialist service
providers per million of total population (Additional
file 1: Table S3). There were wide variations in the num-
ber of service providers, with some countries (such as
the UK) with a reported high burden of food allergy hav-
ing < 1 paediatric allergist per million of population
(0.32/million).  Similarly, other high-burden countries
such as Australia, New Zealand and Canada, report ≤ 3
paediatric allergists per million population. The USA
Page 8
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21 
Page 8 of 12
and European regions with relatively high food allergy
burden are generally better serviced (such as Germany,
Greece, Italy and Nordic countries) but this is highly
variable. Other regions where food allergy is emerging as
a new and growing problem have very few trained spe-
cialists per head of population. This is true in Asia (with
the exception of Japan),  South America (with the ex-
ception of Cuba) and the Middle East (with the excep-
tion of Israel), where there are generally ≤ 3 paediatric
allergists per million of population. African nations
have very few trained paediatric specialist, although there
is a general lack of data on both the burden of disease
and service provision in that region. In the most populous
regions (China and India),  there were also no accurate
data available.
Many countries reported perceived urban–rural differ-
ences in paediatric allergy health care services (Additional
file 1: Table S3). The main exceptions are smaller devel-
oped countries or states (such as Singapore, Hong Kong
and smaller European regions) or regions where services
are equally poor in urban and rural regions (such as
Mongolia).
Adrenaline autoinjectors and allergy action plans
There are wide variations in the availability of adrenaline
auto-injectors and many countries do not yet have stan-
dardized national Food Allergy/Anaphylaxis Action Plans
(Additional file 1: Table S3). Adrenaline auto-injectors are
readily available in countries with the higher service bur-
den of allergy, such as North America, Western Europe,
Nordic countries and Oceania, and are generally subsi-
dized by healthcare systems. Most, but not all, of these
countries have standardized national anaphylaxis action
plans. However, in some countries with a very high service
burden of allergy (such as in New Zealand) adrenaline
auto-injectors are still not subsidized by the healthcare
system. There is a reported lack of general availability of
adrenaline auto-injectors (very difficult to access and/or
not subsidized) in the Middle East, many areas of Asia
and South America, Africa (although data more limited)
and some regions of Eastern Europe.
Discussion
The main purpose of this survey was to provide a global
‘snap shot’ of current trends in food allergy including the
quality of evidence available and regions where more in-
formation is needed. Because the rise in food allergy is
believed to have been relatively recent as ‘a second wave’
of allergy after the rise in asthma and rhinitis [1,60],
most regions do not have accurate or current prevalence
data, particularly in infants and young children under
5 years of age who are most commonly affected. Many
estimates are based on parent- or self-reported question-
naires or surveys and very few objectively confirm the 
prevalence of food allergy through the gold standard of
oral food challenge. Even those few studies undertaking
food challenges until recently have been hampered by
poor challenge participation rates resulting in potential
for substantial allergic bias.
The findings reveal a general paucity of quality data
on food allergy prevalence, even in high prevalence areas
of North America and Western Europe. In Europe this
will be addressed to a large extent by the large-scale
multicentre ‘Europrevall Study’. Extending this to study
an additional 37,000 children in the emerging economies
of Russia, China, and India [13] will be very helpful.
However, there remains a need for similar studies in
South America, South East Asia, the Middle East and
Africa where very little information is available. To
address this in South Africa there are plans for a cross-
sectional, observational study of IgE-mediated food
allergy in an unselected population of children aged 12–
36 months. This will include both urban and rural com-
munities and all children with a positive SPT of any size
(≥1 mm) will be referred to the Allergy clinic for OFC to
determine the clinical significance. Similar studies are
also needed in other emerging economies.
A recent meta-analysis commissioned by the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease concluded
that the prevalence of food allergy across all age groups
is likely to be between 1% and 10%, with higher preva-
lence in younger age groups [61]. The more recent well
designed Australian HealthNuts study supports this,
with 10% of 1 year old infants demonstrating challenge-
proven IgE-mediated food allergy with even higher rates
of food sensitisation [3]. The design of HealthNuts pro-
vides a good model for future food allergy prevalence
studies. The cohort was not selected on the basis of a
family history of atopy, and children with positive tests
irrespective of SPT wheal size proceeded to hospital-
based food challenge to confirm the clinical food allergy.
Oral food challenges were the first to be undertaken
with predetermined objective stopping criteria. Preva-
lence was adjusted for participation bias, both at the
point of initial population screening and at invitation for
food challenge, and nonparticipants were also surveyed
to allow for any bias towards allergy. This study was
clearly labor-intensive and it is acknowledged that, al-
though OFC are the gold standard in diagnosing food
allergy, this is not feasible in many low and middle-
income countries.
Another key observation is that rapidly developing re-
gions such as China are showing significant rates of food
allergy [17,18]. Thus, despite common notions that food
allergy is less prevalent in Asia, these prevalence figures
from various studies in Asia are comparable to those
reported from western populations (Additional file 1:
Table S1). Published studies on food allergy time-trends
Page 9
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21 
Page 9 of 12
confirm the rising prevalence in Asia [18], and a gradi-
ent of food allergy with progressive economic develop-
ment also provides indirect evidence that food allergy is
associated with westernisation; with higher rates of
food allergy in Chinese born in Hong Kong (4.8%) com-
pared with those born in mainland China (2.4%) [4].
This is consistent with recent reports showing a rise in
non-food allergic diseases such as asthma and allergic
rhinitis in developing countries that are adopting a
more “westernised” lifestyle [62-65]. Eczema prevalence
has also increased significantly in Asia [7].  This has
major global implications, as the heavily populated re-
gions of Asia are becoming rapidly urbanised, wester-
nised and industrialised.
In this context it is important to note preliminary evi-
dence that Asian and other non-Caucasian populations
may be even more susceptible to the adverse effects of
‘Westernisation’ than Caucasians [66,67]. Earlier studies
of respiratory disease observed that both allergic symp-
toms and sensitisation were more common in Asian
Australians than non-Asians Australians [66]. Rates were
also higher in Australian-born Asians than Asian immi-
grants, with the prevalence increasing with length of stay
in Australia [66] and this was echoed recently in data
from the Healthnuts study on eczema prevalence. More
recent US studies have similarly noted that non-white
races are more susceptible to food allergy, particularly
Asian populations [67], suggesting a strong genetic pro-
pensity that is amplified by a western environment.
Thus, as urbanisation inevitably progresses we can an-
ticipate a major rise in the global burden of food allergy.
Many countries (n = 45) already report an increase in
food allergy prevalence, although only 6 based this on
published evidence and the remainder based this on re-
ported increased health care burden. Only 9 countries
reported a stable prevalence, and none reported a de-
cline in food allergy burden. However, many (n = 35)
could/did not provide any data (either published or
based on health care burden).  We did not collect data
on the changing prevalence of specific allergies, however,
it has been recently noted that while peanut allergy has
increased dramatically in the USA [68], UK [69,70] and
Australia [46], this is less evident in Asia although data
are more limited (reviewed recently in [55]).
Although there is some variation in the patterns of food
allergy, there is surprising consistency in the most com-
mon allergen triggers, particularly in infants and younger
children. In most regions egg and milk are among the
most common allergens in preschool children, generally
listed as the two most common. Although these are typic-
ally considered as ‘transient’ allergies, it is interesting that
these were also noted among the most common allergens
in older children (>5 years) in almost all regions. It is not
clear how this might relate to emerging evidence that egg 
and milk allergies are now commonly persisting into late
childhood and adolescence [71,72]. Peanut, tree nuts and
seafood were also common allergen triggers in almost
all regions for both preschool and older children.
Across continental Europe, fruits appear to be more
common allergens than in the UK, Australia and North
America, particularly in older children and this is likely
related to tree pollen cross sensitisation. In Asia, sea-
food including shrimp and shellfish feature commonly,
even in preschool children. There was a similar trend
in South America although there is less data to support
this. Sesame was more frequently listed among common
allergens in the Middle East.
Although it was beyond the scope of this survey to
examine the relationship between early feeding patterns
and food allergy, we collected very basic information on
the patterns of early infant formula use, the age at which
infants most commonly start complementary foods, and
the level of parental concern about allergy prevention in
each region. As noted above, there were regional differ-
ences in the likelihood that complementary formula milk
are used in the perinatal period (but hospital staff prior
to discharge) and in the early postnatal period by par-
ents, however there was general uniformity in the age at
which other complementary foods are most commonly
introduced (typically reported to be between 4–6 months
in most regions). As anticipated, parental concern about
allergy prevention was more common in the high preva-
lence regions, but is an emerging issue in some develop-
ing regions. We acknowledge that this is qualitative data,
based on the experience and knowledge of experts in
each region, rather than more accurate population-level
census data, and should be interpreted as such.
The burden of food allergy and eczema also has major
economic implications for health care provision of spe-
cialist allergy services worldwide. Our survey reveals
wide inequities in health service provision, even in de-
veloped regions where the disease burden is already well
recognised. Based on current trends in emerging econ-
omies the health burden of food allergy and eczema is
anticipated to rise substantially in the next decade, and
the greatest impact is likely to be in the more populated
regions of the developing world. Currently, emerging
economies generally have the fewest trained medical
staff with expertise in paediatric allergy. Investment in
training, which can take many years, is particularly im-
portant as these regions might anticipate a substantial
increase in disease burden.
There were also wide variations in the reported access
to emergency treatments for potentially life threatening
food allergy (anaphylaxis). Experts from many emerging
economies report that adrenaline auto-injectors are not
readily available. In other countries, cost is reported to
be a significant barrier because of lack of government
Page 10
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21 
Page 10 of 12
subsidies, even in some highly industrialised countries
where a high burden of food allergy is recognised. Many
countries still do not have nationally-standardised Food
Allergy/Anaphylaxis Action plans, even where auto-
injectors are available, with the choice of plan remaining
at the discretion of each individual treating clinician.
This has implications for the consistency and training
for teachers and other community carers supervising
children with food allergies. These observations gener-
ally suggest the need for greater awareness among gov-
ernments and health policy makers of the significance
and impact of food allergy particularly in children.
Conclusions
In summary, this survey highlights food allergy as a sig-
nificant paediatric health issue that is likely to increase
globally in the coming decade. In some developed econ-
omies 1 in 10 infants now have challenge-proven IgE-
mediated food allergy, following substantive increase in
the last 10 years [2,46]. Similar trends are now apparent
in the developing countries of Asia and other regions.
The survey also reveals the paucity of quality data in
many regions, and the need to obtain more accurate in-
formation about food allergy prevalence and impact,
even in developed countries. Unlike asthma, food allergy
has been relatively neglected area of allergy research.
This is important to address this as part of promoting
awareness of food allergy for health policy and health
care system to better anticipate the growing impact and
growing need for better services, community education
and training to cope with this rising global health issue.
Additional file
 Additional file 1: Table S1. Food allergy prevalence by region. Table
S2. Food allergy patterns and feeding practices by region. Table S3.
Food allergy health services (in 2012).
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
SP coordinated the study, chaired questionnaire design workshops. She
also analysed the data and drafted the manuscript. RP provided genera advice
for the study, logistic support and advice on the questionnaires and data
analysis. KA, DC, JS and SP all assisted with the questionnaire development and
manuscript content and review. AF, ME, HS KB and BL reviewed the process
and the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgement
Members of the WAO Special Committee on Food Allergy and Nutrition:
Alessandro Fiocchi, Hugh Sampson, Motohiro Ebisawa, Susan Prescott,
Wesley Burks, Kirsten Beyer, Gideon Lack, Bee Wah Lee, Kangmo Ahn, Andrea
Vereda-Ortiz.
Author details
1World Allergy Organization, Milwaukee, USA (headquarters). 2International
Inflammation (in-FLAME) Network, of the Worldwide Universities Network
(WUN), Perth, Australia. 3School of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of 
Western Australia, Perth, Australia. 4Division of Allergy, Department of
Pediatrics, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan. 5Royal Children’s Hospital,
Murdoch Children’s Research Institute and the University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 6Westmead Children’s Hospital and University
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. 7Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney and
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. 8Pediatric Hospital Bambino Gesù,
Rome, Vatican City, Italy. 9Clinical Research Center for Allergology and
Rheumatology, Sagamihara National Hospital, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.
10Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
11Department of Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology, University
Children’s Hospital Charité, Berlin, Germany. 12Department of Paediatrics,
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore. 13University of Western Australia, School of Paediatrics
and Child Health Research, Princess Margaret Hospital for Children, Perth,
WA, Australia.
Received: 19 July 2013 Accepted: 4 October 2013
Published: 4 December 2013
References
1.  Prescott SL, Allen KJ: Food Allergy: Riding the second wave of the allergy
epidemic. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2011, 22:155–160.
2.  Poulos LM, Waters AM, Correll PK, Loblay RH, Marks GB: Trends in
hospitalizations for anaphylaxis, angioedema, and urticaria in Australia,
1993–1994 to 2004–2005. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007, 120:878–884.
3.  Osborne NJ, Koplin JJ, Martin PE, Gurrin LC, Lowe AJ, Matheson MC, et al:
Prevalence of challenge-proven IgE-mediated food allergy using
population-based sampling and predetermined challenge criteria
in infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011, 127:668–676. e1-2.
4.  Leung TF, Yung E, Wong YS, Lam CW, Wong GW: Parent-reported adverse
food reactions in Hong Kong Chinese pre-schoolers: epidemiology,
clinical spectrum and risk factors. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2009,
20:339–346.
5.  Asher MI, Montefort S, Bjorksten B, Lai CK, Strachan DP, Weiland SK, et al:
Worldwide time trends in the prevalence of symptoms of asthma,
allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, and eczema in childhood: ISAAC Phases One
and Three repeat multicountry cross-sectional surveys. Lancet 2006,
368:733–743.
6.  Ait-Khaled N, Pearce N, Anderson HR, Ellwood P, Montefort S, Shah J: Global
map of the prevalence of symptoms of rhinoconjunctivitis in children:
The International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC)
Phase Three. Allergy 2009, 64:123–148.
7.  Odhiambo JA, Williams HC, Clayton TO, Robertson CF, Asher MI, The ISAAC
Phase Three Study Group: Global map of eczema: Eczema symptoms in
children from the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood
(ISAAC) Phase Three. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009, 124(6):1251–1258.
8.  Sandin A, Annus T, Bjorksten B, Nilsson L, Riikjarv MA, Van-Hage-Hamsten M,
et al: Prevalence of self-reported food allergy and IgE antibodies to food
allergens in Swedish and Estonian schoolchildren. Eur J Clin Nutr 2005,
59:399–403.
9.  Penard-Morand C, Raherison C, Kopferschmitt C, Caillaud D, Lavaud F,
Charpin D, et al: Prevalence of food allergy and its relationship to asthma
and allergic rhinitis in schoolchildren. Allergy 2005, 60:1165–1171.
10. Graif Y, German L, Livne I, Shohat T: Association of food allergy with
asthma severity and atopic diseases in Jewish and Arab adolescents.
Acta Paediatr 2012, 101:1083–1088.
11. Rona RJ, Keil T, Summers C, Gislason D, Zuidmeer L, Sodergren E, et al: The
prevalence of food allergy: a meta-analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007,
120:638–646.
12. McBride D, Keil T, Grabenhenrich L, Dubakiene R, Drasutiene G, Fiocchi A,
et al: The EuroPrevall birth cohort study on food allergy: baseline
characteristics of 12,000 newborns and their families from nine
European countries. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2012, 23:230–239.
13. Wong GW, Mahesh PA, Ogorodova L, Leung TF, Fedorova O, Holla AD, et al:
The EuroPrevall-INCO surveys on the prevalence of food allergies in
children from China, India and Russia: the study methodology. Allergy
2010, 65:385–390.
14. World Allergy Organization (WAO) White Book on Allergy: In Edited by Ruby
P, Giorgio Walter C, Holgate ST, Lockey RF. Milwaukee, Wisconsin: World
Allergy Organization; 2011. [URL: "http://www.worldallergy.org/"] http://www.worldallergy.org.
Page 11
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21 
Page 11 of 12
15. Lao-araya M, Trakultivakorn M: Prevalence of food allergy among
preschool children in northern Thailand. Pediatr Int 2012, 54:238–243.
16. Chen J, Hu Y, Allen KJ, Ho MHK, Li H: The Prevalence of Food Allergy in
Infants in Chongqing China. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2011, 22(4):356–360.
17. Chen J, Liao Y, Zhang HZ, Zhao H, Chen J, Li HQ: Prevalence of food
allergy in children under 2 years of age in three cities in China.
Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi 2012, 50:5–9.
18. Hu Y, Chen J, Li H: Comparison of food allergy prevalence among
Chinese infants in Chongqing, 2009 versus 1999. Pediatr Int 2010,
52:820–824.
19. Venter C, Pereira B, Grundy J, Clayton CB, Roberts G, Higgins B, et al:
Incidence of parentally reported and clinically diagnosed food
hypersensitivity in the first year of life. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006,
117:1118–1124.
20. Eller E, Kjaer HF, Host A, Andersen KE, Bindslev-Jensen C: Food allergy and
food sensitization in early childhood: results from the DARC cohort.
Allergy 2009, 64:1023–1029.
21. Kvenshagen B, Halvorsen R, Jacobsen M: Is there an increased frequency
of food allergy in children delivered by caesarean section compared to
those delivered vaginally? Acta Paediatr 2009, 98:324–327.
22. Mustafayev R, Civelek E, Orhan F, Yuksel H, Boz AB, Sekerel BE: Similar
prevalence, different spectrum: IgE-mediated food allergy among
Turkish adolescents. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr) 2012.
23. Venter C, Pereira B, Grundy J, Clayton CB, Arshad SH, Dean T: Prevalence of
sensitization reported and objectively assessed food hypersensitivity
amongst six-year-old children: a population-based study. Pediatr Allergy
Immunol 2006, 17:356–363.
24. Roehr CC, Edenharter G, Reimann S, Ehlers I, Worm M, Zuberbier T, et al:
Food allergy and non-allergic food hypersensitivity in children and
adolescents. Clin Exp Allergy 2004, 34:1534–1541.
25. Ahn K, Kim J, Hahm MI, Lee SY, Kim WK, Chae Y, et al: Prevalence of
immediate-type food allergy in Korean schoolchildren: a population-
based study. Allergy Asthma Proc 2012, 33:481–487.
26. Wu TC, Tsai TC, Huang CF, Chang FY, Lin CC, Huang IF, et al: Prevalence of
food allergy in Taiwan: a questionnaire-based survey. Intern Med J 2012,
42:1310–1315.
27. Ostblom E, Lilja G, Pershagen G, van Hage M, Wickman M: Phenotypes of
food hypersensitivity and development of allergic diseases during the
first 8 years of life. Clin Exp Allergy 2008, 38:1325–1332.
28. Obeng BB, Amoah AS, Larbi IA, Yazdanbakhsh M, van Ree R, Boakye DA, et
al: Food allergy in Ghanaian schoolchildren: data on sensitization and
reported food allergy. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2011, 155:63–73.
29. Kavaliunas A, Surkiene G, Dubakiene R, Stukas R, Zagminas K, Saulyte J, et al:
EuroPrevall survey on prevalence and pattern of self-reported adverse
reactions to food and food allergies among primary schoolchildren in
Vilnius, Lithuania. Medicina (Kaunas) 2012, 48:265–271.
30. Levin ME, Le Souef PN, Motala C: Total IgE in urban Black South African
teenagers: the influence of atopy and helminth infection. Pediatr Allergy
Immunol 2008, 19:449–454.
31. Soller L, Ben-Shoshan M, Harrington DW, Fragapane J, Joseph L, St Pierre Y,
et al: Overall prevalence of self-reported food allergy in Canada. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2012, 130:986–988.
32. Gupta RS, Springston EE, Warrier MR, Smith B, Kumar R, Pongracic J, et al:
The prevalence, severity, and distribution of childhood food allergy in
the United States. Pediatrics 2011, 128:e9–e17.
33. Fernandez RM: Food allergy in Alergologica-2005. J Investig Allergol Clin
Immunol 2009, 19(Suppl 2):37–44.
34. Steinke M, Fiocchi A, Kirchlechner V, Ballmer-Weber B, Brockow K,
Hischenhuber C, et al: Perceived food allergy in children in 10 European
nations. A randomised telephone survey. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2007,
143:290–295.
35. Brugman E, Meulmeester JF, Spee-van der Wekke A, Beuker RJ, Radder JJ,
Verloove-Vanhorick SP: Prevalence of self-reported food hypersensitivity
among school children in The Netherlands. Eur J Clin Nutr 1998, 52:577–581.
36. Kanny G, Moneret-Vautrin DA, Flabbee J, Beaudouin E, Morisset M, Thevenin
F: Population study of food allergy in France. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001,
108:133–140.
37. Lunet N, Falcao H, Sousa M, Bay N, Barros H: Self-reported food and drug
allergy in Maputo, Mozambique. Public Health 2005, 119:587–589.
38. Justin-Temu M, Risha P, Abla O, Massawe A: Incidence, knowledge and
health seeking behaviour for perceived allergies at household level: a 
case study in Ilala district Dar es Salaam Tanzania. East Afr J Public Health
2008, 5:90–93.
39. Marrugo J, Hernandez L, Villalba V: Prevalence of self-reported food allergy
in Cartagena (Colombia) population. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr) 2008,
36:320–324.
40. Noda R: Prevalence of food allergy in nursery school (nationwide survey).
Jpn J Food Allergy 2010:5–9.
41. Kusunoki T, Morimoto T, Nishikomori R, Heike T, Fujii T, Nakahata T: Allergic
status of schoolchildren with food allergy to eggs, milk or wheat in
infancy. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2009, 20:642–647.
42. Kusunoki T, Morimoto T, Sakuma M, Mukaida K, Yasumi T, Nishikomori R, et
al: Effect of eczema on the association between season of birth and
food allergy in Japanese children. Pediatr Int 2013, 55:7–10.
43. Ho MH, Lee SL, Wong WH, Ip P, Lau YL: Prevalence of self-reported food
allergy in Hong Kong children and teens–a population survey. Asian Pac
J Allergy Immunol 2012, 30:275–284.
44. Kim J, Chang E, Han Y, Ahn K, Lee SI: The incidence and risk factors of
immediate type food allergy during the first year of life in Korean
infants: a birth cohort study. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2011, 22:715–719.
45. Orhan F, Karakas T, Cakir M, Aksoy A, Baki A, Gedik Y: Prevalence of
immunoglobulin E-mediated food allergy in 6-9-year-old urban
schoolchildren in the eastern Black Sea region of Turkey. Clin Exp Allergy
2009, 39:1027–1035.
46. Mullins RJ: Paediatric food allergy trends in a community-based specialist
allergy practice, 1995–2006. Med J Aust 2007, 186:618–621.
47. Oh J, Pyun B, Choung J, Ahn K, Kim C, Song S, et al: Epidemiological
Change of Atopic Dermatitis and Food Allergy in School-Aged Children
in Korea between 1995 and 2000. J Korean Med Sci 2004, 19(5):716–723.
48. Branum AM, Lukacs SL: Food allergy among children in the United States.
Pediatrics 2009, 124:1549–1555.
49. Eggesbo M, Botten G, Stigum H, Nafstad P, Magnus P: Is delivery by
cesarean section a risk factor for food allergy? J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003,
112:420–426.
50. Venter C, Hasan Arshad S, Grundy J, Pereira B, Bernie Clayton C, Voigt K, et
al: Time trends in the prevalence of peanut allergy: three cohorts of
children from the same geographical location in the UK. Allergy 2010,
65:103–108.
51. Kajosaari M: Food allergy in Finnish children aged 1 to 6 years. Acta
Paediatr Scand 1982, 71:815–819.
52. Pyrhonen K, Nayha S, Kaila M, Hiltunen L, Laara E: Occurrence of parent-
reported food hypersensitivities and food allergies among children aged
1–4 yr. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2009, 20:328–338.
53. Ben-Shoshan M, Turnbull E, Clarke A: Food allergy: temporal trends and
determinants. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2012, 12:346–372.
54. Ben-Shoshan M, Kagan RS, Alizadehfar R, Joseph L, Turnbull E, St Pierre Y,
et al: Is the prevalence of peanut allergy increasing? A 5-year follow-up
study in children in Montreal. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009, 123:783–788.
55. Lee AJ, Thalayasingam M, Lee BW: Food allergy in Asia: how does it
compare? Asia Pac Allergy 2013, 3:3–14.
56. Rodriguez-Ortiz PG, Munoz-Mendoza D, Arias-Cruz A, Gonzalez-Diaz SN,
Herrera-Castro D, Vidaurri-Ojeda AC: Epidemiological characteristics of
patients with food allergy assisted at Regional Center of Allergies
and Clinical Immunology of Monterrey. Rev Alerg Mex 2009,
56:185–191.
57. Yavuz ST, Sahiner UM, Buyuktiryaki B, et al: Phenotypes of IgE-mediated
food allergy in Turkish children. Allergy Asthma Proc 2011, 32(6):47–55.
58. Dubakiene R, Surkiene G, Stukas R, Pirmaityte-Vilesko J, Kavaliunas A: Food
allergies among 5th-9th grade school- children in Vilnius (Lithuania).
Ekologija 2008, 54(1):1–4.
59. Karakoc G, Keskin O, Asilsoy S, et al: Food Allergy profile in tertiary clinics in SE
part of Turkey. Poster presentations in Turkish National Society of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology Annual Congress; 2012.
60. Warner JO: Anaphylaxis; the latest allergy epidemic. Pediatr Allergy
Immunol 2007, 18:1–2.
61. Boyce JA, Assa’ad A, Burks AW, Jones SM, Sampson HA, Wood RA, et al:
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food allergy in the
United States: report of the NIAID-sponsored expert panel. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2010, 126:S1–S58.
62. Shreffler WG, Wanich N, Moloney M, Nowak-Wegrzyn A, Sampson HA:
Association of allergen-specific regulatory T cells with the onset of
clinical tolerance to milk protein. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009, 123:43–52 e7.
Page 12
Prescott et al. World Allergy Organization Journal 2013, 6:21
http://www.waojournal.org/content/6/1/21
63. Trakultivakorn M, Sangsupawanich P, Vichyanond P: Time trends of the
prevalence of asthma, rhinitis and eczema in Thai children-ISAAC
(International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood) Phase Three.
J Asthma 2007, 44:609–611.
64. Liao MF, Liao MN, Lin SN, Chen JY, Huang JL: Prevalence of allergic
diseases of schoolchildren in central taiwan. From ISAAC surveys 5 years
apart. J Asthma 2009, 46:541–545.
65. Zar HJ, Ehrlich RI, Workman L, Weinberg EG: The changing prevalence of
asthma, allergic rhinitis and atopic eczema in African adolescents from
1995 to 2002. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2007, 18:560–565.
66. Leung R, Carlin J, Burdon J, Czarny D: Asthma, allergy and atopy in Asian
immigrants in Melbourne. M J A 1994, 161(7):418–425.
67. Sicherer SH, Wood RA, Stablein D, Lindblad R, Burks AW, Liu AH, et al:
Maternal consumption of peanut during pregnancy is associated with
peanut sensitization in atopic infants. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010,
126:1191–1197.
68. Sicherer SH, Munoz-Furlong A, Godbold JH, Sampson HA: US prevalence of
self-reported peanut, tree nut, and sesame allergy: 11-year follow-up.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010, 125:1322–1326.
69. Hourihane JO, Aiken R, Briggs R, Gudgeon LA, Grimshaw KEC, DunnGalvin A,
et al: The impact of government advice to pregnant mothers regarding
peanut avoidance on the prevalence of peanut allergy in United
Kingdom children at school entry. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007,
119:1197–1202.
70. Du Toit G, Katz Y, Sasieni P, Mesher D, Maleki SJ, Fisher HR, et al: Early
consumption of peanuts in infancy is associated with a low prevalence
of peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008, 122:984–991.
71. Savage JH, Limb SL, Brereton NH, Wood RA: The natural history of peanut
allergy: Extending our knowledge beyond childhood. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2007, 120:717–719.
72. Skripak JM, Matsui EC, Mudd K, Wood RA: The natural history of IgE-mediated
cow’s milk allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007, 120:1172–1177.
doi:10.1186/1939-4551-6-21
Cite this article as: Prescott et al.: A global survey of changing patterns
of food allergy burden in children. World Allergy Organization Journal
2013 6:21. 
Page 12 of 12
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
