BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods
  Results
  Conclusions
Background
Methods
Results
  Knowledge
  Thoughts
  Feelings
Discussion
Conclusions
Abbreviations
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgement
References
Page 1
Polloni et al. Clinical and Translational Allergy 2013, 3:39
http://www.ctajournal.com/content/3/1/39
RESEARCH  Open Access
What do school personnel know, think and feel
about food allergies?
Laura Polloni, Francesca Lazzarotto, Alice Toniolo, Giorgia Ducolin and Antonella Muraro*
Abstract
Background: The incidence of food allergy is such that most schools will be attended by at least one food allergic
child, obliging school personnel to cope with cases at risk of severe allergic reactions. Schools need to know about
food allergy and anaphylaxis management to ensure the personal safety of an increasing number of students. The
aim of this study was to investigate Italian school teachers and principals’ knowledge, perceptions and feelings
concerning food allergy and anaphylaxis, to deeply understand how to effectively support schools to manage a
severely allergic child. In addition a further assessment of the impact of multidisciplinary courses on participants
was undertaken.
Methods: 1184 school teachers and principals attended courses on food allergy and anaphylaxis management at
school were questioned before and after their course. Descriptive and inferential statistics were used to analyze the
resulting data.
Results: Participants tended to overestimate the prevalence of food allergy; 79.3% were able to identify the foods
most likely involved and 90.8% knew the most frequent symptoms. 81.9% were familiar with the typical symptoms
of anaphylaxis but, while the majority (65.4%) knew that “adrenaline” is the best medication for anaphylaxis, only
34.5% knew indications of using adrenaline in children. 48.5% thoroughly understood dietary exclusion. School
personnel considered that food allergic students could have social difficulties (10.2%) and/or emotional
consequences (37.2%) because of their condition. “Concern” was the emotion that most respondents (66.9%)
associated with food allergy. At the end of the course, the number of correct answers to the test increased
significantly.
Conclusions: Having adequately trained and cooperative school personnel is crucial to significantly reduce
emergencies and fatal reactions. The results emphasize the need for specific educational interventions and
improvements in school health policies to support schools to deal with allergic students ensuring their safety and
psychological well-being.
Keywords: School, Food allergy, Anaphylaxis
Background
The incidence of food allergies (FA) in children has in-
creased in recent years [1]. It has been estimated that FA
affects up to 4-7% primary school children in Europe [2].
The lifetime prevalence of parental perceived allergic reac-
tions to food was 10.5% in Italian school-aged children
[3]. The prevalence of FA is such that most schools will be
attended by at least one child with FA, obliging school
personnel to cope with children at risk of severe allergic
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:muraro@centroallergiealimentari.eu"] muraro@centroallergiealimentari.eu
Food Allergy Referral Centre Veneto Region, Department of Women and
Child Health, Padua General University Hospital, Via Giustiniani,
3 - 35128 Padua, Italy 
reactions. It has been estimated, moreover, that between
10% and 18% of food allergy or anaphylaxis reactions
occur at school [4]. In food allergic people aged 0–19 fatal
food anaphylaxis was found to have an incidence rate of
3.25 per million person years [5]. Overall, anaphylaxis is a
rare event in school-age children, but anaphylaxis and FA
deaths have been reported at school [6]. School principals
and teachers increasingly need to mediate the parents’
concern about their children having an allergic reaction
with the everyday running of the school [7].  Numerous
studies on FA and anaphylaxis treatment in school have
identified some major shortcomings, such as the lack of
© 2013 Polloni et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Page 2
Polloni et al. Clinical and Translational Allergy 2013, 3:39
http://www.ctajournal.com/content/3/1/39 
Page 2 of 8
proper FA management plans as well as inadequacies in
recognizing and treating reactions with epinephrine [8,9].
It has been highlighted that schools need to formally edu-
cate staff on FA, providing information on prevention
measures, establishing treatment plans and training staff
to administer epinephrine, where appropriate [2,10-13].
Clearly, school teachers need to know about FA and ana-
phylaxis management to ensure the personal safety of an
increasing number of school students.
It is worth mentioning also that there are no nurses
on the school staff in Italy, so the management of food
allergic students weighs on school personnel. The aim of
this study was to investigate what school teachers and
principals know, think and feel about FA and anaphyl-
axis in order to deeply understand how to help schools
to effectively manage a severely allergic child. In addition
the impact of the courses on participants was assessed
comparing answers before and after the session.
Methods
A total of 1184 Italian school teachers and principals,
who voluntarily attended free courses on FA and ana-
phylaxis management at school took part in the study.
Participants came from schools in the Veneto Region,
from nursery to high school level, the majority coming
from nursery and primary schools as shown in Table 1.
A questionnaire was developed by a multidisciplinary
team of experts in the field basing on clinical expertise
and current literature data. The questionnaire was firstly
given to some representatives of the target group in a
pilot project, to test its clearness. It contained multiple-
choice and open questions assessing knowledge, thoughts
and feelings about FA and anaphylaxis. Questions are dis-
played in Table 2.
School workers were questioned anonymously in writ-
ten form before and after their course. They were ad-
vised that their data would be used for the research aim
of better understanding school needs in managing stu-
dents at risk of anaphylaxis.
The courses were free of charge organized by the Veneto
Food Allergy Centre in Padua over a 12 months period
and consisted of one 2-hour intensive session conducted
by a pediatric allergist, a dietician, a psychologist, and a
lawyer. Courses assessed were 10 in total.
Descriptive statistics were used on pre-course data to
explore the school teachers’  baseline knowledge, atti-
tudes and feelings on the topic. For each item, the 
frequency and percentage of answers was calculated. For
each participant, the frequency of correct answers to
questions 1 to 10 was calculated, concerning what they
knew about FA and anaphylaxis. The questions on their
thoughts and feelings had no right or wrong answers, so
it was only computed the frequency of the answers.
Inferential statistics were used to investigate the data
collected. One-way analysis of variance and the Bonferroni
post-hoc test were used to identify differences in the
scores between the different types of schools, and the
chi-square test was used to investigate differences in
teachers’ opinions and feelings about FA, again by type
of school. Data obtained before and after the course
were then compared using the t-test and chi-square test
to identify changes in participants’  answers. Findings
were analyzed using the SPSS 17 statistical software
package. The level of significance was set at .05.
Results
The results showed that, among the study sample as a
whole, 753 (63.6%) had already received information on
FA: 71.7% attended first aid courses; 11.1% attended
health related training; 64.5% had information from
mass media, 23% from the web and 1.4% from other
sources (e.g. acquaintances or relatives).  However, this
did not influence the number of correct answers in the
baseline questionnaire (p < .05).
Knowledge
At baseline, the following picture emerged regarding
knowledge about FA: interestingly, 60.2% of participants
overestimated food allergy prevalence in children. On a
positive note respondents seem to know about food al-
lergy: 79.3% were able to identify foods most likely to
cause FA; 90.8% knew most of the frequent symptoms;
and 81.9% were familiar with typical symptoms of ana-
phylaxis. However, while 65.4% knew that adrenaline is
the best medication for anaphylaxis, only 34.5% knew
that self-injectable adrenaline can be used in children
without any risks of severe side effects. When it came to
food preparation, 84.5% of teachers were aware that it
was essential to prevent cross-contamination of food
and 81.8% recognized the need to read food labels. How-
ever, only 48.5% knew what “dietary exclusion” means,
and 60.4% could correctly identified the risks relating
to dietary exclusion, e.g. undernourishment or social
problems.
Table 1 Scores for correct answers before the course for different types of school
Type of school  N respondents Mean Standard deviation N  F  Df  P
Nursery school (children aged 0–5)  295  6.83  1.727  1184 13.450  2  .001
Primary school (6–11)  598  7.07  1.646
Middle and High school (12–19)  291  6.21  1.722
Page 3
Polloni et al. Clinical and Translational Allergy 2013, 3:39
http://www.ctajournal.com/content/3/1/39 
Page 3 of 8
Table 2 Questions proposed to participants
Questions assessing knowledge, thoughts and feelings about food
allergy and anaphylaxis
Did you ever receive information about food allergy and anaphylaxis?
□ yes □ no
If so from which source? *
□ First aid courses □ Health related training □ Mass media □ Web □ Other
Knowledge
1  How many patients suffer from food allergies in childhood?
□ 1%
□ 20-50%
□ 4-7%
□ 15%
2  What foods most likely cause food allergy?
□ Tomato, strawberries, chocolate
□ Milk, egg, fish, nuts, wheat
□ Legumes, rice, potatoes
□ Apple, spinach, carrot
3  What are the most frequent symptoms of food allergy?
□ Urticaria, stomachache, wheezing
□ Headache, fever, tremors
□ Constipation, headache, nausea
□ Conjunctivitis, tonsillitis
4  What are the most frequent symptoms of anaphylaxis?
□ Asthma, dermatitis
□ Conjunctivitis, rhinitis, headache
□ Urticaria, itch, stomachache, wheezing, throat tightness, collapse
□ Tonsillitis, cough, temperature
5  Which is the best medication for anaphylaxis?
□ Orally antihistamine
□ Cortisone
□ Intramuscular adrenaline
□ Intramuscular antihistamine
6  Are there any contraindications for using adrenaline in children
in case of anaphylaxis?
□ Diabetes
□ Children under 3 years of age
□ Drug hypersensitivity
□ No contraindications
7  How can you assure food preparation is “safe” from allergens?
□ Washing hands before cooking
□ It is not possible
□ Avoiding all possible cross-contaminations in the whole
meal production
□ Washing kitchen stuff before cooking
8  How can you assure if packaged food is “safe” from a
specified allergen?
□ Reading labels 
Table 2 Questions proposed to participants (Continued)
□ Tasting the food
□ It is not possible
□ Asking to someone
9  What does dietary exclusion consist of?
□ Consuming only foods free from allergens
□ Consuming only foods free from additives or preservatives
□ Consuming only fresh food
□ Consuming only home-made food
10 What are the possible risks of dietary exclusion?
□ Stomachache
□ No risks
□ Undernourishment, social limitations
□ Skin diseases
Thoughts
In your opinion, food allergic students*
□ Could have relationship difficulties because of their health conditions
□ Could have academic difficulties because of their health conditions
□ Could have emotional difficulties because of their health conditions
□ Don’t have any social, academic or emotional difficulties because of
their health conditions
Do you think that food allergy and anaphylaxis could be managed at
school by school personnel?
□ Yes □ No
Do you think that the management of food allergy and anaphylaxis at
school is a task of the school personnel?
□ Yes □ No
In your opinion, what could be useful to manage food allergic students?**
What do you think could be useful to support food allergic students?**
In your opinion, what are the main difficulties in managing food allergy
and anaphylaxis at school?**
Feelings
What emotions do you mainly feel about managing food allergy
at school?*
□ Anxiety
□ Concern
□ Fear
□ Helplessness
□ Other
*more than one choice is possible.
**open question.
Total scores for primary schools were higher than nur-
sery or secondary schools (F value (F) = 13.450, degree of
freedom (df ) = 2, p < .001), as assessed by one-way ana-
lysis of variance (Table 1) and confirmed by Bonferroni’s
post-hoc test.
The total scores obtained after the course were signifi-
cantly better (t value (t) = −34.191, df = 2366, p < .001)
Page 4
Polloni et al. Clinical and Translational Allergy 2013, 3:39
http://www.ctajournal.com/content/3/1/39 
Page 4 of 8
and show an increase from a mean score of 6.6 (±1.755)
to 8.9 (±1.340) as shown in Figure 1.
Thoughts
As for school teachers’  and principals’  thoughts about
FA (Figure 2), the following figures emerged at baseline
for the positive answers when they were asked if allergic
students could have learning difficulties (4.3%),  social
difficulties (10.2%),  or emotional consequences (37.2%)
as a result of their allergy, while 53% thought that aller-
gic students suffered no consequences of their FA at
school.
In the questionnaires completed before the course,
82.6% of participants considered that FA and anaphyl-
axis could be managed at school and 82.8% thought that
this was the responsibility of the school personnel. Most
participants (89.6%) reported that specific multidisciplin-
ary courses were helpful to manage FA and anaphylaxis
adequately at school. School personnel felt that the main
difficulty in managing FA and anaphylaxis at school was:
the lack of specific training (78.2%); the need to ensure
that children with FA avoid allergens (14.7%);  and the
worry, anxiety and fear in the event of a FA-related
emergency (7.1%).  It was also considered crucially im-
portant to spend some time in class listening to allergic
students’ issues, discussing them (49.3%), and developing
the students’ abilities and potential (29.8%). There were
no significant differences in the thoughts reported at the
different types of school. The frequency of participants
thinking that anaphylaxis could be managed at school
(χ2 = 108.757, df = 1, p < .001) and that it is the re-
sponsibility of the school personnel (χ2 = 64.232, df = 1,
p < .001) significantly increased after the course as shown
in Figures 3 and 4.
Feelings
When asked in the questionnaire about their feelings
concerning FA at school (Figure 5),  most participants
(66.9%) said, at the baseline, the main emotion was “con-
cern”; 15.8% of school workers reported “anxiety”; 3.7%
mentioned “fear”; and 7% felt “helpless”. The answer to
this question was “other” for 9.3% of teachers, which in-
dicated a positive attitude, such as the hope that they 
would be able to deal with the allergy and the wish to do
something useful. There were no significant differences
in the feelings reported at the different types of school
and after the course, even if a decreasing in the fre-
quency of “concern” answers was registered.
Discussion
It is worth noting that, although many of our respon-
dents had already received some form of information on
FA, it had no influence on the outcome of the question-
naire. Their knowledge came not only from mass media,
but mostly from first aid courses and/or other health-
related training, raising concern that some participants
may have attended first-aid courses that failed to provide
training on how to manage FA and anaphylaxis. Other
studies have shown that, although the school system
does its best to try and manage emergencies, when it
comes to FA they are often very badly prepared [9,14].
This points out the need for both, the school and the
health system, to focus on preparedness of school personnel
to manage food allergic students.
The aim of this study was to investigate what school
teachers and principals knew about FA and anaphylaxis,
and their related thoughts and feelings. Regarding their
knowledge,  it is interesting to note that they overesti-
mated the prevalence of FA in children: this might re-
flect increasing concern in schools about FA and their
lack of preparation to deal with what is seen as a grow-
ing problem for schools [2]. It might also relate to the
fact that “food allergy” is often misused as a generic label
for food-related problems; for instance, as demonstrated,
many people do not know the difference between “food
allergy” and “intolerance” [15].
The present questionnaire identified an encouragingly
high percentage of participants who were able to identify
the commonly-involved foods and most frequent symp-
toms of FA and anaphylaxis correctly. On the other
hand, a much lower proportion of them knew that
adrenaline is the best medication for anaphylactic shock.
The most worrying finding, however, was that only
34.5% of respondents knew there are no absolute contra-
indications to administer self-injectable adrenaline in
children, which stands for many school teachers were
Figure 1 Knowledge on food and anaphylaxis: before and after course mean score.
Page 5
Polloni et al. Clinical and Translational Allergy 2013, 3:39
http://www.ctajournal.com/content/3/1/39 
Page 5 of 8
Figure 2 Difficulties expected to be caused by FA.
reluctant to use it because of supposed side effects in
childhood. It is a common myth that a life-saving drug
can be harmful, and there is fear and mistrust surround-
ing the use of adrenaline, even though it has become
well established as the best treatment for anaphylaxis,
and endorsed by medical experts. A delay in administer-
ing epinephrine is a common factor associated with fatal
outcomes of FA in children and adolescents [6].  The
usage of self-injectable adrenaline is still quite low; it
was highlighted the paucity of knowledge concerning
when and how to use the device, and reported that ad-
equate first-aid measures were not in place for the ma-
jority of school-going children [16,17]. Care-givers need
to be trained continually and given support on first-aid
anaphylaxis management [17,18].  Previous studies re-
ported also that teachers have very limited knowledge
about anaphylaxis. This observation prompts the need
to inquire into the allergy management plans and pol-
icies in schools [17,18].  A comprehensive educational
program for teachers is considered imperative when no
school nurse is available [19].
Food preparation represents an essential issue when
dealing with FA. The study questioned participants about
their understanding of dietary requirements. The majority
recognized the need to prevent cross-contaminations of
food and the importance of reading food labels. Nonethe-
less, only 48.5% really knew what an exclusion diet is,
and the questionnaire startlingly revealed that many 
respondents thought that an exclusion diet meant eating
fresh or home-made food, with no additives or preserva-
tives. Just over half of the teachers rightly acknowledged
that children on exclusion diets might be at risk of nutri-
tional deficiencies and/or social limitations. The latter
issue relates to the fact that food has a social value be-
cause it is often associated with relationships. Going out
with friends, eating in the canteen, even going to parties
may pose problems for allergic children and adolescents,
and/or their families, with fallout on their quality of
life [7].
Primary schools had higher overall scores than nursery
or secondary schools when it came to the teachers’
knowledge of FA: this may reflect the composition of
our sample (the primary school teachers were numeric-
ally better represented). On the other hand, it may relate
to the epidemiology of FA. It has been estimated that FA
affects up to 4-7% of primary school children [2],  so
teachers of this age group are likely to be more aware of
the problem and more motivated to obtain information
on how to deal with the related problems.
A purpose of the questionnaire was to investigate what
participants thought about FA and anaphylaxis. This was
important with a view to establishing whether school
teachers had any prejudiced or misconceived ideas about
FA that might influence how the condition is managed
at school. Only a very small percentage acknowledged
that a student with FA could have academic difficulties.
FA is often accompanied by respiratory allergies [20]
and it has been demonstrated that respiratory diseases
can affect a student’s performance [21]. Another signifi-
cant issue is that students with allergies have to see doc-
tors more often, meaning they are often absent from
class and this influences their school results [22,23].
Only 10.2% of our respondents recognized that allergic
students may suffer from relational difficulties, and
37.2% felt that they might have emotional problems.
Although it has been demonstrated in the literature
that allergic patients can have various severe relational
and emotional difficulties [23],  more than half of the
participants believed that students with FA suffered no
such consequences of this condition. Less than half of
the teachers acknowledged the importance of creating
Figure 3 Thoughts: could food allergy and anaphylaxis be managed at school by school personnel? Yes answers percentage before and
after the course.
Page 6
Polloni et al. Clinical and Translational Allergy 2013, 3:39
http://www.ctajournal.com/content/3/1/39 
Page 6 of 8
Figure 4 Thoughts: is the management of FA and anaphylaxis at school a task of the school personnel? Yes answers percentage before
and after the course.
opportunities in class for listening and sharing the stu-
dents’  challenges. These findings give cause for con-
cern, since they could mean that school teachers tend
to underestimate some students’ important issues, and
they are ill-prepared to manage the psychological is-
sues associated with FA. Many of the respondents said
that the main difficulty of managing FA at school was
the lack of specific training, confirming previous
research and experts’  reports [2,17,18].  Most of the
teachers recognized that multidisciplinary courses are
needed to manage all aspects of FA adequately. On the
other hand, an encouraging finding was that most of
the participants felt that FA and anaphylaxis can be
managed at school, and that it is up to the teachers to
do so, showing a proactive approach and willingness to
do better. This is likely linked also to the fact that Italian
school health policy does not employ school nurses. In the
case of managing FA at school Veneto Region had a law
in place that recommends the collaboration among
schools, patients’  families, health professionals and local
health services. Specific training for school personnel is
required, but not mandatory. The findings of the study
highlighted the need for policy changes and reform to
support and empower the school system in adequately
managing food allergic students.
The final part of the questionnaire focused on how the
teachers felt about managing FA and anaphylaxis at
school. It is important to understand their feelings to
Figure 5 Feelings of school workers about FA. 
ensure their full cooperation in managing FA. It is com-
mon knowledge that anxiety and fear can make people
freeze in an emergency situation; these feelings can also
lead to unnecessarily restrictive school environments as
well as affect health care planning, giving rise to con-
flicts within families and with physicians and the school
community [24]. The main feeling reported by our par-
ticipants was “concern”; only 15.8% mentioned “anxiety”
and 7% felt “helpless”. Encouragingly, only 3.7% said they
were fearful about FA. Even more positive is the fact that
9.3% mentioned “other”  feelings, which they later
described as the hope the child would recover from the
allergy and their wish to do something useful to help al-
lergy sufferers. The results did not differ for respondents
working at different types of school (nursery, primary or
secondary school teachers).  Teachers’  attitudes have
proved to be an important factor in ensuring appropriate
treatment for allergic children [8,17].  In general, the
findings showed an apprehension felt by school teachers
relating to children with FA. These feelings were not
seen as an obstacle and they could be managed and
turned to positive account. It can be supposed they re-
flect the need of school to be better supported in man-
aging food allergic students, for example considering the
availability of school nurses or mandatory training pro-
grams. The management of FA in the school setting
should also include providing resources for school officials
to help them develop FA management protocols [24].
In addition, an assessment of the answers before and
after the course was performed. When the questionnaire
was completed again, there was a significant increase in
the overall scores about knowledge and in the frequency
of participants thinking that anaphylaxis could be man-
aged at school and that it is the responsibility of the
school personnel. A modest lessening in the frequency
of “concern” answers was registered. Results confirmed a
general positive effect of the course on the participants’
understanding of FA and anaphylaxis. As expected,
changing personal opinions and feelings seems to need
more time and efforts than modifying knowledge. Fur-
ther and long-term studies are needed to know the ef-
fectiveness of multidisciplinary courses in terms of
Page 7
Polloni et al. Clinical and Translational Allergy 2013, 3:39
http://www.ctajournal.com/content/3/1/39 
Page 7 of 8
reducing the number of reactions and increasing food
allergic students’ quality of life at school.
The study is descriptive in its nature and it depends
mostly upon impressions from the questionnaire; how-
ever, this limitation could be balanced by the big large of
the sample (1184 school workers), so results seem to be
in any case informative. Another limit could be the fact
that national differences in school policy do not allow
for generalization of findings, however it can be useful
to learn about and compare different practices for man-
aging allergy and anaphylaxis with a view to improving
regulations and guidelines for schools.
Results from Veneto Region could represent a starting
point toward validation of multidisciplinary educational
trainings that could be used on a larger scale with a
benefit for all Italian schools. This is indeed the first
study, as far as we know, assessing Italian school personnel
attitudes toward the management of FA and anaphylaxis in
the school setting. The gaps identified could form the basis
for improvements of local and national legislation in order
to ensure implementation of specific educational interven-
tions for an adequate management of FA and anaphylaxis
at school. Physician and Referral Health Centre can play an
important role in educating school personnel about the
treatment of food allergies [24]. As recommended by the
European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immun-
ology [2], an education network involving health care and
education providers is crucial in ensuring that the school
staff is alerted and trained, and specific allergy manage-
ment plans initiated. This should be achieved through the
empowerment of key stakeholders and supported by con-
tinuing education of all school staff.
Conclusions
Managing FA and anaphylaxis demands major efforts
and changes in the school system: it is crucial to have
adequately informed, trained and cooperative school staff
to significantly reduce the incidence of emergencies and
fatal allergic reactions. Understanding the schools’  needs
and attitudes is the first essential step to the success of
any training scheme. The results highlight areas where
there is a lack of not only knowledge, but also understand-
ing of the students with food allergies in terms of their
well-being as well as their risk of having a reaction. A
positive effect on school personnel’s knowledge and
thoughts after the course was registered. This contributes
to underline the role of specific educational programs to
train school teachers to deal with allergic children but also
the necessity of implementing an adequate and compre-
hensive school health policy to ensure the safety and well-
being of an increasing number of students.
Abbreviations
Df: Degree of freedom; FA: Food allergy; F: F value; t: t value. 
Competing interests
No financial support was awarded relating to this paper. Conflict of interest:
nothing to declare.
Authors’ contributions
LP designed the study, collected and analyzed the data and prepared the
manuscript. FL, AT and GD collected the data, provided intellectual input
and assisted in manuscript preparation. AM coordinated and supervised the
study, provided intellectual input and assisted in manuscript preparation.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgement
We gratefully acknowledge Marcia Podestà and Marzia Salvagnin from the
National Patients’ Association “Food Allergy Italia” as well as Catherine
Crowley and Lara Fioravanzo for editorial assistance.
Received: 13 August 2013 Accepted: 5 November 2013
Published: 25 November 2013
References
1.  Branum AM, Lukacs SL: Food allergy among children in the United States.
Pediatrics 2009, 124:1549–1555.
2.  Muraro A, Clark A, Beyer K, Borrego LM, Borres M, Lodrup Carlsen KC,
Carrer P, Mazon A, Rancè F, Valovirta E, Wickman M, Zanchetti M: The
management of the allergic child at school: EAACI/GA2LEN Task Force
on the allergic child at school. Allergy 2010, 65:681–689.
3.  Caffarelli C, Coscia A, Ridolo E, Povesi Dascola C, Gelmett C, Raggi V, Volta E,
Vanell M, Dall'Aglio PP: Parents’ estimate of food allergy prevalence and
management in Italian school-aged children. Pediatr Int 2011, 53(4):505–510.
4.  Mehl A, Wahn U, Niggemann B: Anaphylactic reactions in children – a
questionnaire-based survey in Germany. Allergy 2005, 60:1440–1445.
5.  Umasunthar T, Leonardi-Bee J, Hodes M, Turner PJ, Gore C, Habibi P,
Warner JO, Boyle RJ: Incidence of fatal food anaphylaxis in people with
food allergy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Exp Allergy
2013: . doi: 10.1111/cea.12211. [Epub ahead of print].
6.  Bock SA, Muñoz-Furlong A, Sampson HA: Further fatalities caused by
anaphylactic reactions to food, 2001–2006. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007,
119(4):1016–1018.
7.  Munoz-Furlong A: Daily coping strategies for patients and their families.
Pediatrics 2003, 111(6):1654–1661.
8.  Hay GH, Harper TB 3rd, Moore TG: Assuring the Safety of Severely Food
Allergic Children in School. J School Health 2006, 76(9):479–481.
9.  McIntyre CL, Sheetz AH, Carroll CR, Young MC: Administration of
epinephrine for life-threatening allergic reactions in school settings.
Pediatrics 2005, 116(5):1134–1140.
10. Hu W, Kerridge I, Kemp A: Reducing the risks for food allergic children in
schools and preschools. J Paediatr Child Health 2004, 40(12):672–673.
11. Sicherer SH, Mahr T, American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Allergy
and Immunology: Management of food allergy in the school setting.
Pediatrics 2010, 126(6):1232–1239.
12. American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on School Health: Guidelines
for emergency medical care in school. Pediatrics 2001, 107:435–436.
13. AAAAI Board of Directors: Anaphylaxis in schools and other childcare
settings. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998, 102:173–176.
14. Olympia RP, Wan E, Avner JR: The preparedness of schools to respond to
emergencies in children: a national survey of school nurses.
Pediatrics 2005, 166:e738–e745.
15. Gupta RS, Kim JS, Springston EE, Smith B, Pongracic JA, Wang X, Holl J:
Food allergy knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs in the United States.
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2009, 103:43–50.
16. Gold MS, Sainsbury R: First aid anaphylaxis management in children
prescribed an epinephrine auto-injector device. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2000, 106:171–176.
17. Ercan H, Ozen A, Karatepe H, Berber M, Cengizlier R: Primary school
teachers’ knowledge about and attitudes toward anaphylaxis.
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2012, 23(5):428–432.
18. Shah SS, Parker CL, Davis CM: Improvement of teacher food allergy
knowledge in socioeconomically diverse schools after educational
intervention. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2013, 52(9):812–820.
Page 8
Polloni et al. Clinical and Translational Allergy 2013, 3:39
http://www.ctajournal.com/content/3/1/39
19. Nielsen WW, Lindsey K: When there is no school nurse—are teachers
prepared for students with peanut allergies? Sch Nurse News 2010,
27(1):12–15.
20. Krogulska A, Dynowski J, Wasowska-Krolikowska K: Bronchial reactivity in
schoolchildren allergic to food. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2010,
105(1):31–38.
21. Borres MP: Allergic rhinitis: more than just a stuffy nose. Acta Paediatr
2009, 98(7):1088–1092.
22. Jauregui I, Mullol J, Davila I, Ferrer M, Bartra J, del Cuvillo A, Montoro J,
Sastre J, Valero A: Allergic rhinitis and school performance. J Investig
Allergol Clin Immunol 2009, 19(Suppl 1):32–39.
23. Bollinger ME, Dahlquist LM, Mudd K, Sonntag B: The impact of food allergy
on the daily activities of children and their families. Ann Allergy Asthma
Immunol 2006, 96(3):415–421.
24. Young MC, Munoz-Furlong A, Sicherer SH: Management of food allergies
in schools: a perspective for allergists. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009,
124(2):175–182.
doi:10.1186/2045-7022-3-39
Cite this article as: Polloni et al.: What do school personnel know, think
and feel about food allergies?. Clinical and Translational Allergy 2013 3:39. 
Page 8 of 8
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
