Page 1
Draft 3 
Shelly Mansfield
Enron Broadband Services
001-713- 853-4589
shelly_mansfield@enron.net
ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES ANNOUNCES EXPANSION TO EUROPE
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: Thursday, July 13, 2000
LONDON – Enron Broadband Services (EBS), a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron
Corp., announced today it will introduce its wholesale bandwidth products and broadband
application services in Europe. In addition, Enron has appointed Steven Elliott as president of
Enron Broadband Services’ European operation, which will be based in London and will initially
have approximately 50 employees.
Enron has extended the reach of its long-haul broadband communications platform, the
Enron Intelligent Network, into Europe, enabling businesses and Internet content and service
providers to improve the end-to-end delivery of broadband content. 
Enron is offering new applications services to the European market, including the
transport of rich media and streaming video to the desktop at high speeds with guaranteed high
quality of service (QoS). The Enron Intelligent Network recently provided webcast coverage of
the Wimbledon Championships, via the Wimbledon channel, delivering more than 600,000
streams to viewers in 99 countries. 
“The European market is progressive in its approach and receptivity to the Internet and is
a logical step in our global broadband expansion plans,” said Joe Hirko, chairman and CEO of
Enron Broadband Services. “While our service offerings resemble those in the U.S., we are
tailoring our solutions to the unique needs of our European customers. By leveraging Enron’s
existing presence in Europe, we will be well positioned to provide valuable services to customers
there.”
Enron is also offering bandwidth capacity trading and intermediation services in the region. 
Enron has installed and is testing a pooling point in London to facilitate bandwidth trading inter-
continentally between the United States and Europe. Pooling points provide the physical
interconnectivity between bandwidth trading principals. Enron is evaluating sites for pooling
Page 2
point deployment in Amsterdam, Frankfurt and Paris, which is scheduled to be completed by
spring 2001. Enron expects to have 13 pooling points in operation in major U.S. cities by the
end of 2000.
About Enron Broadband Services
Enron Broadband Services is a leading provider of high quality, high bandwidth delivery
and application services. The company’s business model combines the power of the Enron
Intelligent Network, Enron’s Broadband Operating System, bandwidth trading and
intermediation services, and high-bandwidth applications to fundamentally improve the
experience and functionality of the Internet. Enron’s Broadband Operating System allows
application developers to dynamically provision bandwidth on demand for the quality of service
necessary to deliver broadband content. Enron is also creating a market for bandwidth that will
allow network providers to scale to meet the demands required by increasingly complex
applications. Enron Broadband Services can be found on the Web at [URL: "http://www.enron.net/"] www.enron.net.
Enron is one of the world’s leading electricity, natural gas and communications
companies. The company, which owns approximately $37 billion in energy and communications
assets, produces electricity and natural gas, develops, constructs and operates energy facilities
worldwide, delivers physical commodities and financial and risk management services to
customers around the world, and is developing an intelligent network platform to facilitate online
business. Fortune magazine has named Enron “Most Innovative Company” for five consecutive
years, the top company for “Quality of Management” and the second best company for
“Employee Talent.” In addition, Enron ranks in the top quarter of Fortune's “Best 100
Companies to Work For in America.” Enron’s Internet address is www.enron.com. The stock is
traded under the ticker symbol “ENE.” 
###
