Page 1
July 30, 2001
EventAmerica Foundation Executive Summary
The EventAmerica Foundation’s (EAF) mission is to enrich the human experience. This will be achieved
by recognizing extraordinary human behavior, bringing greater awareness to philanthropic endeavors
(including national, regional and local charities), and raising funding for many of these worthwhile
organizations. These include well-known and not so well known charities of all types and causes.
The primary “theme” of this foundation will be the recognition and encouragement of, “extraordinary
deeds”.  These deeds will be defined as any act of outstanding compassion, volunteerism, heroics, i.e.
“going above and beyond” the call of duty. The EAF plans to have a multi-level awards program that
will award scholarships, partial scholarships, sports & entertainment memorabilia, and VIP sports &
entertainment tours provided by its partner corporation, EventAmerica, Inc.
The EventAmerica Foundation will be modeled after the “Make A Wish” Foundation, one of the truly
inspiring philanthropic organizations in existence today. The EAF will be created to accentuate the “flip-
side” of the coin from Make A Wish. So very many people do outstanding deeds on a daily basis and the
goal of the EAF will be to bring recognition to many of these ever so deserving individuals. Far too many
times these outstanding acts of kindness go unrecognized on a national basis. 
These individuals typically seek no reward or recognition, but their efforts stand out and are worthy of
public salute. Usually they enjoy a moment of fame in the media, and then they are quickly forgotten.
People like Jess Knowlton, Terry Forson and Jon Hosfeld, the three CSX Transportation workers who
risked their lives to stop a runaway train carrying hazardous waste. Engineer Knowlton called his wife
before racing his locomotive at 65 mph to catch up with the train. Recalled his wife, “He said, ‘this may
be the last time we talk. I’ve got to go catch a train.”
The EAF will recognize people who succeed in the face of incredible odds; or somehow improve life in
America through ingenuity or perseverance; or those who escape poverty and end up excelling and giving
back to society. And sometimes, the EventAmerica Foundation will reward people who, through no fault
of their own, have somehow survived a horrible ordeal. Like the 10-year-old boy who secretly dialed 911
and summoned police to arrest his mom’s boyfriend who had just killed three family members while
mom was in court seeking a restraining order.
In our society today, so very much emphasis is put on the recognition of and focus on “role-models”.
What better example of a role model than someone that performs selfless acts of generosity? Another
main goal of the EAF will be to bring education and awareness to charitable and corporate organizations,
but also to the general public, by recognizing individuals that deserve more than a “thanks” and a pat on
the back. What better way to instill compassion and acts of kindness in our fellow human beings, if not
by bringing national attention to these acts? 
Page 2
The list of potential anecdotes is virtually endless, as is the good will and exposure EventAmerica will
enjoy. Expenses for experiences granted to individuals would be wholly tax deductible, and in some cases
might therefore be potentially covered by EventAmerica clients who would like to be associated with
sponsoring such recognition and reward. Perhaps a corporation could automatically become a sponsor if
it purchased a certain number of tickets for its executives. 
Like their VIP counterparts who are paying EventAmerica clients, these recipients will receive
experiences and stories to last a lifetime. They will inevitably receive press coverage both at the event and
in their hometown media in recognition of their honor. The goal is for the EventAmerica Heroes
program to become as successful at rewarding extraordinary human behavior as the “Make-a-Wish”
Foundation is for rewarding deathly sick kids.
The EventAmerica Foundation will be incorporated as a 501 C (3) nonprofit public benefit corporation.
The foundation will need to raise $250,000 in initial funding to help build the infrastructure, website,
marketing program and for general operating purposes. The Foundation will form two advisory boards.
The first advisory board will comprise corporate leaders, celebrities, politicians, sports figures and others
who will select EventAmerica “heroes” to be given fully paid EventAmerica VIP tour packages to major
sporting and entertainment events. The second advisory board will focus on the development and growth
of the foundation, making sure to adhere to the bylaws and principals set forth by the board of directors.
Building the EAF “corporate” advisory board can begin with strategic corporate alliances (heavily
weighted towards potential large clients). It will be much easier to approach potential “Heroes” advisory
board members when we can show them photos and video streams of our first recipients.
The EventAmerica Foundation’s primary source of revenue shall be from EventAmerica, Inc., but the
Foundation will also seek corporate sponsors and supporters, as well as solicit tax-deductible
contributions from EventAmerica clients and the general public. The EventAmerica Foundation will
initially be a three-person operation, with a President, an office manager and a liaison, working directly
with EventAmerica, in Silicon Valley. The staff would need to grow as the Foundation grows. The office
manager will be responsible for maintaining the Foundation’s database, updating its website, maintaining
financial records with an accounting program such as QuikBooks, and general office support as needed.
The liaison will help create an EAF presence in Silicon Valley and will help plan events for the EAF and
EventAmerica in the Bay area and in conjunction with EventAmerica’s planned VIP events.
Marketing the concept to begin receiving nominations will be accomplished through media stories, mass
e-mail marketing with HTML-formatted messages, banner advertising, contracted Web site optimization
efforts--and quickly by word of mouth. EventAmerica will “seed” the program immediately by
recognizing a few individuals and getting them to EventAmerica’s first VIP events this fall. That will
trigger the marketing effort, which will be in place before these events take place. We should simply
administratively select our first “heroes” for these events. It won’t be hard to find good candidates for
recognition. EventAmerica’s first events will be held in Denver, so maybe a “gala” dinner to launch the
EventAmerica Foundation would make sense. A kick-off “gala” event of this type might attract 1000
attendees and several national charity organizations that could certainly put the EAF on the map. A
second “gala” dinner in the Bay area this fall, would also help launch the foundation’s endeavors.
In summation, the potential exists to build the EventAmerica Foundation into one of the premier
philanthropic organizations in the world. Remember too, that EventAmerica’s business model is a global
model. Working side by side, and for the good of all human beings, these “sister” corporations will have
an added advantage in promoting each other’s endeavors. The founders of EventAmerica have from the
beginning of their relationship spoken about “giving back” to those in need. After much deliberation,
thought, and help from a select group of visionaries, the EventAmerica Foundation has begun to take
shape and form. The principals are very excited about the opportunities this foundation business model
offers. The future recognition of thousands of “heroes” will hopefully lead others to create worthwhile
ventures that will help all of us, so graced with the gift of life, to celebrate the wonders of kindness,
generosity and helpfulness all in support of our fellow man.
