Page 1
Section
Corporate
Overview
Technology
MGeneral
ost electronic markets enjoy only limited trading because the majority of their
postings are irrelevant to the typical user. The problem arises because goods
and services have many attributes, some being more important than others. 
Current applications of technology to address this problem can handle only
very few attributes, which means that the matches suggested are generally
inappropriate. As a result, users cannot find what they are looking for and the
market fails to achieve liquidity. 
         
Liquid Engines’ product, the IXE2000, has solved the matching
problem for complex goods and services, which account for most of the
transactions in the real world. Our technology does many-to-many matching
and pricing for goods and services described by any number of attributes. 
Furthermore, because the engine takes the preferences of the other side of
every transaction into account, matches are much more likely to result in
trades.  The engine can be quickly customized for the idiosyncrasies of real
online markets, which means that we can offer the technology at very low cost
to the client. 
         
The IXE2000 utilizes cutting edge technologies such as XML and
Java, built on a Weblogic platform. The proprietary mathematics behind the
technology is completely general. This has allowed the IXE2000 to have 25
pre-configured market forms, which enables our clients to choose from a
variety of markets and switch between them if a different market type
improves the community being served.
These markets include virtually any existing or imagined electronic
market in the world today, e.g., exchanges, one-to-one transactions, 
competitive markets, electronic consignment stores, department stores, 
barter, concierge and auctions, among others. Additionally, it can solve
complex internal allocation problems, assigning tasks to workers, consultants
to clients, content to information seekers or projects to departments in large
1
Confidential and Proprietary
Liquid Engines
Page 2
Customer Benefits &
Advantages
firms. Liquid Engines’ technology creates the greatest value in those
industries where current matching technology is the weakest:
  All B2B, B2C, C2B (such as workers supplying labor to a firm), A2A
and C2C exchanges including homogenous or vertical exchanges
such as Barnes and Noble.com and heterogeneous exchanges such
as eBay and Monster.com.
  All horizontal trade enabling technologies such as Ariba and
CommerceOne.
  All non-commerce exchange activities falling within and outside
companies such as recruiting, resource allocation, trade shows, 
temporary staffing, student services within universities, special interest
clubs, etc. Customers could include companies such as HP, British
Petroleum and Manpower.
  All electronic retailers that want to broaden the types of transactions
offered and those that want to offer intelligent and personalized
product and service recommendations.  
  Industries with rigid market structures (Net Markets – eBay/Ubid are
strictly auction sites with defined procedures across entire user
groups.
  Industries where information availability is poor (IT - Staffing
companies margins <10% and unfilled positions at 28% and growing)
  Current markets that either force strict taxonomies or use text
searches that return long lists where most entries are irrelevant 
(Portals – The average search yields over 100 results)
  Markets that have unequal focus on buyers/suppliers (Procurement –
Ariba/CommerceOne are heavily buyer focused. Current supplier
networks are not designed for buyer convenience.)
  Markets with high transaction costs (Recruiting – Cost up to $20,000
to hire a key executive)
  Development and deployment can be very expensive (MetalSite, a
metals auction site and exchange cost nearly $25 million to build)
  Where lead times are very long and do not support the fast paced
environment in which e-markets need to compete (GoTo.com bought
AuctionRover but does not expect to introduce auctions for several
months.)
Since the digital economy is evolving at a very rapid pace, today's
frontier technology may be tomorrow's obsolete software. Rather than try to
predict where the market may be going, Liquid Engines’ philosophy is to
provide the e-Market community with the technology to run their markets. Our
2
Confidential and Proprietary
Liquid Engines
