Page 1
BACKGROUND ON COST OVERRUNS
•  Increased financing costs ($32mm KFW fee which is up-front buy down of
credit spread that when amortized over life of the loan is within our original
interest rate of 11%) This fee is not paid if the financing does not close. The
other $17mm is related to bank financing costs, bank legal costs and IDC tied
to delays-Total cost of $47mm.
•  Project part of our cross border strategy, required special law to be passed
through Bolivian congress to cross Bolivia/Brazil border. Took 9 months
longer than plan to resolve. Total cost of $40mm in delay and contractor
renegotiations.
•  On July 15,1999 we gave release to contractor (except spreads 3 & 4 in Bolivia
because of issues in the Chiquitano forest with the NGO’s). Two months later
released Chiquitano after further forest reroutes and delay costs. Event
occurred after receipt of concession to build pipeline. Total cost of $15mm.
•  Environment management /compliance cost- Environmental and Safety
Management System required as condition of the OPIC loan. Total cost of 
$20mm.
•  Brazilian political event--construction stay issued by assistant attorney
general until environmental study and reroutes agreed with Attorney general
and Ibama to avoid impacts to terrain, caves and fauna and flora in a ridges
area near Caceras Brazil. This occurred after receipt of all Brazilian local and
federal permits to build pipeline in Brazil and required the project to drill three
ridges. This took over 10 months to resolve. The horizontal drilling and
consequent construction delays resulted in total cost increases of $50mm.
•  Water treatment plant and river intake system because wells (original plan) 
insufficient to meet water needs of plant- Total cost of $15mm.
•  Settlements of civil unrest and other licensing requirements-Total cost of
$4mm.
•  Extension of time and diesel costs-Total cost of $10mm.
•  Other miscellaneous costs-Total of $11mm.
•  Still have pending cost overruns but we still have outstanding contractor
claims in excess of budget but we hope to handle these claims with $15mm
of contingency included in the budget.
Page 2
Shell dilution
  We need an additional $25mm if shell does not fund its pro rata portion of the
$67mm of cost overruns. This could represent up to a 9% transfer of
ownership interest from Shell to Enron. We would look to recoup the additional
equity investment next year. 
Project Highlights
•  Basic power plant economics $36/mwh, $ 1300/kw, 7500 heat rate, 1.29 gas
yields an 11% deterministic unlevered return even after consideration of the
cost overruns incurred to date compared to original rate of return of 16%.
•  We have Booked around $88mm of MTM income on the project
•  Charged $30mm of Enron office overhead, internal costs to the project
•  Maintained $22mm fee to EE&CC in the construction contract
•  All cash from operations until commercial operations on gas at 480mw will be
used to pay capital costs of the venture. Approximately $20million of cash
expected in current forecast.
•  Cuiaba 2 will add significant value. Only compression needed on the pipeline
for the expansion
We recommend the board approve these commitments to cover cost overruns so the
pipeline can be completed and provide Enron with the upsides of having gas at the project.
