Page 1
July 20, 2020 
One Sutherland Court.
Palm Beach Gardens
FL 33418 -7061
(561) 627 0662
Mr. Jeffrey Skilling
Enron North America
333 Clay Street
Suite 1800
Houston, TX 77002
Dear Mr. Skilling,
I would like to inform you of the availability of some gas turbine power plants we
can offer for short term delivery. Energy Services, Inc. is totally dedicated to all
phases of the gas turbine business and can provide equipment, installation,
maintenance, training, and spare parts
At the present time we can supply remanufactured gas turbines which have been
zero timed and will have an 18 month new engine warranty. For next summer
operation we can offer two HC4-2 40 MW units and one HC4-6 120 MW unit.
These consist of double expander power turbines originally manufactured by
Worthington (now Dresser-Rand) which are powered by gas generators originally
supplied by Turbo Power & Marine (a subsidiary of United Technologies). Should
maintenance be required for the gas generators, we can supply a spare unit which
can be exchanged in 8 hours and perform the necessary repairs on your unit at one
of our two overhaul shops. 
Many of the components in the package will be new such as:
  Woodward NetCon 5000 Fuel Control
  Inlet and exhaust silencers
  All accessories and interconnecting pipe and wiring
Page 2
The approximate installed cost for one HC4-2 40 MW unit is $13 million and $36
million for the HC4-6 120 MW plant. This includes water injection for NOx
control. I can provide you with a complete detailed specification if you desire.
These gas turbines have a history of very high reliability. It should be noted that
their heat rate is approximately 13500 BTU/KWH LHV and would therefor be
better suited for peaking or standby service rather than base load.
Last year we installed four HC4-2 power plants for CMS Energy in Gaylord, MI
which are identical to the above units. We have also installed other recent units for
Morgan Stanley in Smiths, Alabama and Bainbridge, Georgia. Should you wish to
visit these sites we would be happy to make arrangements for you. 
Since most of the key people at ESI had worked at Turbo Power & Marine
Systems who originally developed the industrialized version of the Pratt &
Whitney JT4/J75 jet engine, they are intimately familiar with this equipment and
can analyze problems and provide training. ESI has also been designated the OEM
for the Dresser Rand double expander power turbine. ESI established itself in the
gas turbine business 25 years ago and has an impressive record of on time delivery
and expertise on various gas turbines. We also have one of the largest inventories
of spare parts for these turbines which are available for immediate shipment.
At this time we also have a GE LM2500-30 available which is nominally rated at
20 MW and has a heat rate of 9800 BTU/KWH. 
Please keep us in mind for any future projects which require gas turbines. We do
acquire various power plants from time to time and may be able to locate a
specific model or size to fit your requirements.
You may contact me at (561) 627 0662 or E-Mail at jmisteli@aol.com
Sincerely yours,
John A. Misteli
