Page 1
 BEN POURBABAI
 1077 Papermill Ct., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20007
 (202) 965-3696; Cell: (202) 793-4854
 BenPourbabai@aol.com
EXECUTIVE EXPERIENCE
My proven executive strengths include: abilities to build consensus, to forge strategic alliances, to work with
diversified cultures, and to motivate and to lead. I have strong entrepreneurial skills and abilities to get the job
done with limited resources and under pressure and adverse conditions, and have significant hands-on
experience in managing complex cross-functional programs. I strongly believe in strategic and contingency
planning, and risk management during the life cycle of any program or project. I am informal and manage
through consensus building, and introducing relevant incentives and disincentives. I have had P&L
responsibilities, have been in charge of strategic business planning and development, have significant
international experience, have had numerous discussions with the senior executives of the aerospace sector in
the States and abroad, and have represented DOT in multilateral discussions and collaborations.
TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMNT EXPERIENCE:
1996-Present Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor, US Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation
Administration (Manufacturing & Quality Assurance).
  Directed a diversified national team of technical personnel (1000+) through five national directorates.
  Contributed to transition of DOT into a (multimillion $) global secure broadband web-based E-business
infrastructure addressing customer-based transactions with the industry and other agencies.
  Collaborated with DARPA on R&D programs in domains of broadband wireless telecommunication
systems, NGI, and design of secure broadband-wireless communications infrastructure.
  Developed a global web-based multimedia information system architecture for aircraft fleet-monitoring
and maintenance management and accident prevention system at Aircraft Certification Service.
  Developed and implemented a real-time information-based quality control system for monitoring
aerospace products, parts, and (software and hardware) systems during their respective life cycles. 
  Managed life cycle (i.e., design, development, and implementation) of web-based multimedia learning, 
logistics, and surveillance systems. These systems do demand a broadband communication infrastructure.
  Developed a multimedia web-based advanced training/learning systems at Aircraft Certification Service.
  Represented the United States in the International Organization for Standardization (IOS) in domains of
systems engineering, quality control management, and systems' life cycle management.
  Worked with the members of Congress to improve aviation safety and security by addressing a subset of
vulnerabilities of the national information systems' infrastructure.
  Contributed to creation of ISO 12207 standards on software life cycle processes as well as ISO 15288
standards on system life cycle management. These standards are extremely relevant during development
life cycle of complex (information and communication) systems.
  Implemented a Command, Control, Communication, Computer, and Intelligence (C4I) system as a
strategic safety management system for improving aviation safety.
  Contributed to improvement of the FAA's (multimillion $) acquisition management system for
procurement of advanced information systems.
  Assessed vulnerabilities of capabilities of Cockpit Voice Recorders (CVRs) and Digital Flight Data
Recorders (DFDRs), and proposed complementary strategies.
  Assessed vulnerabilities of the information and communication systems’ components of the
transportation infrastructure to the synthetic computer viruses, and proposed complementary strategies.
  Assessed limitations and capabilities of Supply Chain Management and Enterprise Resource Planning of
the aerospace sector, and advised the aerospace industry's senior executives on complementary strategies
for improving productivity and efficiencies. 
  Monitored and assessed the state of art IT, manufacturing (e.g., Lean and Agile Manufacturing, 
JIT/CIMS, CAD/CAM, MRP/ERP/SCM), and quality assurance  technologies (i.e., TQM, Six-Sigma, 
ISO) in the aerospace sector and when necessary, advised its senior executives accordingly.
1991-1996 93-96: Vice President; 91-93: Principal: MSCA: Management Science
Consultants of America, Inc. Alexandria, VA.
  Designed, developed, and implemented a number of large scale Information Systems projects. Clients
included: Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA); World Bank; TRW Environmental
Safety Systems (TRWESS); US Trust Corp.; Lockheed-Martin (formerly Loral, and the IBM Federal
Page 2
Systems); Raytheon (formerly Hughes Aircraft Company); TRW's Avionics & Surveillance Group's
tactical systems; Tracor Aerospace; General Dynamics; Federal Highway Administration, Washington; 
Colorado Department of Transportation; US Postal Service; Urban Institute.
  Increased profitability by 500% through strategic alliances and subcontracting.
  Forged strategic alliances between MSCA and TRW, Boeing (Space & Defense Group),  IBM, Northrop-
Grumman, Tracor Aerospace, Hughes Aircraft Company to collaborate on various contracts in the
domains of information systems, supply chain management, transportation, and manufacturing.
  Improved productivity by simultaneously managing cross-functional programs through recruiting highly
technical consultants.
  Reduced operations cost by 25%, through recruiting part time consultants.
A SAMPLE OF CONSULTING PROJECTS: 
  Re-engineered the product development process through introducing agile and lean manufacturing strategies and
implementation of an Enterprise Resource Planning system, for UK’s General Electric Co. PLC (formerly Tracor
Aerospace), Austin, TX. 
  Implemented a Supply Chain Management system, for Raytheon (formerly Hughes Aircraft Company), El Segunda, 
CA.
  Developed an Enterprise Command, Control, Communication, and Intelligence (EC3I) Decision Support System
(DSS) for concurrent re-engineering of Supply Chain Management operations, for Defense Advanced Research
Project Agency (DARPA), Arlington, VA. 
  Developed an information system for Enterprise Resource Planning while providing capabilities for electronic data
exchange among dissimilar CAD/CAM modules, based on an architecture for integration and communication of
information among various dependent decision making modules, for Lockheed-Martin, Manasses, VA.
  Proposed lean and agile manufacturing strategies through adoption of supply chain management strategies for
optimal utilization of both military and commercial manufacturing resources and facilities, for TRW's Advanced
Surveillance Group's Avionics Division, Beavercreek, Ohio. 
  Implemented a financial information system for identifying the risky depositors, through creation of a discriminate
analysis-based decision support system for identifying and minimizing the risk, based on the clients' overall financial
risk profiles, for US Trust Corp., New York, NY. 
  Developed optimization-based information management system’s components of a traffic routing and control
components of a multimodal logistics system, for TRW's Avionics & Surveillance Group's tactical systems, 
Sunnyvale, CA. 
  Developed components of an enterprise-wide information management system, for TRW Environmental Safety
Systems (TRWESS), Fairfax, VA. 
  Developed a strategic financial plan for privatizing the secondary education in the third world, as well as assessing
the impact of utilizing computer aided learning systems, and wireless telecommunication systems in the region, for
the World Bank, Washington, DC. 
  Implemented ISO9000 as well as TQM strategies, for Northrop-Grumman (formerly Westinghouse Electronics),
Columbia, MD.
1989-1991 Director of Center for Production, Operations Management, and Engineering (CPOME),
University of Maryland, College Park. [1991 Summer , Distinguished Visiting Professor, Department of
Econometrics., Tilburg University, Netherlands].
  Managed a cross-functional team of scientific staff; Reduced operations cost at the CPOME by 50%;
Administered R&D while developing, transferring, and commercializing technology to private sector. 
  Edited a special volume of the Int. J. of Systems Automation Research & Applications on CIMS.
1984 to 1989: (84-85): Associate Professor, U. of Southern California, LA, Dept. of Industrial & Systems
Engineering; (85-88): Assistant Professor: New York University, Stern Graduate School of Business, New
York; (84-85):Assistant Professor: Dept. of Systems & Industrial Engineering; U. of Arizona, Tucson.
EDUCATION
  1984, Ph.D., Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
(3.98/4.0).
  1979, M.S., Industrial & Operations Engineering, the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor. 
  1978, B.S., Civil (Transportation Systems) Engineering, the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.
  Honors: Tau Beta Pi (National Engineering Honor Society); Sigma Xi (Scientific Research Honor
Society); Alpha Pi Mu (Industrial Engineering Honor Society).
