Page 1
TERM SHEET
This Term Sheet sets forth the terms of a proposed transaction in which Vectren Energy Solutions, Inc.
(Vectren) would purchase from Genscape, Inc. (the "Company") shares of Preferred Stock (“Preferred A Shares”).
Sterling Lapinski and Sean O’Leary (collectively the “Founders”) join in this Term Sheet for the sole purposes of
Sections 2.02, 2.03 and 2.09.
1.  Terms of Investment
1.1  Purchase Price. Price per share will be calculated to equal a $5.75 million pre-money valuation on a fully-
diluted basis (including the share option pool contemplated by Section 1.10 below). The pre-investment
and post-investment capitalization of the Company shall be as set forth on the attached capitalization table.
1.2  Amount of Financing: $3,000,000. Vectren along with investor(s) mutually acceptable to Vectren and the
Company shall at the mutual agreement of Vectren and the Company purchase up to $3.0 million of Series
A Preferred Shares prior to March 31, 2002 on terms agreeable to Vectren and the Company. Vectren will
be willing to consider funding up to half of a fully funded commitment. Vectren will not fund any amounts
prior to the execution of the commitments by the other investors.
1.3  Use of Proceeds. TheCompanyshallusetheproceedsoftheinvestmentforworkingcapitaland
development.
1.4  Drawdown and Issuance of Preferred. Investors will fund $1 million at the Closing and Company will
issue 306.106 shares of Preferred to Investors. Additional funds will be drawn down as determined by a
majority of the Investor representatives on the Board (and a corresponding amount of Preferred issued to
Investors) on a quarterly basis post-Closing provided that the Company meets its quarterly revenue and
EBITDA financial projections. Shares will be issued as funds are drawn down, but will have voting rights
as if fully issued and fully converted. 
1.5  Right of First Offer and Preemptive Rights. Vectren shall have a right of first refusal to purchase their pro
rata share (based on their relative ownership of shares of equity or convertible securities) of all future
equity or convertible securities offered by the Company in any private offering other than securities issued
to employees, directors or consultants pursuant to a share option plan approved by the Compensation
Committee of the Board. Vectren would not have the right to maintain its prorata ownership in the event of
a business combination that does not require additional cash to be raised. In the event of such combination
Vectren should have the opportunity to purchase its prorata share.
1.6  Redemption Rights. Vectren shall have the right to "put" their shares to the Company, at any time and from
time to time, after five years from the closing and upon not less than 180 days prior notice given to the
Company, for a price equal to the greater of (i) the initial purchase price of Vectren' shares plus an amount
which, after receipt, the holders of Preferred A Shares shall have received an internal rate of return on the
initial purchase price equal to 25%, calculated to the date of redemption and including payment of all
dividends on the Preferred A Shares, or (ii) the fair market value per share as determined by a qualified,
independent appraiser acceptable to both the Company and Vectren, or, if the Company and Vectren cannot
agree on an appraiser, the average of the fair market value per share as determined by a qualified,
independent appraiser selected by the Company and the fair market value per share as determined by a
qualified, independent appraiser selected by Vectren.
1.7  Registration Rights. Vectren shall have, at the Company's expense, (i) two demand rights at any time after
six months from the Company's initial public offering of Common Stock, (ii) full "piggyback" rights to
register their shares in any registration of the shares of the Company by the Company or its management,
Page 2
and (iii) four S-3 registration rights, provided that the Company shall not be obligated to effect more than
two S-3 registrations in any twelve (12) month period.
1.8  Standoff Provision. No holder of Preferred A Shares may sell any shares within 180 days of the effective
date of the Company's initial public offering if all officers, holders of more than 1% of the Company's
equity securities and directors are similarly bound, if so required by the Company's underwriters.
1.9  Unlocking Provision.  On or after thirty (30) months from the closing, Investors shall have the right to
"unlock" their shares so that in the event that a bona fide offer is made by a third party to purchase the
Company for cash or other liquid securities, and Vectren wish to accept this offer but the Company and/or
the Founders do not, upon the request of Vectren, the Company shall, within ninety (90) days, either
purchase Vectren' interests on the same terms and conditions as the bona fide offer or accept the offer.
1.10 Share Option Pool.  Contemporaneously with the transactions contemplated herein, the Company shall
establish a share option pool consisting of 150.00 shares, which is equal to approximately 8.52% of the pre-
money equity in the Company.
1.11 Executive Bonus.  Kenneth Berryman, David A. Doctor, Sterling Lapinski and Sean O’Leary shall be
compensated in accordance with an executive program adopted by Genscape’s Board of Directors on May
10, 2001, provided that such compensation shall only be paid from cash received from Genscape customer
license agreements surplus to Genscape’s approved budget prior to December 31, 2001 and approved by
the Board Compensation Committee. The approved budget will be specified and approved at the first
official board meeting following the initial close.
1.12 Terms of Preferred A Shares.  Each Preferred A Share shall accrue a cumulative dividend equal to 8%
per annum of the purchase price per Preferred A Share compounded annually. In the event of any
liquidation or winding up of the Company or the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of the
Company, the holders of the Preferred A Shares shall be entitled to receive, in preference to the holders of
all other equity securities, an amount equal to (i) the original purchase price per Preferred A Share, plus (ii)
all accrued but unpaid dividends, plus (iii) the aggregate amount that would be distributed in respect of the
aggregate number of shares of the Company's Common Stock issuable upon conversion of all Preferred A
Shares. Each holder of Preferred A Shares shall have the right to convert their Preferred A Shares, plus any
accrued and unpaid dividends, at any time, at the option of the holder, into shares of the Company's
Common Stock. The conversion price shall be one Preferred A Share for one share of Common Stock,
subject to anti-dilution adjustment on a "full ratchet" basis, provided that accrued and unpaid dividends on
the Preferred A Shares shall be paid in shares of the Company's Common Stock at the fair market value per
share of Common Stock. Upon the affirmative vote of the Preferred A Directors and upon a Qualified
Public Offering, each Preferred A Share shall automatically be converted into Common Stock at the then
conversion price. Each holder of Preferred A Shares shall have the right to a number of votes equal to the
number of shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the Preferred A Shares held. Except as
provided in Section 2.01 below, the Preferred A Shares shall be entitled to vote with the Common Stock on
all matters, and as specifically provided herein and as otherwise required by law.
2
