Page 1
Enron Child Care Announcement
The Enron Kids’ Center will be located on Louisiana Street, across from our corporate
headquarters in Houston. Enron will partner with Knowledge Beginnings, one of the leaders
in the child care industry, to provide high quality, conveniently located, customer service-
oriented child care for Enron employees in Houston. 
Knowledge Beginnings is a leading, national child-development center provider. It has
360 centers, enrolls over 42,000 children daily, and has operations in 28 states. 
Knowledge Beginnings is part of the Knowledge Universe Company, a family of
companies focused on lifelong learning. 
Here are some of the details we are excited to share with you: 
Anticipated opening date: Fall 2001 (unforeseeable construction delays may impact
opening date)
Hours of operation: The center will be open Monday through Friday from
7:00 AM – 6:30 PM. The center will be closed on all Enron
holidays. In addition, special “parents’ night out” care will
be offered for occasions such as holiday shopping and night
out at the movies for an additional fee.
Complete meal service: Your child’s breakfast, lunch and two snacks are included
in tuition. Infants will need to bring their own food until
they are ready for “table food”.
Tuition
Tuition is paid semi-monthly through payroll deduction, or monthly if paying by check. 
Tuition is based on the child’s age as follows:
Group
Infants (6 weeks – 11 mos)
Older Infants (12-17 mos)
Toddlers (18-24 mos)
Twos (24-36 mos)
Preschool (over 36 mos) 
Capacity
16
20
24
36
80 
Caregiver: Child Ratios
1:4
1:4
1:4
1:6
1:10 
Monthly Tuition
$800
$800
$790
$780
$710
Employees with more than one child in the center will be able to utilize a sibling discount
OR may be eligible for fees on a *sliding scale, whichever provides the greater benefit. A
sibling discount of 10% off tuition of the oldest child enrolled in the center is offered.
*Sliding Scale
Enron will be offering employee subsidies for the center based on household/family 
income. In order to apply for an Enron subsidy for tuition, you must submit your actual or
- 1 -
Page 2
estimated total household income for 2001 on your application. Employees may be asked
to verify this number with a copy of their tax return.
Subsidy levels are as follows:
Family Income
Less than $45,000
$45,000 - $59,999
$60,000 - $74,999
$75,000 or more 
Subsidy Level
30%
15%
10%
0%
Eligibility
Regular full-time or part-time Enron employees who are the parents or legal guardians of
the child or children named on the application are eligible to enroll their children in the
center. Temporary employees, contract workers and non-custodial parents are not eligible
to enroll their children in the child development center.
Pre-Enrollment Process
The Enron Kids’ Center’s inaugural group of children in the center will be selected based
on a lottery process. This process will be managed externally by Knowledge Beginnings.
Enron believes that this is the best method of ensuring that all employees have an equal
chance of enrolling their children in the center. Specific details outlining the lottery
process will be communicated to all Houston employees in February. 
The lottery process is expected to begin in April, with written notification of acceptance
of enrollment to selected employees later that month. The written notification of
enrollment is nontransferable and may only be used by the employee selected. Parents
will have 15 calendar days to confirm their places in the child care center by providing a
$75 deposit for one (1) child, or $125 deposit for two (2) or more children or their
space(s) will be forfeited. Forfeited spaces are treated as new openings and will be filled
from a wait list generated from the lottery process. 
All children in the family between the ages of six weeks and four years at the opening of
the center are eligible for enrollment. If both parents are eligible Enron employees, only
one application/lottery number per Enron family will be accepted.
When an application with more than one child is drawn, all the children in that family
have enrollment priority. If an age group is filled, that child will be placed on a waiting
list and assigned a priority number. A sibling of a child who was selected, and whose age
group is filled, will be given priority on the waiting list over children who do not have
enrolled siblings. 
- 2 -
