Page 1
Energy Market & Policy Analysis, Inc.
Reston, VA 20194 (Phone: 703 709-2213) 
June 26, 2001
Generous Californians Are Helping Others Pay Their Energy Bills
Even though they are facing enormous electricity and natural gas bills, the generous taxpayers
from California are contributing millions to help people in other states pay their energy bills.
However, Californians probably are not aware that they are being so generous and their
representatives in the US Congress are unlikely to tell them about it.
How does this “generosity” come about? It’s the legacy of an anachronistic law pushed through
Congress in the early 1980s, to use tax dollars to help people pay heating oil bills, principally
those in northeastern and north central states. The program is called the “Low Income Home
Energy Assistance Program,” or LIHEAP. 
LIHEAP funds (at least $1.7 billion and possibly $2 billion in 2001) are spread among states
according to an old formula developed in the 1980s. The formula favors people in certain states
that tend to be heavily dependent on oil for heating. The formula hasn’t been changed even
though the burden of heavy energy bills has changed. Many in warm states have just as much
difficulty paying air conditioning bills as those in cold states have paying heating bills.
Californians are now burdened with high gas and electricity bills. True, the high bills are due
largely to the fact that facilities were not built in California to generate enough electricity or
deliver enough natural gas. Nevertheless, because of LIHEAP, Californians and others with high
energy bills are seeing their tax dollars flow to states with lower energy bills.
“Losers” and “Winners.” ThemoneydistributedbythefederalgovernmentviaLIHEAP
comes principally from income tax revenues. So, when the federal government distributes tax
dollars some states are “winners” because their share of LIHEAP funds is larger than the state’s
share of federal income taxes. Other states are “losers” because their share of LIHEAP funds is
less than the percentage share of federal income tax. In the case of LIHEAP, the principal
“loser” states and “winner” states with 2001 amounts are shown below. (Estimates assume 2001
LIHEAP spending is only $1.7 Billion. Disparities will be greater if spending is $2 billion.)
“Losers” 
State 
California
Texas
Florida
Georgia
Arizona 
Amount Lost
$137.8 million
80.9 million
77.2 million
25.8 million
18.1 million 
“Winners” .
State  Amount Gained
New York $74.4 million
Pennsylvania 43.3 million
Minnesota 36.0 million
Michigan 32.0 million
Wisconsin 30.7 million
Other “winners” include Ohio, Iowa, Maine, and Massachusetts (see Attachment for details).
Will the program or the unfair formula be changed? Not likely! The LIHEAP program is
unlikely to be changed because, like many federal programs, it has attracted a very strong
constituency that lobbies furiously to preserve the program and increase appropriations. For
reasons explained below, the constituency for the program now includes the state and local
government people that distribute LIHEAP funds, lobbying groups formed by those people,
Page 2
2
electric and gas utilities and their Washington-based trade associations, state public utility
commissioners and their Washington-based association.
Presidents, members or Congress, governors and state legislators use the program as their first
line of defense when electricity, natural gas and heating oil bills rise. They even use LIHEAP
when faulty government policies or actions (including failure to allow construction of adequate
facilities to find, produce, transport and convert energy) are the principal cause of higher
consumer prices. Besides, it’s only tax money and who’s counting?
LIHEAP Dollars that End up In State Treasuries. While LIHEAP money is intended to help
low income people pay their energy bills, some of it ends up in state and local governments
coffers. Virtually every state and some local governments impose a tax on electric and gas bills.
The taxes are simply added to monthly bills (often, probably, with the hope that they won’t be
noticed!)  Thus, electric and gas utilities have become “revenue collectors.” They collect the
money from their customers and pass it along to the state or city treasurer.
Thus, LIHEAP money follows an interesting path. First, it is “contributed” by federal taxpayers
via income taxes. It flows to Washington where generous political leaders send it to an office in
the Department of Health and Human Services which hands it off to state governments (and
Indian tribes) who distribute it via state and local “energy offices” or organizations such as the
Salvation Army. It then flows to individuals who use it to pay electricity or natural gas utilities
or heating oil distributors, who hand part of the money to state and/or city treasurers. And, of
course, a little of the money “falls off” along the way. For example, states are permitted to use
up to 10% of the funds to “administer” the program.
High monthly gas and electric bills often produce windfall revenues for State Treasuries.
Also interesting: At least 28 states (and/or cities within those states) set utility taxes on the basis
ofapercentageoftheelectricorgasbill, oftenasa“grossreceiptstax.”[URL: "#Page2"] 1  Therefore, tax
revenues rise along with increases in gas and/or electric bills. During the past year, consumers in
many states have faced higher monthly gas and electric bills because they had to use more
energy because of cold winters or hot summers, and because the unit cost of energy was also
higher. As a result, many states have enjoyed a tax revenue windfall.
The Interest Groups and Why they are Interested. The army of special interest groups that is
likely to prevent any reform of LIHEAP include, but are not limited to the following:
  National and state associations made up of people whose principal function is distributing
LIHEAP funds, such as the National Energy Assistance Directors Association, National
Fuel Funds Network and the National Community Action Foundation. Many states have an
organization that distributes LIHEAP funds that is separate from other welfare programs.
  State public utility commissioners (PUCs) who regulate electric and gas utilities. Most
PUCs have rules that limit the ability of utilities to cut off electricity or natural gas even
when customers don’t pay their bills. (The rules have a humanitarian purpose, but they
leave utilities with unpaid and “uncollectable” electric and gas bills. Of course, the PUCs
avoid the media coverage and “political heat” that would result if utilities shut off electricity
or gas for people who didn’t pay bills when the weather is unusually hot or cold.)
1 Among the states identified thus far where either the state or a city within the state applies a percentage or per unit
of energy tax are the following: AL, AR, AZ, CA, FL, GA, IL, IN, KY, LA, MD, MI, MN, MO, NC, NE, NJ, NM, 
NY, OH, OK, OR, RI, TN, TX, WA, WI. Edison Electric Institute, Electric Rates in Major US Cities
