Page 1
Mike Coda’s Eulogy for John Sawhill
I worked with John Sawhill for 17 years—7 at McKinsey and 10 at The Nature
Conservancy. I am grateful for the opportunity to speak because, in that time, I never
adequately thanked him for what he did for me and for the Conservancy. I hope my
remarks can help make up for that omission. Today, I want to talk about John from three
perspectives: first, as a leader; second, as a role model; and, third, as a friend. 
As a leader, John Sawhill had few equals. Think about it: in his career he had a
profound impact in four different and very challenging institutional settings. He
dominated energy policy in the federal government; he was president of one of the
largest universities in the country; he made McKinsey & Company the preeminent
energy strategy consulting firm; and he made The Nature Conservancy an overwhelming
force in conservation. What he did at any one of these places is more—far more—than
most of us will accomplish in our entire careers.
John’s leadership skill is also reflected in the long trail of people who owe the
success of their careers to him. Along the way, I’ve met people who worked with John
in the past and invariably their work is identified by how they related to John: “He was
John’s assistant at DOE or he was John’s director of development at NYU.” At John’s
memorial service, I saw presidents of major corporations and senior directors at
McKinsey whose careers were launched by John Sawhill. And John has left behind a
new trail of leaders that he developed at the Conservancy. 
I think many of these people would agree that if John Sawhill had confidence in
you, he was the best boss in the world. He backed his staff when others were critical. 
He used his connections to make things happen. He was constantly encouraging and
upbeat. For 10 straight years, I heard him say that each annual meeting was “the best one
we’ve ever had.” And he meant it. 
He never waffled. John was always clear about what he wanted. And he was not
afraid of hard problems. He tackled the big issues even when they were unpleasant. In
fact, during his time at the Conservancy he took on every major personnel and
programmatic issue. John never shirked his responsibilities and our next president
should thank him for that.
John understood that leadership meant defining values for the organization. His
legacy for the Conservancy is partly in the phrases he made such a central part of our
language: One Conservancy, integrity beyond reproach, nonconfrontational, science-
based. He even got rid of “headquarters” and replaced it with the friendlier “home
office.”
As a leader, John had high standards and demanded the best possible work from
others. I wonder if the board members realize how many times John made us redraft
those papers for the board retreat. Generally, a discussion of a presentation began with
him saying, “We’ve got a lot more work to do on this.” I remember going by the office
Page 2
of a relatively new senior manager several years ago and hearing John say to him “I’d
give this memo about a C minus.” Well, you couldn’t afford to be too sensitive and most
of us have to admit that our work was a lot better because we knew John would not
tolerate a mediocre product. It’s true that at times John went a little overboard. At one
annual meeting, John entered the dining room 5 minutes before the 600 attendees would
be entering. He wasn’t satisfied because he felt the green water glasses did not set the
right tone. They had to be replaced with clear glasses, immediately.
These eccentricities aside, John Sawhill made a darn good role model for the rest
of us. His integrity was beyond question. He spent the Conservancy’s money the way he
spent his own—very carefully. No staff member anywhere at TNC consistently worked
as hard as John. None. He was at his desk before 8:00am and stayed until 7:00pm every
day. He worked virtually every weekend, carrying the Conservancy flag at some chapter
meeting or donor trip. He kept a grueling schedule, full of red-eye flights and multiple
connections. If his plane landed at National Airport at 6:00pm, he’d go right into the
office every time. But I never heard him say he was tired, complain, or engage in any
form of self-pity. Where did that energy come from?
John was a tremendous competitor as well. One of the first encounters I had with
John was when we were travelling on a business trip. I was going for a run before work
and happened to be leaving the hotel just as John was heading out for his morning run. I
asked John if I could go along with him. That turned out to be a mistake. Although I
was 17 years younger and only a few years out of college where I ran track, John literally
left me in his dust on the dirt trail that day. That was the first time I saw the fierce
competitive desire that drove John. His competitiveness could occasionally have a hard
edge, but in general he used it as a positive force, driving us to greater levels of
achievement.
Just as important, that hard work and competitive energy was always directed at
meaningful goals. John’s free time was full of board meetings, commissions, teaching, 
bird watching, and reading nonfiction. He was productive. 
Many people knew and respected John as a leader and role model. But I wish
more people had the opportunity to know him as a friend. John was adept at building
business relationships that often required him to reach out to people he barely knew. But
I always felt that, despite this talent, he was basically a shy person. I think it was really
hard for him to do his walks around the building and talk to staff, not because he didn’t
want to know what we were up to, but because he felt like he was intruding on us. And, 
of course, John did not drink alcohol, stay up late and small talk, or otherwise engage in
the social back and forth that is often a part of friendship. And he just wasn’t interested
in popular culture. Before one of the Long Island rock concerts we sponsored, John was
informed that he would be meeting Paul Simon. “Yes, of course,” he said, “the Senator
from Illinois.” Driving John to the same concert, Ray Culter played a tape from Billy
Joel, who was also performing that day. After listening, John turned to Ray and said, “Is
Billy Joe a man or a woman? 
