Page 1
Press Response
In just the state of Maharashtra, there are about 23 registered captive units that aggregate to a capacity of
about 600 MW. We ran a rough calculation using fuel cost data from mid 2000, and discovered that for
every kWh of power generated by a captive unit, as against having the same power provided by Dabhol, the
consumer spent roughly 2-3 cents/kWh additional in the energy costs alone. This means that by switching
to Dabhol, the savings in energy costs alone would be: 
With Dabhol Running on Naphtha: $ 10,175 per hour or $50.8 Million annually assuming 57% PLF
With Dabhol Running on LNG: $ 17,642 per hour or $88.2 Million annually assuming 57% PLF
This reflects the fuel savings, in Maharashtra alone. Furthermore, this saving is a direct reduction in
foreign exchange outflow for the country since India is a net fuel importer. Thus, by having a more
efficient combined cycle power plant in the state, there are large potential savings for the consumers. The
analysis above does not include the many smaller gensets installed in homes, hotels, and other commercial
establishments that have energy costs in the range of 10-12 cents/kWh. 
Such units are very common, and are likely to increase as the grid reliability decreases. Hence, in order to
make these savings possible, MSEB and the government have to provide reliable and timely connections to
industrial and commercial consumers, who are willing to pay for reliable service (as shown by the fact that
they are putting up expensive captive units).  Unless such reliable service is provided, the number of
captive units in the state will continue to increase, and the State Electricity Board will continue to lose their
paying anchor customers.
Dabhol, provides the state with the ability to service all customers in a reliable and energy efficient manner,
and hence decrease the need for distributed gensets to be installed which are both expensive, and
environmentally more polluting. The real need of the hour, therefore, is to reform end-user tariffs and
collection system so that centralized generating stations can provide cheaper, cleaner power to end-
consumers. 
