Page 1
IBM AND ENRON ENERGY SERVICES SIGN $350 MILLION
CONTRACT FOR TECHNOLOGY SERVICES 
Somers, NY, June 8, 2000 … Enron Energy Services, a subsidiary of Enron Corp., has selected
IBM to deliver $350 million in technology services to Enron locations throughout the U.S.
Under an agreement, IBM Global Services will provide Enron Energy Services with
application development, maintenance, and PC and server support services over the next ten
years. In addition, IBM will assume responsibility for Enron Energy Services’ non-routine
help desk support -- commonly known as level two and three help desk services -- for the term
of the contract.
Enron expects its relationship to infuse its information technology organization with additional
I/T expertise, particularly in the area of application development and e-commerce capabilities. 
In addition, Enron expects significant cost savings to result from the contract.
Lou Pai, chairman and CEO of Enron Energy Services, said: “With 133 data centers, 
40,000 servers, and 138,000 services professionals around the world, no one can surpass
IBM’s capabilities in the I/T services arena. Together with IBM, we will build the
technology infrastructure our company needs to prepare us for the tremendous future
growth experienced by our energy outsourcing business.”
“Enron is one of the most innovative, fastest-moving companies we’ve seen in any
industry,” said Tom Cotney, vice president, Utility & Energy Services, IBM Global
Services. “We are delighted to have the opportunity to work with Enron as it builds its
information technology infrastructure for the future. IBM will deploy the people, 
technology, and skills Enron requires as one of America’s leaders in the energy industry.”
Enron is one of the world's leading electricity, natural gas and communications
companies. The company, which owns approximately $37 billion in energy and
communications assets, produces electricity and natural gas, develops, constructs and
operates energy facilities worldwide, delivers physical commodities and financial and
risk management services to customers around the world, and is developing an intelligent
network platform to facilitate online business. Fortune magazine has named Enron "Most
Innovative Company" for five consecutive years, the top company for "Quality of
Management" and the second best company for "Employee Talent." In addition, Enron
ranks in the top quarter of Fortune's "Best 100 Companies to Work For in America."
Enron's Internet address is [URL: "http://www.enron.com/"] www.enron.com. EnronOnline can be found at
www.enrononline.com. The stock is traded under the ticker symbol "ENE."
IBM is the world’s largest information technology company, with 80 years of leadership
in helping businesses innovate. IBM offers a wide range of services, solutions and
technologies that enable telecommunications service providers and equipment suppliers
to take full advantage of the new era of e-business. IBM Global Services is the world’s
largest information technology services provider, with 1999 revenues of more than $32
billion. Services is the fastest growing part of IBM, with more than 138,000
professionals serving customers in 160 countries. IBM Global Services integrates IBM’s
broad range of capabilities -- services, hardware, software and research -- to help
companies of all sizes realize the full value of information technology. 
###
