Page 1
Fact Sheet
WHAT:
WHEN:
WHERE:
WHO: 
The premier business strategy summit focusing on the challenges, opportunities, and
new ideas in deregulation, e-business, and customer-centric applications in the
provision of electricity, natural gas, and water. The program includes interactively
topical conference sessions, one-to-one meetings arranged according to mutual
business interests, and leisure activities for informal networking.
August 10-12, 2001.
The Doral Golf Resort & Spa, South Florida's world class oasis of luxury**which is
known "For The Love of The Game!" featuring Raymond Floyd's Gold Course, Dick
Wilson's masterpiece Blue Monster, and Jim McLean's Golf Learning Center.
SPEAKERS. Industry executives, policy makers, and associations will present
keynote addresses and case studies. Confirmed as of May, 2001:
 Frank Cassidy, President & COO
PSEG Power, LLC
 David Eppler, President & CEO
Cleco Corporation
 Stephen Etsler, General Manager
Nicor, Inc.
 Tony Fountain, President
BP North America Gas and Power
 Peggy Fowler, CEO & President
Portland General Electric
 Seth Hulkower, COO
Long Island Power Authority 
 Frank Johnson, President & CEO
CMS Electric and Gas
 Ianne McCrea, CIO
Reliant Energy
 Ed Mills, President & COO
Aquila Energy Corp.
 Rich Walje, Vice President & CIO
Pacificorp
 Russell J. Krauss, CIO
New York Power Authority
DELEGATES. Invited chief executives and senior executive managers responsible
for operations and information technology at organizations that provide power
generation, T&D, energy trading, retail products and services.
SOLUTION PROVIDERS. Leading organizations possessing knowledge, 
technologies, and other resources enabling the development and implementation of
customized products and services for competitive advantage and enhanced enterprise
value. Confirmed as of May, 2001:
 e-Acumen   Schlumberger
 Mastercard   Schneider
 Open Sea Solutions   Veriphone
 Rekadom
CONTACT: Felicia Griffin, Summit Producer.
  Phone: (713) 650-6007 or 281-931-3009.
  Fax: (713) 759-1478.
  E-mail: feliciag@marcusevanstx.com
  Website: [URL: "http://www.marcusevans.com/"] www.utilities2001.com
Page 2
ABOUT US:  Founded in London in 1983 as International Communications for Management Group, 
marcus evans is the largest corporate hospitality business in the world. Our core
business is the provision of major sector-focused events for business learning and
networking opportunities across a variety of industries and professions. With more than
1,250 employees operating in 31 countries around the world, marcus evans serves
all of the world's top 1000 companies. 
PROGRAM (as of May, 2001) 
 Implementing Choice on Long Island - Seth Hulkower
 e-Business Service or Solution Provider Selection - Ianne McCrae
 Emergence of a Gas Economy - Tony Fountain
 The LNG Market: Real Opportunities Being Overlooked - Frank Johnson
 Capturing Value by Retaining Generation Assets - Frank Cassidy
** Conde Nast Traveller
 Page 2
