Page 1
An open letter to Governor Davis and members of the Legislature:
Despite considerable efforts, California's energy crisis has persisted and worsened
over the past 12 months. The crisis has already claimed one casualty—Pacific Gas & Electric
has declared bankruptcy. And Southern California Edison has been pushed dangerously
close to a similar fate. Worse, with California spending $70-100 million a day on power and
depleting cash reserves, the state budget is imperiled. Consequently, California’s credit
rating has been downgraded and is now among the lowest in the country.
Already, California has experienced a record number of blackouts, and summer is
fast approaching. Absent swift and decisive action, California could face an economic and
fiscal catastrophe. The North American Electric Reliability Council released a report last
week showing that California will face more than 260 hours of blackouts this summer --
that's ten days without power, or more likely, 30 to 40 days with rotating blackouts. Clearly,
the impact of this level of supply disruption to California's economy will be significant. 
While there has been much talk of potential solutions, none has advanced. There is
too much at risk to delay another day. Therefore, we, the undersigned, are proposing a
comprehensive five-step solution to solve California's short- and long-term energy crisis that
includes the following:
1. Decrease demand -- There is no time to build power plants or get additional
generation on-line in time for this summer. Therefore, the only option to reduce the impact
of an electricity shortage this summer is to consume less. This can be accomplished in
several ways:
Real-time pricing -- Prices should reflect the cost of producing electricity, which varies
throughout the day. When demand is greatest, costs are high; when demand for
electricity drops, so does the cost of producing it. This will give customers a financial
incentive to conserve and take simple actions, like turning the thermostat up two
degrees.
Demand buy-down programs – It will be cheaper this summer to conserve electricity
than to buy it on the open market. We should therefore do everything we can to “buy
savings” instead of buying electricity. California should start immediately to give
businesses and consumers financial incentives to save so the state can spend less on
power and more on schools. 
2. Increase supply. The Governor has taken an important first step by using his
executive powers to streamline power plant siting. While the state currently has approved
13 power plants totaling 8,512 megawatts, it is not enough. California needs to be the most
attractive place to build power plants, transmission lines and pipelines; instead, it's the
least. With legislation focusing on windfall profits taxes, plant seizures and government
price controls, California is chasing away private investment and the capital that fuels it. 
California’s leaders must put out the welcome mat instead of pulling it up if the state ever
hopes to solve its energy problems. Our political leaders should put a moratorium on
legislation that is hostile toward the investment that California must have in order to
eliminate the state’s energy shortage.
3. Make the utilities creditworthy.  Under California law, utilities have been
forced to sell power for less than the cost to buy it. The utilities' inability to recover their
costs has forced PG&E into bankruptcy and threatens Southern California Edison's solvency. 
The solution to restoring the utilities' creditworthiness is to set rates that cover the utilities' 
past debts and future costs -- and then give customers the power to reduce their bills by
conserving or by choosing a competitive energy supplier.
Page 2
4. Get California out of the power-buying business.  Everyone agrees that state
government isn’t equipped to run an energy company. The good news is that once the
utilities are returned to creditworthiness, the role of buying power can be very quickly
moved out of state government agencies and returned to the utility -- within three to six
months. 
The state knows even less about running a transmission system than it does about
buying power. Consequently it makes little sense for the state to buy the utilities’ 
transmission business. If the state wants to inject additional cash into the utilities, there are
better ways to do it. California should keep the electricity business where it belongs—in the
hands of the private sector, where the expertise and know-how are sufficient to run the
system efficiently and safely.
5. Get deregulation right in California.  California never deregulated. In fact, 
today there is more regulation than ever before. For true deregulation to exist, every
consumer and business in the state must have the right to hire and fire their energy service
provider. When California passed a law this year authorizing the state to buy power, that
same law (AB1X) called for an end to customer choice (also called "direct access.")
California must rescind AB1X and reinstate the right of customers to choose their
energy service provider. 
We urge the Legislature and Governor to enact legislation that includes these five
components and sets California on the path to economic stability. California is teetering on
the brink of an economic, financial and political disaster. Delay is no longer an option. The
time to act is now.
