Page 1
Management Team/ Strengths / Backgrounds
The present management team consists of two founders. Based upon funding, they will be
joined by the other six listed. All individuals bring a wealth of media, marketing, and
technology experience. The Company’s management team will be key in the creation,
marketing and promotion of the “EventAmerica” brand, the development of the Phase II portal
and the development of Phase III, which includes B2B and ASP opportunities. 
The management team’s strength will be its marketing experience. This team has more than
45 years of combined major corporate marketing, advertising, promotions, media and public
relations expertise. Two of these executives have developed multiple, million dollar
campaigns, which in three cases reached in excess of $100 million. 
EventAmerica plans to hire a Chief Executive Officer with an entertainment rich work
experience. The Company also will need a Chief Operating Officer, Chief Financial Officer,
Marketing Director and several other executive level individuals to compliment the
management team, as it exists. The Company has identified several other top quality
management people that have expressed an interest in joining the Company’s team. Their
involvement will coincide with the Company’s ability to raise the funding it is seeking. The
Company has spoken with two executive search firms and plans to speak with several other
firms that can help the Company find these perspective individuals. The Company does not
believe that it will have trouble securing the very best talent currently available in the
marketplace.
Officers and Management
Eliot D. Barton, Chairman, CEO and Founder: 
Mr. Barton has over 20 years of experience developing major corporate marketing and
(sponsorship) programs within the racing community. Mr. Barton worked at three companies
over a period of 12 years creating, developing, and managing sales driven marketing
programs that increased revenues significantly. As Vice President of Inis Corporation, Mr.
Barton was responsible for producing a $6 million program with a leading Hormel Food’s
brand. The results from this specific campaign include sales increases of 300% in the
regional areas where the brand was being promoted.
Mr. Barton’s own company, Barton Motor Sports, Inc.,  produced $5 million dollars in
marketing and sponsorship funding for client racing teams primarily for Championship Auto
Racing Teams (CART) and National Association of Stock Car Racing (NASCAR) teams in
the Winston Cup Series. Mr. Barton was a member of one of the original founding teams in
CART (1979).  Since that time, he has maintained close and professional relationships with
Page 2
many of the key players throughout that organization. 
As a former CO-owner of Media Event Concepts, Inc., he was involved with all aspects of
event publishing, from securing the rights to produce each event’s program publication, to
coordinating all artwork, advertising sales and the marketing of each event publication.
Through Mr. Barton’s efforts, Media Event Concepts, Inc. was able to generate more than $1
million in new gross revenues over the first three months of operations.
James B. McKay, Co-Founder, Strategy, Research & Business Development: 
Mr. McKay’s responsibility will be to provide research on companies and individuals that have
potential relationships to, or with, the Company. These relationships will include a variety of
capacities that include, strategic alliances/partnerships, investment, providing products and
services, or in a management/employee position. Mr. McKay has been instrumental in the
development of the EventAmerica business model, Internet strategy and business model plan
execution.
During the last ten years, Mr. McKay has been involved with several start-ups as founder,
investor, director and consultant to, including; Discplay, Inc.,  a company with a unique
software/Internet concept for the retail world, and Wall Street Learning Systems, an
interactive software/Internet program for stock market investors. Mr. McKay’s background is
from the investment advisory side of stock market portfolio management, concentrating on
investments into small cap growth stocks for long-term appreciation. Prior to brief stays with
Dean Witter and Crocker Bank, Mr. McKay spent 13 years working with his father in the
family’s investment advisory firm, McKay Management & Research, Inc. Mr. McKay met Mr.
Barton while working on HotNitesUSA, a national Internet entertainment directory.
Chris Walsh, Vice President of Internet Services & Business Development:
Mr. Walsh recently left Angel Engineers as their VP of Business Development and is currently
acting as a consultant to several Internet start-ups. Upon the Company receiving its first
major round of funding, Mr. Walsh will be joining EventAmerica on a permanent basis. Mr.
Walsh’s responsibilities will include the development of the Company’s Internet infrastructure,
including all website development, marketing and deployment. He will also help build the
Company’s Business Development Group. Mr. Walsh has previously worked with several
well-known technology companies including TABNet, SRI International and Macromedia.
Darin R. Molnar, Chief Technology Officer:
Mr. Molnar has spent his entire career working in technology, specifically in software and
website development. Mr. Molnar has designed, programmed and implemented databases,
websites and software programs for many well-known corporations including Hewlett
Packard, General Motors, Disney, Microsoft, Visa and CKS Partners. Mr. Molnar’s
responsibilities with EventAmerica will include developing the Company’s technology
foundation and website infrastructure. He will work closely with the Company’s Internet
division to create a streamlined rollout of all of the Company’s web initiatives.
Timothy J. Miller, Controller:
Mr. Miller has over 30 years experience in finance, operations, and sales in established and
start-up companies. He has held positions as Vice President Operations, Vice President
Finance/Administration, Controller and Broker in the travel/hospitality, automotive and
investment industries. Mr. Miller will be responsible for implementing all of the Company’s
accounting and financial systems, reporting, and procedures. He will also assist the
