MINUTES OF THE MEETING
                             OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
                          OF STRATEGIC FORECASTING, INC.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Strategic Forecasting, Inc., a Delaware corporation was called to order at 2:00 p.m. CST on December 28, 2009.
Present in Austin, TX were George Friedman and Don Kuykendall. Present by phone was Stephen Feldhaus. Attending by invitation in Austin was Secretary of the Board, Meredith Friedman. 
Call to Order.
Don R Kuykendall called the meeting to order at 1:00p.m. EDT and noted that a quorum was present.
Approval of Minutes.
The minutes of the meeting of the Board of Directors from October 23, 2009 were unanimously approved.
Restricted Stock Awards, Third Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, and Second Amended and Restated 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan: 
Mr. Kuykendall indicated that the Board has received a memorandum from the CEO of the Company, George Friedman, recommending that six individuals receive the right to purchase Series B Common Stock of the Company pursuant to the Company’s 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan.  The six individuals are Peter Zeihan, Darryl O’Connor, Robert W. Merry, Meredith Friedman, Don Kuykendall, and Stephen Feldhaus.  The Restricted Stock Agreements for such individuals are attached hereto as Exhibit A through F, respectively.  
Mr. Kuykendall noted that the authorized capital stock of the Company includes 200,000 shares of Series A Common Stock, all of which is issued, 200,000 shares of Series B Common Stock, 184,145 shares of which will be issued following the execution of the Restricted Stock Agreements, and 977 shares of Preferred Stock, all of which is issued.  Mr. Kuykendall noted that the Company’s current and likely ongoing financial constraints will mean that the Company will not be able to meet the compensation requirements of current and future employees solely in cash, and that stock awards and stock option grants will continue to be a necessary component of compensation.  Accordingly, Mr. Kuykendall noted that he and Mr. Friedman are recommending that the Board approve the authorization, subject to shareholder approval, of an additional 50,000 shares of Series B Common Stock, pursuant to the Third Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Company, (the “Third Amended and Restated Certificate”), in the form attached hereto as Exhibit G.   Mr. Kuykendall noted that he and Mr. Friedman are also recommending that the Amended and Restated 2007 Long Term Incentive Plan of the Company be amended to provide that the maximum number of shares that may be issue pursuant to the plan is 345,000 shares, consisting of 95,000 Series A Common Stock and 250,000 shares of Series B Common Stock, pursuant to the Amended and Restated 2007 Long Term Incentive Plan attached hereto as Exhibit H (“the “Second Amended and Restated Plan”).  Following a discussion, and upon a motion duly made, seconded and unanimously carried, it was: 
RESOLVED, that the Third Amended and Restated Certificate be, and hereby is, approved and adopted, subject to the approval of the Stockholders of the Company in accordance with the requirements of the Delaware General Corporation Law; and be it further
RESOLVED, that the Second Amended and Restated Plan be, and hereby is, approved and adopted, subject to the approval of the Stockholders of the Company in accordance with the requirements of the Delaware General Corporation Law; and be it further
RESOLVED, that the proper officers of the Company be, and each of them hereby is, authorized to submit the Second Amended and Restated Certificate and the Amended and Restated Plan to the Stockholders of the Company for their approval at the 2010 Annual Meeting of the Stockholders; and be it further
RESOLVED, that, subject to the approval of the Stockholders of the Company in accordance with the requirements of the Delaware General Corporation Law, the proper officers of the Company be, and each of them hereby is, authorized to take any and all action and do any and all things as may be deemed by any of them to be necessary or advisable to file the Third Amended and Restated Certificate with the Secretary of State of Delaware, and in connection therewith, to execute and file all requisite papers and instruments and to make any and all payments of filing, registration or other fees, costs and expenses, and to take any and all further action in connection with the foregoing which any one of them shall deem necessary or advisable; and that the execution by such officers, or any one of them, of any such papers or instruments or the performance by any one of them of any act in connection with the foregoing shall conclusively establish their authority therefor from this Company for the action so taken; and be it further
RESOLVED, that notwithstanding approval of the Third Amended and Restated Certificate by the Stockholders of the Company, the Board may, at any time prior to the filing of the Third Amended and Restated Certificate, abandon the filing of the Third Amended and Restated Certificate without further action by the Stockholders of the Company.
Mr. Kuykendall also noted that the Company has recently hired Robert W. Merry as Publisher of the Company.  He reviewed a proposed Restricted Stock Agreement for Mr. Merry attached hereto as Exhibit C.  Following a discussion, and upon a motion duly made, seconded and unanimously carried, it was determined to withhold approval of the Restricted Stock Agreement for Mr. Merry pending the approval by the stockholders of the Company of the Third Amended and Restated Certificate. 
Mr. Kuykendall reviewed a proposed Restricted Stock Agreement for the Peter Zeihan and Darryl O’Connor, attached hereto as Exhibits A and B.  Mr. Kuykendall noted the contributions to the Company made by these individuals to the Company and the role that these individuals are expected to play in the coming years in growing the business of the Company.  Following a discussion, and upon a motion duly made, seconded and unanimously carried, it was: 
RESOLVED, that the Restricted Stock Agreements for Peter Zeihan with respect to 2000 shares of Series B Common Stock, and for Darryl O’Connor with respect to 2,000 shares of Series B Common Stock, each pursuant to the Company’s 2007 Long Term Incentive Plan, on the terms set forth in the attached Exhibits A and B, be, and each of them hereby is, approved; and it is further
RESOLVED, that the fair market value of the Series B common Stock of the company for the purposes of the Restricted Stock Agreements with Peter Zeihan and Darryl O’Connor is $0.01 per share; and it is further
RESOLVED, that the officers of the Company are hereby authorized to enter into, execute and deliver the Restricted Stock Agreements and such other documents as shall be necessary and proper to carry out the intention of these resolutions; and it is further
RESOLVED, that upon receipt of the purchase price by the Company and the issuance of the shares of Series B Common Stock in connection with the Restricted Stock Agreements, such shares shall be validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable; and it is further
RESOLVED, that in connection with the Restricted Stock Agreements, and the issuance of the Series B Common Stock, the proper officers of the Company are hereby authorized and directed to prepare or cause to be prepared and filed on behalf of the Company any notice or any application for qualification or registration necessary or desirable to establish compliance with applicable securities laws, and pay on behalf of the Company any required filing fees in connection therewith.
Mr. Kuykendall noted that the Restricted Stock Agreements for Meredith Friedman, Stephen Feldhaus and Mr. Kuykendall attached hereto as Exhibits D, E, and F involve either the wife of a member of the Board or members of the Board.  Accordingly, it was determined to submit these Restricted Stock Agreements to the stockholders of the Company for their approval as potential Interested Party transactions.
Financial Report.
Don Kuykendall reported that the new office space at 700 Lavaca Street was lost due to a state government agency purchasing the building. He will work with Don Cox to find another location.
Don Kuykendall reported that Texas Capital Bank has agreed to give us a $500,000 line of credit pending financial documentation from Don Kuykendall, Steve Feldhaus, George Friedman and Meredith Friedman.
    V.	     CEO Report.
George Friedman reported that Robert Merry has agreed to join STRATFOR as publisher. He will focus on new products to launch in B2B and B2C business. Merry will start on January 4, 2010. 
The date of the next Elder’s Meeting will be determined after Bob Merry has been integrated enough into the company to present his strategic plan at that meeting.
   
   
    VI.      Old Business.
There was no old business.
   
   VII.       Next Meeting.
The next board meeting will be held in March in conjunction with the annual Stockholders meeting.  
Closing Remarks.
There were no closing remarks.
Adjournment.
There being no further business to come before the meeting, upon motion duly made and seconded, the meeting was adjourned at 1:30 p.m. EDT.
Respectfully submitted,
________________________
Meredith Friedman
Secretary
APPROVED:
________________________
Don R. Kuykendall, Chairman
Date ____________________
1
