Page 1
Azurix Buy-Back Q&A
For Internal Use Only
Why did Enron offer to buy all publicly held Azurix shares?
Enron believes the proposal offers Azurix shareholders a significant premium to the market price
of Azurix for the past several months and that the value offered is greater than any sale to a third
party. Other benefits to Azurix include reducing general and administrative expenses, offering
greater certainty to Azurix’s customers and employees, and allowing Azurix increased flexibility
for restructuring its business.
What is the total cost to Enron of this transaction?
How come Enron’s purchase price is so much higher than your previously announced
offer?
The agreed-upon purchase price is the result of negotiations between Enron and Azurix’s special
committee. The price covers a premium to the market price and the settlement of pending
certain shareholder litigation.
What’s the status of the litigation against Azurix that claimed the Enron’s offer was
unfair?
Azurix has settled in principle the shareholder litigation pending in Delaware and Texas that had
challenged the Enron proposal as unfair. The settlement is contingent on execution of a
definitive settlement agreement and court approval.
What’s the status of the class action lawsuits about disclosures?
Those lawsuits are still pending.
Will Enron consolidate Azurix’s debt?
No.
Is this transaction accretive or dilutive to earnings?
Enron’s balance sheet is not materially changed other than a modest increase in debt.
How will this transaction be funded?
Enron Corp. will utilize existing facilities to provide liquidity to Azurix to effect the transaction.
What did Enron initially pay for Wessex Water?
Approximately $2.8 billion, including debt.
What are Enron’s plans for Azurix?
Enron has not made any definitive plans for Azurix. 
Does Enron plan to sell Azurix or its assets?
Enron has not made any definitive plans for Azurix.
Page 2
Has Azurix been a disappointment to Enron?
We have been disappointed that the global market for water privatizations did not develop on the
originally envisioned timetable. We think this offer will allow Azurix increased flexibility to
restructure its business.
What approvals are required for this transaction?
This transaction requires Azurix shareholder approval, Securities & Exchange Commission
clearance of the proxy statement, and Hart Scott Rodino clearance.
If shareholders approve the deal, how long before the merger becomes effective?
The SEC must review the proxy statement under the special “going private” rules. We do not
know how long this review or other approvals prior to shareholder approval will take. At the
earliest, the shareholders meeting can occur 20 business days after the proxy statement is mailed.
We believe the transaction can be completed by the end of 1Q01.
What is Enron’s ownership interest in Azurix now?
Enron will acquire the one-third ownership interest in Azurix that is currently owned by public
shareholders. The remaining two-thirds is owned by Atlantic Water Trust, of which Enron holds
a 50 percent voting interest.
How much longer does the Marlin structure last?
The Marlin structure matures in December 2001, but its repayment must be funded in August
2001.
How will the Marlin structure be refinanced or repaid?
No decision has been made yet. However, the proposed transaction does not have any impact on
this decision.
Is Azurix a business unit of Enron or a separate company?
Azurix will become a majority-owned affiliate of Enron.
What will happen to Azurix employees? How many employees does Azurix have?
Azurix employees will remain Azurix employees. Globally, Azurix has 5,100 employees (100 of
which are in Houston).
Does Enron plan layoffs of Azurix employees?
Enron does not foresee layoffs at this time.
Will there be any changes in the management of Azurix?
Enron does not foresee any management changes at this time.
