Page 1
Questia Media, Inc.
Three Greenway Plaza
Suite 1700
Houston, Texas 77046
Notice of Voting Event
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN to you as a holder of Series B Convertible Participating
Preferred Stock, par value $.0001 per share (“Series B Preferred Stock”), of Questia Media, Inc.,
a Delaware corporation (the “Company”), pursuant to the provisions of Section 1.3 of the Voting
Rights Agreement you entered into as of August 18, 2000 (the “Voting Rights Agreement”) in
connection with your purchase of shares of Series B Preferred Stock (“Shares”) that: 
1. The Board of Directors of the Company has adopted resolutions extending the Company’s
offering of Series C Convertible Participating Preferred Stock, par value $.0001 per share
(“Series C Preferred Stock”), beyond the originally authorized closing date of May 31, 2001,
to permit a limited number additional of investors to purchase shares of Series C Preferred
Stock in one or more private placement transaction exempt from the registration
requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, on substantially the same terms as
sales made prior to May 31, 2001 (the “Extended Offering”).
2. The Board of Directors of the Company has adopted resolutions authorizing and
recommending to the Company’s stockholders the amendment of the Company’s Amended
and Restated Certificate of Incorporation to extend the full-ratchet price-based anti-dilution
adjustment protection mechanism applicable to the Series C Preferred through November 30,
2001; and
3. In connection with the Extended Offering, the proxy holder for your Shares designated under
the Voting Rights Agreement (the “Proxy Holder”) intends to execute a written consent
approving the adoption of stockholder resolutions on behalf of your Shares in favor of (A)
approving and ratifying the Extended Offering, (B) amending the Company’s Amended and
Restated Certificate of Incorporation to extend the full-ratchet price-based anti-dilution
adjustment protection mechanism applicable to the Series C Preferred through November 30,
2001, and (C) waiving the requirement under Article V of the Company’s Certificate of
Incorporation that the foregoing resolutions be adopted by unanimous written consent of the
Company’s stockholders. The form of stockholder resolutions which the Proxy Holder
intends to approve on behalf of your Shares are attached hereto as Exhibit A. 
In accordance with the terms of Section 1.3 of the Voting Rights Agreement, you have
the right to revoke the general proxy granted for your Shares to the Proxy Holder with respect to
one or more or the matters for approval specified above. In order to revoke your general proxy,
you must deliver a notice of revocation to the Company at the address listed above (Attn:
Secretary) by courier to the Company’s business address or by fax (713-358-2996) on or before
5:00 p.m. Houston, Texas time on the September 20, 2001.
Dated: September 13, 2001  QUESTIA MEDIA, INC.
HOU03:799774.2 
Kevin V. Weido
Acting Secretary
Page 2
Exhibit A
Form of Stockholder Resolutions
HOU03:799774.2
