Page 1
PROBLEMS AS COVERED IN HOUSTON CHRONICLE
I.  A Series of Incidents That Question Competence of Houston Fire
Department
(The Gang That Can’t Shoot Straight)
Page 2
A.  Death of Houston police officer Troy Blando, who was shot while on
patrol. It took twenty minutes for an ambulance to reach him after
dispatchers gave wrong location. [Dispatcher was apparently hearing
impaired.] 12/04/00, Section A, p.1.
B.  On June 17, 2000, Daniel Lopez, a sixth-grader in the Aldine school
district, sought medical help at Fire Station 18, located at 619 Telephone
Road, three different times between 3:35 pm and 4:30 pm that day. 
According to the investigation, Sergio Lopez, an emergency medical
technician at that fire station, did not take the boy’s vital signs or call an
ambulance. Family members later drove the boy to Ben Taub hospital
where he died around 9:26 from a rare aortic aneurysm. Although the
station’s ambulance was out on another call all afternoon, dispatch records
show two units were available at that time at another location 2.2 miles
away. Chief Lester Tyra, after reviewing the report of the city’s
investigaiton, placed Sergio Lopez on indefinite suspension. The report
stated that Sergio Lopez violated department guidelines by failing to check
the boy’s blood pressure and temperature, failing to monitor those vital
signs, not calling an ambulance and not notifying a supervisor of the
situation. The parents of the boy, Daniel Lopez, have filed a lawsuit
against the city. 8/01/00 Section A, p.1, Edition 3 Star.
C.  On June 10, 2000, an ambulance call was made to the home of Jose Ruiz
of the 8600 block of Broadway. Mr. Ruiz complained of stomach pains. 
The firefighter Donna Golden suggested that Mr. Ruiz get some antacids
from a drugstore. When Ruiz asked to be taken to the hospital, Golden
told him there was nothing wrong with him and that it would cost $500 to
$600 to take him to an ambulance. Golden denied making those
comments. Golden and her partner Donald Mauro were called back
several hours later to Ruiz’s apartment complex, where he had died. She
and Mauro were indefinitely suspended. The termination memos said
Golden and Mauro failed to follow department policy by not contacting
supervisors or getting Ruiz to sign a form refusing transport in an
ambulance. 7/26/00, Section A, p. 23 Metfront.
D.  In July, an ambulance driver stopped for doughnuts on way to hospital
with patient. 8/01/00, Section A, p.1, Edition 3 Star.
E.  Two of the busiest fire stations in Houston, Stations 1 and 8, located
downtown were announced to be closed. Stations will be replaced in 3-5
years with Super station in mid-town. Criticism from the community and
City Council ensued. The ability of neighboring fire stations to handle the
calls downtown before new super station is built were questioned. 1/31/01,
Sec. A., p.1. Mayor later announced that the closings would be delayed
thirty days.
F.  On the positive side: 
1. The Commission on Fire Accreditation International is expected to
award HFD its highest accreditation in March, 2001. Houston will be
