Page 1
The Premier Conference on Investing in the Americas
Presented during the 2001 Annual Meetings of the World Bank Group and the
International Monetary Fund
October 1-3, 2001 at the Omni Shoreham Hotel – Washington DC
PRELIMINARY AGENDA
Day One
9:00 – 12:00  Opening of Expo Americas & Registration
9:30 -10:30
Buffet Breakfast in Expo Hall
10:30 – 12:00 Official Opening of Expo Americas
12:00-2:30
Luncheon
2:45 – 4:30  An Overview of the Challenges and Opportunities for Latin America
With Latin America enjoying a period of relative economic stability and low inflation, regional
leaders have a unique opportunity to enact structural reforms to address difficult economic and
social issues. Distinguished leaders from Latin America will discuss their visions for the
continued economic development of the region. 
  Providing an investor friendly climate to attract foreign investment
  The role of multilateral institutions and governments in encouraging investment
  Developing stronger local and regional capital markets
  The impact of infrastructure investment on poverty reduction and economic growth
4:30 – 4:45
Break
4:45 – 6:30  An Analysis of Investment in Latin America
Private sector investment in Latin America has exploded from $12 billion in 1990 to $90
billion in 1999. However, the sharp slowdown in the U.S. and Argentina’s continued
economic difficulties are having a negative effect on growth rates throughout the region. 
These leading financial investors will address the outlook for investing in Latin America in the
midst of a slowing global economy. This session will provide an overview of the relevant
Page 2
investment disciplines, including: 
  Institutional Investors - Capital markets investments
  Multinational Companies - Mergers, acquisitions and strategic alliances
  Commercial Banks – Syndicated lending and other credit facilities
  Private equity funds – High risk and high return investments
6:45-8:30
Cocktail Reception
Day Two
7:30-8:30
Registration & Continental Breakfast and Exhibits
8:45-9:00
Chairman’s Re-Cap of Day One and Introduction to Day Two
John H. Tonelli
Chairman & CEO
International Venture Partners, LLC
9:00 – 10:45  Regional Integration – The Dreams and the Reality
Despite concerns about tarriffs, unfair competition, labor issues and environmental protection, 
most of Latin America’s governments continue to support free trade and regional integration. 
This session provides a reflection on the effects of regional integration on the economies of
Latin America by some of Latin America’s greatest visionaries. 
  The development and growth of Mercosur
  Has regional integration helped increase investment in the region?
  Is the Free Trade Association of the Americas (FTAA) a viable goal in the near term?
  Does regional integration help the smaller countries in the region?
10:45 – 11:45 Promoting Greater Infrastructure Investment in the Americas
Continued investment in infrastructure is essential for the region to provide basic services to a
growing population, improve the standard of living and maintain economic growth in the region. 
These prominent government officials will discuss the need for increased investment in Latin
American infrastructure and their plans for encouraging it in their countries.
  Addressing local government’s urgent need to upgrade existing infrastructure
  Identifying projects that can be financed and providing adequate guarantees
  The role of multilateral agencies and government entities in project development
  Accessing international capital markets for infrastructure projects
10:45-11:00
Mid-Morning Refreshments and Exhibits
11:15 – 12:30 Overcoming the Challenges of Financing Infrastructure Projects
Large scale infrastructure projects typically require long term financing, which is not
readily available in the region. There are a variety of challenges to funding
infrastructure projects in Latin America. These high level speakers from public and
private sector financial institutions will address these challenges and discuss
strategies for developing successful projects.
  Where are the main obstacles & challenges?
