Page 1
Business Overview
April 7, 2001
Contact:
J.P. Monteverde, III
President and CEO
281-493-3367 tel.
 jp@mygiveback.com
DISCLAIMER/CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE
This Confidential Business Overview is intended solely for the person to whom it was delivered by MyGiveBack, Inc. It may not be reproduced
or distributed to any other party without the express written consent of MyGiveBack, Inc. The contents herein are for general information
purposes only, subject to change without notice. Financial data are preliminary projections only. No warranties or representations are expressed
or should be implied. This is not an offer of securities. This business overview contains information of a confidential nature which is intended
solely for investors, prospective investors, and/or their legal and/or financial counselors or representatives. Use of this information for any other
purpose is forbidden.
Confidential  Not an offer to sell Securities
Page 2
Business Overview
Overview
MyGiveBack, Inc. (“MGB”) is an affinity marketing company for community-based, non-
profit organizations. MGB allows businesses and individuals to contribute to their charities
simply by making purchases with participating merchants. MGB recognizes qualifying sales
when consumers: (1) use the MyGiveBack Loyalty Card; (2) use any credit card or
merchant loyalty card which the consumer registers with MGB; or (3) trade through the
MGB “Mall” (MyGiveBack.com web site).  Participating merchants will donate a portion of
every purchase an individual or business makes through any of these methods. Donations
are in addition to (not in lieu of) any other consumer benefits (airline miles, hotel points, 
etc.).
MGB, in partnership with IFS International Holdings, Inc. (“IFS”), has the point-of-sale and
financial transaction processing infrastructure to enable MGB’s programs with merchants
and organizations world-wide. MGB’s program is extremely well suited to countries having
strong cultural or religious giving traditions. MGB’s management has strong business
relationships with merchants in the U.S., Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East.
The Problem
Non-profit organizations face the constant challenge of raising money. Large organizations
like the United Way have strong corporate relationships and broad community exposure. 
Smaller charitable and civic groups cannot effectively lever the value of their memberships
to raise money through the business community. For example, banks will not issue affinity
credit cards for an organization with fewer than 40,000 members. As a result, small
organizations usually rely on the goodwill of their members for direct contributions of
money, goods, and labor.
Merchants, large and small, must attract customers in an environment where consumers are
overwhelmed with competing messages. As advertising through traditional media grows less
cost effective, new marketing methods present merchants with the risk of expensive failure.
The Solution
MyGiveBack offers non-profit organizations an effective and unique solution for their
fundraising needs. By partnering with MGB, a non-profit will receive funds every time one
of its members makes a purchase from an MGB participating merchant..  This unique
approach to fundraising causes minimal imposition on an organization or its members; the
charity simply needs to encourage its members to shop at local merchants who accept the
MGB Loyalty Card and online at the MGB Mall. Consumers simply present either their
MGB Loyalty Card (or any credit or merchant loyalty card which the consumer has
registered with MGB) at the point of sale to record the gift.
Unlike any other new marketing program, participating in MGB costs a merchant nothing
unless MGB delivers a customer and that customer makes a purchase.
Confidential  2  Not an offer to sell Securities
