Page 1
InterofficeMemo
randum
To: Management Committee
From: Rebecca C. Carter
Subject: October 9th – Board of Directors Meeting 
Department: Corporate Secretary
Date: September 19, 2001
Enron Corp.’s next Board of Directors meeting is scheduled for October 9th.  Prior to that meeting, the
Audit and Compliance, Compensation and Management Development, Finance, and Nominating and
Corporate Governance Committees of the Board will also meet.  Any transaction requiring Board approval
must first go through the Risk Assessment & Control Group (“RAC”). RAC needs sufficient lead time
to be able to test its models against the analytics presented and arrive at a recommendation. If you
have an item to be submitted to the Finance Committee, it should be sent to Rick Buy who has
responsibility for that Committee agenda. If you are unsure as to whether your item should go to the
Finance Committee, please call Rick Buy at (713) 853-4739. 
Please complete and return this memo to me by September 27th if you have a matter for the agenda.
Agenda items arising after September 27th, must be approved by Ken Lay prior to submission to me.
We anticipate mailing the Board and Board Committee materials no later than October 2nd. Please return this
letter only if you have an item for the agenda.
_______  I have the following agenda item(s) listed below:
Proposed Item(s)  Approx. amount of time needed:
Presentations and resolutions relating to a specific deal or transaction requiring Board approval are
included in the Finance Committee and the Board books since the Finance Committee will recommend the
transaction for approval to the Board.
The following business units are scheduled to make presentations at the October 9th Board meeting:
Enron North America
Enron Energy Services 
Kitchen & Lovorato
Delainey & Dietrich
Respect
/app/norm/24.doc
Form 000-469-E(7/92) 
Integrity  Communication Excellence
Page 2
May 2nd - Board of Directors Meeting  Page 2
Business unit and corporate staff presentations are not included in the Board book, but must be
reviewed prior to the Board meeting, therefore, please note the schedule below to check due dates. The
schedule must be adhered to in order to ensure that we have the information to the Board of Directors and
the Office of the Chairman in a timely manner. 
Due Date
Thursday, September 27th  Finance Committee meeting presentations,
resolutions, and any other items requiring
Board approval to Rick Buy
Thursday, September 27th  Board meeting agenda items to Rebecca
Carter
Tuesday, October 2nd  Mailing date for Board and Committee
books
Wednesday, October 3rd  Draft of business unit presentations for
Board meeting to Greg Whalley (due by
Noon)
Thursday, October 4th  Final business unit presentations for Board
meeting to Greg Whalley and Terry West
(due by Noon)
Friday, October 5th  Agenda Review at 10:30 a.m. in the
Boardroom
Monday, October 8th  Committee meetings (Monday afternoon)
Monday, October 8th  Executive Session (Monday evening)
Tuesday, October 9th  Board meeting
cc: Terry West
