Page 1
The
Economist
Conferences
Speaking opportunity summary
The fourth annual e-business conference
Creating value with Internet technologies
24th-25th October 2001—The Radisson SAS Portman Hotel,
London
THE ECONOMIST CONFERENCES—BACKGROUND
The Economist Conferences is the world’s leading provider of international
forums—conferences, management briefings and Government Roundtables—
which facilitate organisational development and help senior management sustain
competitive advantage. As part of the Economist Group, the publisher of The
Economist newspaper, we are a respected brand with a 150-year history and an
unrivalled reputation for excellence and independent judgement.
Drawing on the expertise of in-house country specialists and close, long-standing
links with international companies operating globally, The Economist
Conferences is dedicated to creating objective, high-quality events with senior-
level speakers and delegates. 
Far more than just a conference organiser...
The Economist Conferences is not just a conference organiser. Our staff includes
country experts, consultants, advisors and researchers. We take an active part in
all events by chairing the sessions ourselves. We retain strict control of the
content of each event, although the advice of sponsoring companies and clients
is actively sought to create the most relevant and worthwhile meeting possible.
YOUR CONTACT FOR THIS EVENT
Veronica Piatigorsky, Conference Manager
The Economist Conferences
Email: veronicapiatigorsky@economist.com
Tel.: +44 (0) 20 7830.1270
Fax: +44 (0) 20 7931.0228
THE EVENT’S OBJECTIVES
In the wake of the market slowdown, companies are now back to looking at their
IT investments as a means of creating value and reducing expenditure. 
As companies integrate the Internet into their supply chains, they frequently find
that they need to change much more than their communications technology.
Their strategy, their approach, their deployment of skilled people, their divisional
structure—all these things get challenged.
The aim of this two-day event will is to discuss the challenges of the next few
years. Senior level executives from leading edge companies and industry experts
will discuss which strategies have succeeded, what the optimal business models
will be and what the future holds for your organisation.
FORMAT OF THE EVENT
© The Economist Intelligence Unit 2000  1
Page 2
A two-day conference with keynote sessions and panel debates allowing for
dialogue on the main issues. We will also allow for joint question and discussion
sessions following the presentations.
© The Economist Intelligence Unit 2000  2
