Page 1
January 19,2001
Mr. Jeffrey K. Skilling
Enron Corp.
50th Floor
1400 Smith
Houston, Texas 77002
Dear Jeff;
As a result of decisions made at our January 13 meeting please:
1) choose between artist’s proposals
2) consider a change of location of artwork
3) determine which, if any, of your current collection you would like to frame
I have enclosed two images from Joe Mancuso that are suggestions for the freestanding
sculpture in the living room. The stacked piece is almost a sampler of Joe’s work using
brick, tile, concrete and wood. It is 90” tall and currently available. The image of the
striped column is representative of a scaled down version of brick and mortar that he
would create specifically for your home.
The other artist we are considering for that space is Mary Shaffer. I have enclosed the
photograph of her “Wall Wave Pillow”, slumped glass and bronze. The dimensions are
73” x 22” x 33” and the price is $28,000. 
No matter which you decide to use I recommend that you keep it on the wall to the left of
the entry from the Music Room and that Joe Mancuso’s wall construction stay on the
right wall as originally planned. This creates a better balance in the room since there will
be a very tall Bird of Paradise plant in the opposite corner to the right of the fireplace.
Two tall elements on the right side of the room makes it out of balance. Having the plant
and the freestanding piece diagonally across from each other is more balanced and there
is plenty of room to comfortably move around either freestanding piece on the left side.
Please let me know what you would like to do so that Joe will know which wall he is
working with (the left wall is 10” narrower than the right.)
Page 2
I will be removing the two Billy Hassells, the Kalish over the fireplace and the Todd
Stilson in the dining room of your North Boulevard residence on February 14 so that my
art handler can install these along with your new works on Friday, February 16. If you
would like to have these framed in a manner similar to the ebony stained frames we are
using on the Hartnetts in the Master Bedroom and the Gael Stack in the Dining Room we
will need to pick them up earlier in the month. Please let me know if you would like me
to take care of framing the photograph of the children for the study as well. 
Madeline O’Connell, the artist who created the Dashes that will hang in the Master
Bedroom, is being honored with a solo exhibition at the McNay Art Museum in San
Antonio. The McNay was very interested in including the piece you have selected so
some time ago Madeline promised they could have it for the show. Betty Moody of
Moody Gallery from whom you are purchasing the work has assured me that you may
borrow any artwork from the gallery that you would like for the time period that
Madeline’s piece is in the show July 8 through September 9, 2001. The gallery will also
assume all responsibility not only for taking the piece to the museum, for its return and
reinstallation but also for installing the borrowed artwork and, if necessary, restoring the
wall to it original condition.
Lastly, I have included a contract from Chihuly that is a bit over the top but is the general
contract they use for all commissions. Please sign both copies and return to me. I will
have Chihuly sign and return a copy to you for your files.
Also enclosed is an agreement from Ben Livingston, the neon artist, outlining his fees for
transporting and installing his artwork for the Stairway and Enclosed Porch. Please sign
and return to me. I will need the photographs of Joe Mancuso’s works and Mary Shaver’s
work back but please feel free to keep the catalogues.
Please call me with any question you may have. Thank you again for the great pleasure of
assisting you with what is truly a terrific art collection.
Sincerely,
Leigh Smitherman Edwards
