Page 1
Donald B. Reid
General Manager, Structured Finance
Enron Corporation, Houston TX
Office 713-345-6282; 3AC648
 donald.reid@enron.com
PROFESSIONAL SUMMARY
Business/Finance Professional and Originator with in-depth new business and
transactional experience both domestically and internationally. Track record in
structured finance, business origination, relationship building, negotiating and closing
complex, high-value transactions. Specialized experience in the electric, gas, 
telecommunications, steel and construction industries. Generated over $12 million in
profits since joining Enron. Fluent in Spanish.
EXPERIENCE PROFILE
Enron International / Engineering and Construction Company – August 1998-
Present
General Manager, Structured Finance
-  Headed up a team of finance professionals providing financial alternatives
to third party clients to accelerate growth in new, third party construction
business for Enron Engineering and Construction. Arranged construction
and lease financing for the Bethlehem Steel Slab Caster Project resulting
in $2.6 million in financing IBIT. Closed over twelve, complex financings in
conjunction with new EPC business that generated financing income of
over $12 million plus stock options for 16% of Mexico’s second largest
construction company. 
Global Finance Corporation -- 1993-1998, Managing Director
-  Founded Firm and developed niche business in the independent power, 
electric utility and global energy markets
-  Appointed financial advisor for various debt, equity and M&A assignments.
Privately placed a 20% equity interest in an U.S. energy company.
Served as financial advisor for projects in the US, Argentina, Jamaica, El
Salvador, Honduras, the Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, Mexico, China
and the Philippines. Evaluated and developed a financing structure for an
87-MW combined-cycle electrical power plant in Argentina. 
Page 2
Donald B. Reid
Page 2 of 2
Westpac Banking Corporation -- 1986-1993
Vice President and Manager, Special Industries, Project Finance and Global
Power
-  Team Leader responsible for delivering the bank’s corporate and project
finance services to the utility, gas, power generation and cable TV
industries nationally. Increased commitments by $2.2 billion. Arranged
and syndicated a $1 billion acquisition financing for a US energy company.
Developed over 40 relationships across the country. Generated over $58
million in net income without losses.
Bank of America -- 1972-1986
Vice President
-  Led the Eastern Region’s Utility/Telecommunications Group, establishing
an industry leadership position in financing utility and satellite companies.
-  Developed new business in the domestic energy, telecommunications and
electric power industries.
-  Directed asset recovery in Chile, Brazil, Venezuela, Honduras and
Panama.
- 
OTHER
MILITARY: Officer, 101st Airborne Division.
EDUCATION: MBA, New York University; Course Work Completed for Ph.D.
in Economics
Bachelor of Foreign Trade, Thunderbird Graduate School
Bachelor of Science, University of Rochester
FOREIGN LANGUAGE: Spanish
PERSONAL INTERESTS: Golf, Skiing, Hiking, Theater, Family Trips
REFERENCES: Furnished upon request
