Page 1
JOHN C. SAWHILL
John Sawhill is President and Chief Executive Officer of The Nature
Conservancy, an international conservation organization with over a million
members committed to the preservation of threatened ecosystems and
wildlife habitat. Since its founding in 1951, the Conservancy has protected
over 11 million acres in the United States, and helped protect over 59 million
acres in Latin America, the Caribbean, Canada, Asia and the Pacific. The
Conservancy, which is the fifteenth largest nonprofit in the United States,
owns and manages the largest private system of nature preserves in the
world. In September 1995, the Conservancy completed its $300 million Last
Great Places capital campaign six months ahead of schedule and raised $315
million. It recently launched the Campaign for Conservation to raise $750
million by 2003.
From 1981 to 1990, Mr. Sawhill served as a director of McKinsey &
Company, Inc. and headed the Firm's energy consulting practice. In this
position, he created an energy research group and directed strategic
planning studies for some of the largest companies in the petroleum, natural
gas, electric utility, and coal industries. He also worked on energy
assignments for governments in the U.S., Europe, and Latin America. He
chaired McKinsey's Clientele Development Council, a group responsible for
the Firm's industry practice areas and served as a member of the Firm's
Directors and Shareholders Committees. Under his leadership, McKinsey's
energy consulting revenues grew at a compounded annual growth rate of
over 30 percent.
Prior to joining McKinsey, Mr. Sawhill served as Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer of the United States Synthetic Fuels Corporation and,
before that, as Deputy Secretary of the Department of Energy under
President Carter. During the Nixon and Ford Administrations, he served as
Administrator of the Federal Energy Administration; Deputy Administrator of
the Federal Energy Office; and Associate Director for Natural Resources,
Energy, Science, and Environment of the Office of Management and Budget.
Mr. Sawhill served as President of New York University, the largest
private university in the United States, from 1975 to 1979. During his tenure
as President, he successfully led a 3-year, $150 million fundraising effort and
achieved an academic and financial turnaround, which was described by the
New York Times as one of the "miracles of higher education."
Mr. Sawhill has served as a director of a number of major American
corporations; these include Consolidated Edison, RCA, Philip Morris, Crane
Corporation, General American Investors, American International Group,
Page 2
-2-
Automatic Data Processing and North American Coal. He is currently a
director of The Procter and Gamble Company, Pacific Gas and Electric
Company, and the Vanguard Group of Mutual Funds.
He holds responsible positions in a number of nonprofit organizations.
He is chairman of the board of the H. John Heinz III Center for Science,
Economics and the Environment. He serves as a member of the President's
Council on Sustainable Development and the Environment for the Americas
Board, the group that oversees debt-for-nature swaps and the establishment
of
conservation trust funds in several Latin American countries. In addition, he
served on the Commission on the Future of the Smithsonian and chaired the
task force on governance, management and financial resources.
In September 1997, Mr. Sawhill became Senior Lecturer of Business
Administration at the Harvard Business School where he is teaching and
conducting research on not-for-profit institutions. His course, Effective
Leadership of Social Enterprises, is offered in the Spring term to second year
students. 
Mr. Sawhill has published numerous books, articles, and reports about
energy and energy-related subjects. He is a co-author of the report, Nuclear
Power Issues and Choices, which was written after his participation in a year-
long study of the development and use of civilian nuclear energy that was
sponsored by the Ford Foundation, and of a similar report entitled, Energy:
The Next Twenty Years, also sponsored by Ford. He is also the principal
author of Energy - Managing the Transition, a study prepared for the
Trilateral Commission, and of Improving the Energy Efficiency of the
American Economy published by Prentice-Hall. He co-authored a book
published in January 1986 by The Brookings Institution assessing changes in
energy usage over the past decade entitled, Energy Conservation:
Successes and Failures. He has published a series of articles in Public
Utilities Fortnightly on developments in the natural gas and electric utility
industries and in the Harvard Business Review on the restructuring taking
place in the electric utility industry. In the September-October 1995 Harvard
Business Review, there is an interview with Mr. Sawhill entitled "Surviving
Success".
Mr. Sawhill graduated cum laude from Princeton University's Woodrow
Wilson School of Public and International Affairs in 1958 and received his
Ph.D. in economics from New York University in 1963. From 1960 to 1963,
he was Assistant Dean and Assistant Professor, Department of Economics;
later during his term as President, he was a professor of economics and the
