Page 1
Company.com
Company.com is the leading online widget distributing widgets to users via a web-enabled, B2B exchange. The
company has developed a winning formula for profitability by developing a zero cost consumer/member acquisition
strategy and has agreements for several key strategic partners.
Product
  Company.com offers a unique, user-friendly, interface that facilitates trading activity and communication
among auction participants. Because traditional distribution channels typically rely on antiquated methods
of communication, Company.com promises to provide a service that will, in the short term be used as a tool
by industry “middlemen”.  In the long term however, management anticipates channel conflict and the
complete elimination of one step in the traditional distribution channel. 
  The company will effectively reach our target market and derive revenues from multiple sources including:
advertising, e-commerce, strategic affiliate revenue, and technology services/content syndication.
Market
  The target market is buyers and sellers of widgets.
  Based on XYZ research, the US market boasts 77 million potential customers, with spending power of $350
billion[URL: "#Page1"] 1.
  The market is projected to grow 25% per year, as the demand for widgets increases and as the market
channels become more efficient.
  In addition there is an international market for widgets that has been estimated at $100 billion.
Strategic Partners
  Company.com has developed strategic relationships and marketing alliances with several key widget
manufacturers including three of the industry leaders, XYZ, ABC, and GHF.
  The company recently closed an contract to be the exclusive auction site for MMM, a worldwide and
dominant buyer of widgets. 
Competition
  Company.com has identified two direct competitors. The first is Distributor.com; a brick and mortar
incumbant with an online presence. The second is Seller.com; a lifestyle website focusing sellers only.
  Other online ventures such as Widgets are not currently in the online space, but may chose to develop
technology that would enable them to become a potential competitor.
  Indirect competitors include traditional middlemen. 
Competitive Advantages
  Strategic Marketing - Company.com has developed a 100% performance-based marketing strategy thru a
variety of partners including a major widget manufacturer. 
  Membership Acquisition Engine – Through strategic commission relationships, Widget.com has
developed a revenue strategy that will first equalize the cost of membership acquisition, and ultimately will
become a profitable membership acquisition engine.
  Exclusive eCommerce Contracts – Exclusive contracts with leading buyers and sellers of widgets
effectively bar new competitors from infringing on the company’s space. 
Organizational Information
Management Team
  John Doe, CEO & Chairman - Co-Founder of Company.com. BS in Industrial Distribution, Texas A & M
University. Seven years experience as a sales executive in the mutual fund industry with Janus. 
  Jane Doe, President & Vice-Chairman - Co-founder; Company.com. BS in Business, University of
Houston. Co-founder; Widget Technologies; 8 years startup experience, responsible for operations, sales &
marketing, vendor relations, developed quotation software, website development.
  Sam Smith, VP Business Development - BS in Business Administration, Cum Laude, University of
Texas. Instrumental in the company’s rapid growth and recognition as both an INC 500 and Houston 100
national company
1
Page 2
Outside Directors
  Paul Frison, Director - Co-Founder of HTC. Currently president of the XYZ Group, and serves on the
Board of Directors several public companies. 
  Gray Hancock, Director - Owner and CEO of a large company in San Antonio, TX. Responsible for raising
capital for several private placement offerings. Attended the University of Texas at Austin and Trinity
University in San Antonio. 
  Frank Karbarz, Director -  BS in Accounting, Northwestern University; MBA, Southern Methodist
University; CPA; Director of IP Communications, Inc. Former CFO, i2 Technologies, Inc. (NASDAQ: ITWO).
Architect and executor of i2’s highly successful 1996 IPO.
  Juan Samudio, Director - Managing Director of XYZ Financial Corporation; past Chairman and CEO.
Degrees from USMA, Georgetown, and Columbia Business School. 
Financial Projections
   2000
Revenue $448,787
Gross Profit  $143,637
EBITDA  $(716,362) 
2001
$4,427,343
$2,431,250
$271,250 
2002
$13,282,031
$7,293,750
$1,085,000 
2003
$26,564,062
$14,587,500
$4,340,000 
2004
$53,128,125
$29,175,000
$17,360,000
Capital
  Company.com is seeking approximately $500,000 in angel/seed investment at this time. The company
plans to raise $2-3 million in a Series A financing in Q1. 2001. 
  Funds will be used to support ongoing operating expenses, web site development, and membership
acquisition. Break-even profitability is projected Q1 2000.
Contact Information
  John Doe
Chairman, CEO
Company.com, Inc.
713.658-1750
 jdoe@houstontech.org
 
Please note:
Investments resulting from introductions by HTC may involve a high degree of risk. HTC has neither
evaluated nor endorsed the merits of any investment opportunity presented through its services and
makes no recommendations regarding the appropriateness of particular investment opportunities for
particular investors. Each potential investor must rely on his or her own judgment regarding the merits of
a particular investment opportunity.
