Page 1
The Premier Conference on Investing in the Americas
Presented during the 2001 Annual Meeting of the World Bank Group
and the International Monetary Fund
October 1-3, 2001
Omni Shoreham Hotel – Washington D.C.
International Venture Partners, LLC is pleased and excited to announce our upcoming Latin
American Investment Summit (LatinSummit),  the premier conference on investing in the
Americas, presented during the Annual Meeting of the World Bank Group and the International
Monetary Fund.
The LatinSummit is a unique opportunity for your company to connect with top business
executives, government officials and other potential customers at the largest and most important
annual gathering of world leaders from the public and private sectors. Adjacent to the
LatinSummit will be the ExpoAmericas, consisting of a maximum of fifty exhibitors, including
some of the most prominent international companies working in Latin America.
Why should your company be a Sponsor?
  The Annual Meeting attracts over 15,000 participants, including presidents, ministers, other
senior government officials, as well as thousands of senior level executives from the private
sector. 
  The Annual Meeting attracts extensive international press coverage and is televised throughout
the world. Full media coverage.
  Three-day Conference with top-level speakers from the public and private sector.
LatinSummit will explore the unique challenges of financing public and private sector projects
in Latin America with a focus on infrastructure finance, capital markets, commercial lending,
mergers and acquisitions and private equity investing. 
  Very exclusive ExpoAmericas, with no more than 50 exhibitors and open admission to all
Annual Meeting and LatinSummit attendees. Your company will have maximum exposure.
  LatinSummit will be held in the same venue as the Annual Meetings of the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, providing ideal networking opportunities.
  Because LatinSummit is organized by IVP ([URL: "http://www.ivp-ny.com/"] www.ivp-ny.com), an investment banking firm
focused on Latin America, and not a conference organizer, we will ensure that the agenda
covers only the most poignant topics.
For more information on sponsoring or exhibiting please contact Santiago Arana, [URL: "mailto:sarana@ivp-ny.com"] sarana@ivp-ny.com or
James Ontra, [URL: "mailto:jontra@ivp-ny.com"] jontra@ivp-ny.com at 212-980-0002
Page 2
  Presented by the organizers of Cyber Americas ([URL: "http://www.cyber-amricas.com/"] www.cyber-americas.com) at the Inter-
American Development Bank’s Annual Meeting in March 2001. Past sponsors include
PriceWaterhouseCoopers, Oracle, American Airlines, Optiglobe, Lucent Technologies,
Accenture, Impsat, America Online, Global Crossing, Greenberg Traurig, Bloomberg, Exodus
Communications and others. Our experience will ensure an extremely successful event.
We are offering a variety of sponsorship opportunities from which to choose from. We hope that
you will join us for this unique event.
Feel free to contact me at your convenience.
James Ontra
International Venture Partners, LLC
692 Madison Avenue, Third Floor
New York, NY 10021
main (212) 980-0002
fax (212) 980-1331
cell   (917) 887-1706
 http://www.latin-summit.com
 http://www.ivp-ny.com
[URL: "mailto:jontra@ivp-ny.com"] jontra@ivp-ny.com
For more information on sponsoring or exhibiting please contact Santiago Arana, [URL: "mailto:sarana@ivp-ny.com"] sarana@ivp-ny.com or
James Ontra, [URL: "mailto:jontra@ivp-ny.com"] jontra@ivp-ny.com at 212-980-0002
