Page 1
North American Energy Advisors 
Paul Ziff, CEO
Calgary Office  Houston Office
Richard G. DeWolf, Sr. VP
Susan Hamilton, Sr. VP
G. Gordon Clarke, Sr. Assoc. 
Robert J. Reid, Sr. Assoc. 
W. P. (Bill) Gwozd, Manager Adrian H. Goodisman, Sr. VP
Leary Hosein, Manager Luis Bacigalupo, VP
Court Mackid, Manager Richard M. Tucker, VP
William Winnick, Manager Steve Turk, VP 
Shelley Soles, Conference Dir. Thomas J. Woods, VP 
Ron Ford, Sr. Assoc.
Janet Lynch, Sr. Assoc.
Mike Erpenbeck, Manager
Randy Schultz, Manager
March 20, 2001
File #: 01CC-1003
Enron
P.O. Box 4656
Houston, Texas 77002
Via Email: jskilli@enron.com
Attention: Mr. J. Skilling
Chief Executive Officer
Dear Jeff:
Re:  North American Gas Strategies Conference, November 5 & 6, 2001, Calgary
Keynote Speaking Invitation
It was a great pleasure to have you speak five years ago as our keynote luncheon speaker in Calgary. As you
know, our gas conferences, held in several North American locations, are designed to assist our gas consulting
and E & P clients regarding key future issues. We are pleased to have had strong participation from many of
your colleagues in our past conferences. Julie Gomez of Enron NA, also a past speaker, will be attending our
April 2/3 2001 event in Houston, Winter’s Aftermath; A New Era for Northern & Frontier Gas, which has a
stellar line-up of senior speakers. Since your involvement, the conference has grown and developed to become
the leading event for discussion of gas and related energy issues in North America. Some attached comments
from attendees will demonstrate why. 
We are now designing our fall 2001 conference program in Calgary. Day l focuses on the basic issues of
supply, markets, and price outlook. Day 2 focuses on a specific issue — this spring the far North, and in the
fall, the outlook for Canadian gas supply (south of 60).
I would like to invite you to participate on day 1, Monday, November 5 to deliver the Keynote address on the
Energy Markets panel, particularly. Issues such as the California energy situation, and the converging of gas and
power markets, and Enron’s leadership in assisting the industry to manage related risks would be of high interest
to the Canadian energy industry, and the many other executives who will come from over 50 locations across
the continent. You would speak for about 25 minutes, and then participate in an active, moderated discussion
responding to audience questions.
We also hold a VIP/Speaker Dinner the Sunday evening preceding (November 4) that would provide an
excellent opportunity for you to meet or reacquaint with many of the senior executives in the Canadian E&P
industry, and senior government regulators (e.g. NEB, Alberta EUB), as well as executives attending the
conference. 
1117 McLeod Trail S.E. Calgary, Alberta T2G 2M8
403-265-0060 Fax 403-237-8489
5151 San Felipe, Suite 550, Houston, TX 77056
713-627-8282 Fax 713-627-9034
Page 2
Enron
Page 2
Our objective, Jeff, is to present the best gas conference in North America in terms of speakers, topics and
calibre of attendees. Enclosed are some examples of the excellent response from our recent conferences. We
expect about 350 attendees from a wide range of companies in the gas value chain (E&P, midstream, pipelines,
LDC’s, cogen’s/IPP’s), from over across the continent. Most energy media are represented (2 to 3 dozen;
Bloomberg is our dinner sponsor in Houston this spring). Our gas conferences also attract senior investment
industry analysts. I can assure you that Ziff Energy will dedicate considerable effort to ensure that this
opportunity is worthwhile for you and Enron, in terms of the number and seniority of North American gas
executives attending to hear your message.
We hope that you are able to join our roster of senior North American energy executives speaking in Calgary
and look forward to your early response to our invitation. If you are able to participate, we would appreciate
your confirmation by Wednesday, April 11. I can be reached at 403-265-0600 or by return email:
 pziff@ziffenergy.com or alternately, contact Ziff’s Conference Director, Shelley Soles, at 403-234-4285 or
 ssoles@ziffenergy.com. We look forward to hearing from you.
Sincerely,
ZIFF ENERGY GROUP
Paul Ziff
Paul Ziff
CEO
(PZ:ss)
Enclosures: Conference Brochure, Houston, April 2/3
Conference Testimonials
