Page 1
GREATER HOUSTON COMMUNITY FOUNDATION
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Title:  Gift Acceptance – Non-cash
Purpose:  To establish a standard policy for the acceptance and valuation of gifts
other than cash
Effective Date:
Donors may choose to make a contribution to a Greater Houston Community Foundation
(GHCF) fund with a variety of marketable assets other than cash. These assets may
include, but are not limited to, brokerage held marketable securities, donor held
marketable securities (may be restricted), mutual funds and certificates of deposit (CDs).
With the exception of CDs, GHCF’s policy is to sell marketable assets upon receipt. 
Non-marketable assets may be accepted as gifts but are subject to prior approval by the
Investment Committee. These assets may include, but are not limited to, ownership
interests in nonmarketable investments, remainder beneficiary interests in charitable
remainder trusts (CRT), life insurance, stock options, gifts in kind, land or other real
property, works of art and other split-interest gifts. Since interests in these entities are
not liquid, the donor is required to make a gift of cash or marketable securities to cover
administrative fees, professional fees and any other out-of-pocket costs incurred by the
Foundation in the transfer of ownership of these types of gifts.
The following outlines the acceptance policy for certain of the above mentioned assets:
  Brokerage held marketable securities
Ownership of marketable securities (stocks or bonds) that are held in “street” name
is easily transferable. The donor should send a letter of authorization (LOA) to his or
her broker (with a copy to GHCF) that includes the following information:
1. Name and number of shares of the securities to be transferred
2. Name of the GHCF fund to be credited
3. GHCF’s custodian’s name, DTC number and GHCF’s account number
4. GHCF’s address and telephone number
The value of the gift is assigned based on the average price (i.e., highest trading
price + lowest trading price divided by 2) on the date the securities are delivered to
GHCF’s account (Treas. Reg. §1.170A-1(b)). A reliable pricing source is used in
determining the average price of the stock. Some thinly traded stock may not trade
every day. Should stock be received that does not trade on the delivery date, the
value will be assigned based on the average price the next day on which it does
trade. 
In the event that the timing of the receipt of a gift is critical (e.g., year-end), GHCF
may, at its discretion, take constructive receipt, in writing, before the actual transfer is
effected. The Executive Director or Managing Director-Fund Development must
agree to the transaction before the critical date arrives.
07/20/20  Page 1 of 3
Page 2
GREATER HOUSTON COMMUNITY FOUNDATION
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Donor held marketable securities
Stock certificates or bonds that are mailed should be sent via registered mail
(unendorsed).  A signed Irrevocable Stock or Bond Power should be sent under
separate cover. Hand delivered securities should also be unendorsed and
accompanied by a signed Irrevocable Stock or Bond Power. GHCF will provide the
donor with an acknowledgement of receipt of the securities. The securities and the
Irrevocable Stock or Bond Power will be delivered to GHCF’s custodian. The date of
mail receipt or hand delivery to the Foundation will determine the gift valuation date. 
A donor may choose to transfer securities to GHCF’s name. Whether the gift is
accomplished through a DTC transfer, mailed or hand delivered to the Foundation,
the gift valuation date is the date that the securities are registered, received and/or
transferred into GHCF’s name or account.
GHCF will accept gifts of restricted stock. Since these restrictions can take many
forms, each gift of restricted stock will be handled on a case-by-case basis. In
general, the gift valuation date is the date that the securities are registered, received
and/or transferred into GHCF’s name or account. However, the valuation of the
donor’s fund balance will be based on the proceeds from the sale of the stock. A gift
of restricted stock with a “legend” that cannot be removed for a specified period of
time may be sold at a discount that in turn lowers the value of the gift. Therefore,
when stock carrying this type of restriction is received by the Foundation, an
appraisal (or some other accepted form of valuation) must accompany the gifted
stock for charitable gift and valuation purposes. 
  Certificates of Deposit
The same procedures as those for brokerage held marketable securities apply to the
transfer of CDs to GHCF. The value assigned to the gift is the face value of the CD.
After accepting a CD as a gift, GHCF will consult with the issuer as to whether or not
the CD may be redeemed for cash with no penalty. If there is a penalty, the CD will
be held to maturity. Those with no penalty will be redeemed and the cash invested
in the custodial pool. 
  Mutual funds
Donors wishing to donate mutual funds should authorize the fund manager to
transfer the shares to a GHCF account. If GHCF does not have an account with the
fund manager, the Executive Director or Managing Director-Fund Development is
authorized to open an account with the written approval of the chairman of GHCF’s
Investment Committee. Upon delivery to GHCF’s account, the shares will be sold
and the fund manager will be requested to send GHCF a check for the proceeds.
The value assigned to the gift is the cash proceeds from the sale. 
07/20/20  Page 2 of 3
