Page 1
The
Economist
Conferences
Last updated 20 July, 2020
Creating value with Internet technologies
Wednesday 24th—Thursday 25th October 2001 • Radisson SAS Portman Hotel, London
Draft theme
Although an Internet strategy is now a requirement of modern business, many companies admit they have
not yet seen the benefits of the new technologies despite millions spent on investments. Many commercial
Internet initiatives over the last few years were driven by hype rather than business sense. It is only
through integrating Internet technologies into your overall strategy that they can be used as a driver for
competitive advantage. 
From e-marketplaces to the whole spectrum of supply chain integration, logistics and procurement
solutions, there is significant value to be created and cost savings to be made in the b2b arena. The
Internet provides a common IT delivery platform across the value chain. The challenges lie in making the
right decisions for technology investments, choosing a strategy that is right for your company and making
sure that the cultural issues are grasped across the organisation.
Now in the fourth year of their annual e-business strategy events, the Economist Conferences once again
brings you a panel speakers from the most dynamic and innovative companies who have successfully
created the new business models. Aimed at senior industry executives, this event will focus on harnessing
technologies, and redefining your relationships with suppliers, partners and colleagues, in order to truly
exploit the potential in the in your business.
Key issues for discussion
Opening address
  Capturing the real economic benefits of the Internet
  Impact on industry structure
  Building on the proven principles of effective strategy
The value chain
  Integrating Internet applications into the overall value chain
  Fitting in your e-business strategy with current market conditions and other corporate priorities
Who is responsible for your e-business strategy?
  Active involvement of top management
Changing your business processes
  Effective transformation of corporate culture
  Evolving a communication strategy
  Converting personal knowledge into organisational knowledge
Page 2
Identifying potential profitability
  Industry structure
  What paths to profit are emerging?
  Sustainable competitive advantage
  The importance of strategic positioning
Re-engineering the supply chain
  Transforming the management of your supply chain
  Implications of adopting a strategy
  How best to roll out a supply chain solution to key partners and suppliers
  Successful case study
The future of e-marketplaces – when will they start to deliver?
Delivery platforms of the future
