Page 1
FIBER DYNAMICS INCORPORATED
BUSINESS PLAN SUMMARY
September 6, 2001
Introduction
Fiber Dynamics, Inc. (“FDI” or the “Company”) a Texas C-Corporation, manufactures patented fiber optic
sensors that provide continuous monitoring of equipment for industrial processes too extreme and/or
hazardous for conventional electrical sensors.
FDI’s sensor technology, protected by nine U.S. patents developed at Texas A&M University, is well suited
for a wide variety of sensor types: chemical, temperature, strain, medical, electromagnetic, rotation, 
vibration, displacement, pressure and flow. However, the Company has chosen to focus on two high-volume
market sectors with excellent vertical expansion capacities during its initial phase of commercialization. 
The current products are pressure sensors for in-cylinder monitoring in large reciprocating engines and load
sensors for monitoring of critical industrial bearings. The industry leader in each of these sectors has signed a
strategic alliance with FDI. Demonstrating the longer-term broad potential of the technology, FDI also
provides fiber components on a smaller developmental scale for aerospace interests to include Northrop-
Grumman, Lockheed Martin, and NASA; and to a sub.of Corning for use in intrusion detection systems. 
The Company is currently raising $1.5 to $2.0 million (with $300,000 in place from first-round investors) 
and seeking a lead investor to support the current rapid growth phase leading to sustained profitability, 
expected within 18 months. Profitable revenues in 2006 are projected at $115 million based primarily upon
the requirements identified by current customers.
Proprietary Technology
FDI holds exclusive licenses for the nine U.S. patents that cover the products and processes associated with
its core technologies: fiber Fabry-Perot interferometer (“FFPI”) sensors and signal control unit (“SCU”)
interfaces. FFPI sensors, fabricated in a single mode fused silica optical fiber, deliver extremely accurate
readings and survive extreme environments, undegraded by high temperatures, electromagnetic interference
or the presence of flammable or explosive materials. The technology is also applicable to fiber-based
networks for data and process control systems in industrial environments. 
Competitive Advantages
FDI believes it has significant, sustainable advantages that provide substantial barriers to entry for potential
competitors:
  Strong patents on proprietary technology
  Customer installations in place
  Strategic alliances with industry leaders 
  Strong vertical expansion in initial markets
  Suited to multiple additional markets/uses
  Designed for mass production, 
miniaturization
FDI’s Current Markets
Although FFPI sensors have very broad market applications, (including oil and gas, defense, and medical) 
the Company has chosen to take a very focused approach, concentrating on only two very specific market
segments for initial product entry: (1) pressure sensors for large reciprocating engines used in natural gas
transmission and production, electric power generation, large manufacturing companies, refineries and
petrochemical plants, and (2) load sensors for critical industrial bearings. 
Page 2
Operators in these markets have a critical need to reduce operating costs, achieve dramatic emissions
reductions, increase safety, reduce downtime, and prevent catastrophic failure of critical equipment. In some
cases, these results are mandated by governmental regulations; failure to comply results in heavy fines or
loss of competitive position. Skyrocketing fuel costs also increase the desire to monitor equipment
performance. 
FDI’s initial targets represent a total market of approximately $500 million including retrofits and new
equipment. Vertical expansion into other industrial engines and bearings, planned for the next 2-3 years, will
bring these potential markets over $1 billion, without including applications for automobiles and light trucks.
Additionally, the U.S. Navy is scheduled to complete acceptance testing in 2002 on an underwater compass
built by FDI; if accepted, the Company will manufacture the compass, yielding additional revenue of $9-15
million annually, and opening a door to the defense market for FFPI sensors. 
Strategic Alliances/Contracts in Progress
FDI enters markets with strategic partners in order to gain customer acceptance and market knowledge while
remaining focused on manufacturing rather than distribution. Strategic milestones include:
  A joint development agreement with Caterpillar, the leading OEM for large bore engines; limited
production of the joint development product is scheduled to begin in first quarter 2002. 
  An exclusive use/marketing agreement with Bearings Plus, the leading manufacturer of critical
industrial process equipment bearings; customer demo installations will begin in 4th quarter 2001. 
  Contracts in progress with Fairbanks-Morse, Caterpillar and the U.S. Navy that aggregate to $1.6
million dollars. 
Management & Governance
The Company has assembled a strong management team with extensive executive and industry experience to
run manufacturing operations as well as the research and development associated with product development
and refinement. The current executive team is: 
Mark G. Swank, President and Chief Executive Officer
Richard R. Gerhold, Director, Electronics Development
Chun E. Lee, Ph. D., Director, Research, Development and Engineering (Co-Founder)
Edward E. Seale, Chief Financial Officer
Gordon E. Sefcik, Director, Sales and Marketing
FDI’s Board of Directors, Chaired by Mike Burke –former CEO of four multi-billion dollar corporations, is
actively involved in the Company’s development, contributing industry, management, technology, finance
and operations expertise. The Board also includes Dr. Henry Taylor (Co-Founder), Professor Electrical
Engineering @ Texas A&M and investors and fund managers Dennis Murphree, Murphree Ventures and Dr. 
David Mueller, AM Fund. FDI’s technical staff is led by a team that has worked together for 7 years, 
including two of the Company’s co-founders. 
Financial
Five-year revenue and earnings projections based upon current customer projections ($Million):
Revenues Earnings*
2002  $5.01
2003  $29.35
2004  $50.85
2005  $85.2
2006  $115.55
