Page 1
Location:
5450 Northwest Central, Suite 230
Houston, Texas 77092
Industry:
Multi-point videoconferencing service for businesses,
utilizing the internet to drive broader availability and
lower costs.
Contacts:
Kerry Brooks  Dave Throckmorton
713-462-5565  713-462-5565
kbrooks@meetrix.com  dthrockmorton@meetrix.com
Offering:
45.5% of company offered for $5,000,000 equity
investment at a pre-money valuation of $6,000,000; to
be used for operating expenses to start the company.
Management:
1) Kerry Brooks: Chairman & CEO, “turn-around”
specialist with 24 years of experience managing
businesses for Procter & Gamble, Coca-Cola, and
Citibank; founding partner with Eyes of Texas
Partners. 
2) Dave Throckmorton: President & COO, business
leader and problem solver with 28 years of experience
managing businesses for Procter & Gamble and
Coca-Cola; commanding officer and pilot in the U.S.
Army.
3) Eric Cumming: VP, CTO, entrepreneur and
business founder with 24 years of management
experience at INC Group and IBM; founding partner
with Eyes of Texas Partners.
4) Tom Dye: VP, Business Development,
entrepreneur and business founder with 22 years of
management experience with Interactive Silicon,
Cirrus Logic, Austek Microsystems, Design
Technology, Dell, Motorola, and Texas Instruments. 
Company Status:
Meetrix will be formed as a Delaware Corporation in
September of 2001. A business plan has been
developed and the startup of operations is underway.
Mission:
Our mission is to develop the first, and thereafter, the
dominant internet-based, multi-point visual
communications company; offering live, interactive
video and audio connectivity to expanding
communities of business users.
Service:
Meetrix will provide a unique, interactive, real-time
videoconferencing service for the business market
utilizing the internet as a low cost platform. This
service fills a huge need for companies who are
demanding more effective, real-time communications
capabilities with employees, suppliers, customers and
partners. Our value proposition also includes greatly
improved personal productivity, and significantly
reduced communications and travel expenses. Using
a personal computer with low cost video camera and
microphone, high-speed internet access, and web
access to our proprietary software; we offer: 
1) Secure multipoint videoconferencing; enabling up
to 8 participants simultaneously with synchronized,
high quality video and audio plus full duplexing.
2) Real-time collaboration tools to enhance the
videoconferencing experience; including graphics,
spreadsheets, documents and whiteboards.
3) Text chat and instant messaging sidebar allowing
participants to conduct private communications. 
Technology:
We will file 7-10 patents for our proprietary software
and technical platform. Phase 1 applications will
include on-the-fly MPLS-based virtual private network
(VPN) provisioning, secure peer-to-peer (P2P) video
and audio communications, feedback-based dynamic
quality of service adjustments, and innovative
scheduling and resource management. This platform
offers nearly unlimited scaling in the support of
simultaneous conferences. We are also obtaining an
exclusive license of a patented compression and
decompression (codec) methodology to enable higher
quality video than any other internet-based system.
Phase 2 applications will include a Linux-based
conference server/MPLS/firewall appliance to support
campus videoconferencing and external Meetrix.com
communications, and a camera/mobile phone device
to provide both local (directly attached) and remote
(traveling) input via direct wireless uplink to the
network. $9 million of development spending and beta
testing by a former company also supports our effort. 
Market:
The market for real-time collaboration services is
huge ($9 billion) and growing quickly (+20% per year).
Videoconferencing is about 50% of the total, with both
data and audio conferencing delivering the remainder.
Competition:
The videoconferencing market is fragmented, with
over 25 companies providing various products and
services. However, none have the capability to
provide our service package of high quality, low cost,
multi-point videoconferencing over the internet with a
full suite of collaboration tools. Almost all video-
conferencing today is done through high cost
conference room equipment systems that are point-to-
point using expensive telephone circuits.
Distribution Channels:
Our customer acquisition activities will be managed by
a small direct sales team, supplemented by a
“reseller” network of broadband internet providers and
ASP/ISP companies. This will deliver us faster access
to companies that are already ongoing customers for
this network of providers, while also adding important
value to their own businesses.
Revenue Model:
Our Meetrix-hosted videoconferencing service is
provided to geographically dispersed businesses for
an unlimited monthly usage fee of $125 per user. Our
supplemental service for co-located campus
customers hosting their own services on a LAN will be
offered for a reduced monthly fee of $25 per user. 
Financial Estimates (Unaudited):
$Millions Yr. 1  Yr. 2  Yr. 3  Yr. 4  Yr. 5
Revenue 0.0  11.3  39.8 130.2  414.3
Op. Income (4.3) (3.2)  11.4  54.5  193.0
Margin --  --  29% 42% 47%
