Page 1
Enron
P.O.Box 1188
Houston, TX 77251-1188
CONFIDENTIAL DRAFT - 7/20/20  For Discussion Purposes Only
ENRON AND AT&T ANNOUNCE GLOBAL BANDWIDTH TRADING
JOINT VENTURE
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: XXXX, May X, 2001
HOUSTON -- Enron Broadband Services, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Enron Corp. 
(NYSE: ENE), and AT&T announced today that they have entered into a joint venture whose
purpose is to transform the nature of long haul bandwidth provisioning and pricing. 
Enron will contribute market-making and intermediation activities including risk
management, trading and ____ network interconnection locations and facilities in North
America, Europe and Asia. AT&T will contribute ____ interconnection locations worldwide and
a service agreement for local access in North America, Europe and Asia. In addition, AT&T will
provide a guaranteed back-up long haul service agreement and will take over ownership and
operation of Enron’s existing long haul network.
The venture will facilitate and accelerate the deployment of a liquid, transparent, real-
time market for long haul bandwidth capacity. In the future, carriers, enterprises and local
service providers will be able to instantaneously provision bandwidth at the lowest possible
price. 
“This agreement allows AT&T to focus its efforts on its dominant retail and business
franchise, while providing access to the absolute lowest cost bandwidth available,” said David
W. Dorman, president of AT&T. “In addition, the venture will allow AT&T to significantly
streamline its long distance network and reduce the costs and capital expenditures associated
with long haul network maintenance and upgrades.”
“The combination of AT&T local connectivity and data throughput should significantly
shorten the time frame for the development of open, competitive markets for bandwidth,” said
Jeffrey K. Skilling, CEO and president of Enron. “We believe that this effort will change the
entire structure of the long haul bandwidth market, leading to lower costs for consumers and
improved capital efficiency for the industry.” 
Page 2
About Enron
Enron Broadband Services is a leading provider of high quality, high bandwidth delivery
and application services. The company’s business model combines the power of the Enron
Intelligent Network, Enron’s Broadband Operating System, bandwidth trading and
intermediation services, and high-bandwidth applications to fundamentally improve the
experience and functionality of the Internet. Enron’s Broadband Operating System allows
application developers to dynamically provision bandwidth for the quality of service necessary to
deliver broadband content. Enron is also creating a market for bandwidth that will allow
network providers to scale to meet the demands required by increasingly complex applications. 
Enron Broadband Services can be found on the Web at [URL: "http://www.enron.net/"] www.enron.net.
Enron is one of the world’s leading electricity, natural gas and communications
companies. The company, with revenues of $101 billion in 2000, markets electricity and natural
gas, delivers physical commodities and financial and risk management services to customers
around the world, and has developed an intelligent network platform to facilitate online business.
Fortune magazine has named Enron “America’s Most Innovative Company” for six consecutive
years. Enron’s Internet address is www.enron.com. The stock is traded under the ticker symbol
“ENE.”
About AT&T
AT&T ([URL: "http://www.att.com/"] www.att.com) is among the world’s premier voice, video and data
communications companies, serving consumers, businesses and government. AT&T has annual
revenues of nearly $66 billion and 162,000 employees, and provides services to customers
worldwide. Backed by the research and development capabilities of AT&T Labs, the company
runs the world’s largest, most sophisticated communications network, is the largest cable
operator in the U.S., and has one of the largest digital wireless networks in North America. The
company is a leading supplier of data and Internet services for businesses and offers outsourcing,
consulting and networking-integration to large businesses. Concert, the AT&T/BT Global
Venture, serves the communications needs of multinational companies and international carriers
worldwide. In October 2000, AT&T announced a restructuring plan to create a family of four
businesses, each operating under the “AT&T” brand, committed to uniform standards of quality. 
###
