Page 2
Page 3
Page 4
Page 5
Page 6
Page 7
Page 8
Page 9
Page 10
Page 11
Page 12
Page 13
Page 14
Page 15
LEASE AGREEMENT
THIS LEASE AGREEMENT (this “Lease”) is entered into as of July 30, 2021, by
and between Roman Catholic Archbishop of Boston, a Corporation Sole, (“Landlord”) with
its principal office located at 66 Brooks Drive, Braintree, Massachusetts 02184-3439, acting on
behalf of St. Tarcisius Parish (“Parish”) located in Framingham, Massachusetts, and Brazilian
American Center, Inc., (“Tenant”) a Massachusetts not for profit corporation with its principal
office located at 562 Waverly Street, Framingham, Massachusetts 01702. 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual conditions and agreements and
covenants set forth herein, and for other good and valuable consideration, the adequacy and
sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, the parties hereto agree as follows: 
SECTION 1: REFERENCE DATA & DEFINITIONS: Each reference in this Lease to any of
the following subjects shall be construed to incorporate the data stated for that subject in this
Section 1: 
1.1  Landlord. Roman Catholic Archbishop of Boston, a
Corporation Sole. 
1.2  Landlord’s Address. 66 Brooks Drive
Braintree, Massachusetts 02184-3439
Attention: Chancellor’s Office
1.3  Tenant.  Brazilian American Center, Inc., a not-for-profit 
corporation. 
1.4  Tenant’s Address. 562 Waverly Street
Framingham, Massachusetts 01702
Attention: 
Telephone: 
Facsimile: 
Email: 
1.5  Premises. The land (“Land”) together with the building
thereon (“Building”) located at 560 Waverly Street, Framingham, Massachusetts, more
commonly known as the former St. Tarcisius School Building, all as further described in Section
2.1 hereof. 
1.6  Commencement Date. August 1, 2021. 
1.7  Term.  As defined in Section 2.2 hereof. 
1.8  Termination Date. September 30, 2022. 
Page 16
1.9  Lease Year.  “Lease Year” means each twelve consecutive month
period during the Term commencing on the Commencement Date and ending on the day
immediately preceding the anniversary of the Commencement Date. 
1.10 Annual Base Rent. 
Landlord as follows: 
“Annual Base Rent” means payments by Tenant to
Lease
Year
1 
Starting Date
August 1, 2021 
Ending Date
September 30, 2022 
Annual Rent
($)
$1.00
1.11 Rent. 
Additional Rent. 
“Rent” means the Annual Base Rent plus all
1.12 Additional Rent. “Additional Rent” means those additional amounts
payable to Landlord as provided throughout this Lease. 
1.13 Rent Payment Date. As defined in Section 3.1 hereof. 
1.14 Permitted Uses. “Permitted Uses” means use of the Premises as
more fully described in Section 7 hereof. 
SECTION 2: PREMISES & TERM. 
2.1  Premises. 
(a)  Lease Premises. Subject to the provisions of this Lease and all matters of 
public record, with the benefit, however, of Landlord’s covenant of quiet enjoyment in Section
9.2, Landlord hereby leases to Tenant, and Tenant leases from Landlord, the Premises, as
described in Exhibit A located at 560 Waverly Street, Framingham, Massachusetts. Nothing in
Exhibit A shall be treated as a representation that the Premises or the Building shall be precisely
as shown, it being the intention of the parties only to show diagrammatically, rather than
precisely, on Exhibit A the layout of the Premises and the Building. 
(b)  Condition of Premises. Tenant acknowledges that it has inspected the 
Premises and, by execution of this Lease, agrees to accept the Premises "as is." Tenant agrees
that Landlord has no obligation to perform any work whatsoever in order to prepare the Premises
for Tenant’s occupancy under this Lease. 
2.2  Term. The term of this Lease (the “Term”) shall be the period commencing on
the Commencement Date, at which time Landlord shall deliver full possession of the Premises to
Tenant, and ending on the Termination Date, unless sooner terminated in accordance with the
provisions of this Lease. 
Page 2 of 26 
Page 17
SECTION 3: RENT, INSURANCE, REAL ESTATE TAXES AND OTHER CHARGES; 
PAYMENT. 
3.1  Rent. Commencing on the Commencement Date, Tenant shall pay Rent
without any offset or reduction (except as made in accordance with the express provisions of this
Lease). 
3.2  Insurance, Real Estate Taxes & Other Charges. 
(a) Tenant Insurance. Tenant shall, at Tenant’s sole cost and expense, procure and 
maintain in full force and effect, throughout the Term of this Lease, and thereafter so long as
Tenant is in occupancy of any part of the Premises, the following policies of insurance issued by
companies domiciled in the United States and qualified and licensed to conduct business in The
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and shall be rated A+ (A Plus) or better in the most current
issue of Best’s Key Rating Guide (or any successor thereto): (1) policies of comprehensive
general liability insurance and casualty/property insurance (including broad form comprehensive
liability coverage to cover any liabilities assumed under this Lease, insuring against all claims
for injury to or death of persons or damage to property on or about the Premises or arising out of
the use of the Premises, products liability sexual misconduct liability and completed operations
liability) with initial limits of $1,000,000 each occurrence and $2,000,000 in the aggregate
(combined single limit) for property damage, bodily injury or death or such greater amounts as
Landlord in its reasonable discretion shall from time to time request, under which Tenant is
named as an insured and Landlord, and, at Landlord’s request, Landlord’s property manager, any
mortgagee, and such other persons as Landlord reasonably may request are named as additional
insureds; (2) medical payment insurance with limits of $5,000.00 each person and $25,000 per
occurrence, under which Tenant is named as an insured and Landlord is named as an additional
insured, (3) special form (formerly known as “all-risk”) property insurance on a “replacement
cost” basis, insuring Tenant’s Property (as defined in Section 11.8, herein) and any
Improvements (as defined in Section 8, herein), which such insurance on the Improvements
naming Landlord, and, at Landlord’s request, Landlord’s mortgagee (if any) as additional
insureds to the extent of their interest in the same; (4) workers’ compensation insurance with
statutory limits, (5) employer’s liability insurance with the following limits: bodily injury by
disease per person $1,000,000.00; bodily injury by accident policy limit $1,000,000.00; bodily
injury by disease policy limit $1,000,000.00, (6) business automobile liability insurance
including owned, hired and non-owned automobiles, in an amount not less than One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit per occurrence, with such commercially reasonable
increases as Landlord may require from time to time, and (7) business interruption insurance
insuring interruption or stoppage of Tenant’s business at the Premises for a period of not less
than twelve (12) months. Tenant may satisfy such insurance requirements by including the
Premises in a so-called “blanket” and/or “umbrella” insurance policy, provided that the amount
of coverage allocated to the Premises is pursuant to a “per location” endorsement and shall
otherwise fulfill the requirements set forth herein. Tenant’s insurance policies shall not include
deductibles in excess of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00).
Such policies shall cover the use and occupancy of the Premises and all operations and activities
conducted at, on or from the Premises by Tenant, its agents, employees, servants or invitees and
shall include reasonable and customary deductibles. Tenant’s insurance shall be primary to, and
Page 3 of 26 
Page 18
not contributory with, any insurance carried by Landlord, whose insurance shall be considered
excess only. Each such policy shall name Tenant as a named insured and each liability policy
described in the immediately preceding clauses shall name Landlord as an additional insured and
shall provide that (i) the foregoing policies must not be canceled and that the aforesaid limits not
be reduced without at least thirty (30) days’ prior written notice to Landlord and its designees, 
and (ii) said policies will provide that the interests of Landlord and its designees there under or
therein will not be affected by any breach by Tenant of any policy provision. 
Evidence of these policies, in the form of insurance certificates reasonably satisfactory to
Landlord, must be submitted to Landlord no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the
Commencement Date and fifteen (15) days prior to the commencement of any Improvements by
Tenant. Tenant shall cause a current and valid certificate of insurance to be deposited with
Landlord at all times during the Term. If Tenant fails to have a current and valid certificate on
deposit with Landlord and such failure is not cured within seven (7) days following Tenant’s
receipt of notice thereof from Landlord, Landlord shall have the right, but not the obligation, to
obtain such an insurance policy, and Tenant shall be obligated to pay Landlord the amount of the
premiums applicable to such insurance within fifteen (15) days after Tenant’s receipt of
Landlord’s request for payment thereof (such amounts to be deemed Additional Rent hereunder).
Landlord shall have the right from time to time to increase such minimum limits upon notice to
Tenant provided that any such increase shall be consistent with coverages being carried on like
property with a similar use in the greater Boston area. 
(b) Landlord Insurance. Landlord shall, at Tenant’s sole cost and expense (such cost and 
expense to constitute Additional Rent), procure and maintain during the Term hereof, with
reputable insurers meeting at least the standards set forth above for Tenant’s insurance: (i) 
insurance against loss of, or damage to, the Building (said insurance now known as "Special
Form" or "Special Extended Coverage" (formerly known as “All Risks”) which policy will
contain a 100% Replacement Cost endorsement and an Equipment Breakdown Coverage
endorsement; and (ii) a commercial general liability insurance with limits similar to those carried
by landlords of similar buildings with similar uses with minimum limits at least matching those
limits required to be carried by Tenant hereunder, which policies shall contain reasonable and
customary deductibles. Upon receipt by Landlord of any notice of cancellation or any other
notice from the issuers of Landlord's policies required to be carried hereunder, Landlord shall
promptly deliver to Tenant a copy of such notice. Landlord in the exercise of Landlord’s
reasonable discretion shall from time to time during the Term increase the limits of its policies to
the limits that are then customarily being required by landlords being carried on like property
with a similar use in the greater Boston area. Landlord shall submit to Tenant an invoice for the
cost of said insurance set forth in this Section 3.2(b) and Tenant shall reimburse Landlord for the
cost of the same within thirty (30) days. 
(c)  Waiver of Subrogation. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, 
Landlord and Tenant each hereby waives any and all rights of recovery, claim, action, or cause
of action against the other, its agents, employees, licensees, or invitees for any loss or damage to
or at the Premises or any personal property of such party therein or thereon by reason of fire, the
elements, or any other cause which is covered by insurance, regardless of cause or origin, 
including omission of the other party hereto, its agents, employees, licensees, or invitees. The
Page 4 of 26 
Page 19
parties hereto agree that all such insurance policies required to be carried by either party shall be
endorsed with a waiver of subrogation clause permitting such waiver without invalidating the
insurance. 
(d) Tenant’s Risk. Tenant agrees to use and occupy the Premises and to use such other 
portions of the property owned by Landlord as Tenant is herein given the right to use at Tenant’s
own risk and Tenant assumes liability for any and all injury, loss or damage to any person or
property on the Premises or other such property, unless due to the negligence or willful
misconduct of Landlord or Landlord’s agents, contractors, employees or invitees, whether
covered by insurance or not subject to the waiver of subrogation set forth herein. Landlord shall
not be liable to Tenant, its employees, agents, invitees or contractors for any damage, injury, 
loss, compensation, or claim (including, but not limited to, claims for the interruption of or loss
to Tenant’s business) based on, arising out of or resulting from any cause whatsoever, unless due
to the negligence or willful misconduct of Landlord or Landlord’s agents, contractors or
employees. Any goods, property or personal effects stored or placed in or about the Premises
shall be at the sole risk of Tenant, and neither Landlord nor Landlord’s insurers shall in any
manner be held responsible therefor. Except to the extent of the negligence or willful
misconduct of Landlord or Landlord’s agents, contractors or employees, Landlord shall not be
responsible or liable to Tenant, or to those claiming by, through or under Tenant, for any loss or
damage that may be occasioned by or through the acts or omissions of persons occupying
adjoining premises or any part of the premises adjacent to or connecting with the Premises or any
part of the other property owned by the Landlord or otherwise. The provisions of this Section
3.2(d) shall be applicable from and after the execution of this Lease and until the end of the Term
of this Lease, and during any additional period as Tenant may use or be in occupancy of any part
of the Premises or of the Building. 
(e) Tenant’s Other Liability. Subject to Section 3.2(c) and Section 12, Tenant further 
covenants and agrees to restore, repair and replace any fixtures or equipment of Landlord on the
Premises which may be lost, damaged or destroyed during the Term of this Lease, except to the
extent of ordinary wear and tear or the negligence or willful misconduct of Landlord or
Landlord’s agents, contractors or employees. Tenant shall have the right to use during the Term
(but not be required to restore, repair or replace) any furniture of Landlord located on the
Premises on the Commencement Date. 
(f) Taxes, Levies and Charges. Real estate taxes and all other government levies and 
charges, general and special, foreseen and unforeseen, assessed against or levied on the Premises
or any betterments and attributable in whole or in part to the Term of the Lease with respect to
the Premises, to the extent there are any, shall be imputed to the Tenant. Landlord shall present
to Tenant copies of the statements for such real estate taxes and all other government levies and
charges promptly after they are received. Tenant shall pay to Landlord, as Additional Rent, an
amount equal to the full amount due under such statements on the Rent Payment Date next
preceding the date on which such amount is due and payable in accordance with such statements. 
If Tenant desires to have proceedings instituted for an abatement of any real estate taxes or other
such levies or charges upon the Premises and so requests in writing, Landlord, at Tenant’s cost
and expense, may institute such proceedings; if Landlord does not institute such proceedings, 
Tenant shall have the right to do so, in which case Landlord shall cooperate with Tenant’s efforts
Page 5 of 26 
Page 20
in connection therewith. If Landlord declines to institute proceedings, Tenant may do so in the
name of Landlord; provided, however, in any event, that all costs of such proceeding shall be
borne by Tenant. If any abatement is received in accordance with the provisions of this Section
3.2(f), the proceeds thereof, to the extent they represent payments actually made by Tenant to
Landlord in accordance with this Section 3.2(f), shall be distributed to Tenant. All remaining
proceeds shall be paid to Landlord. Nothing herein shall prevent Landlord, on its own volition, 
from applying for an abatement of said real estate taxes, levies or charges. Landlord represents
as of the date hereof that there are no real estate taxes assessed against the Premises or otherwise
payable by Landlord. 
SECTION 4: PAYMENTS
4.1  Payments Accepted. All payments of Annual Base Rent and Additional Rent
shall be made payable to St. Tarcisius Parish and delivered to the Parish at the address provided
in Section 14.1 by check, by wire transfer of immediately available funds or by direct deposit in
accordance with account information supplied by Landlord (the “Account”), or to such other
person as Landlord may from time to time designate in writing. All payments to be made
hereunder shall be deemed paid when received in the Account as determined by the banking
institution at which the Account is maintained. 
4.2  Late Payments and Fees. If Tenant pays any installment of Annual Base Rent
or Additional Rent more than ten (10) calendar days after notice that the same is delinquent, then
Tenant shall pay to Landlord as Additional Rent a late payment charge of two and one-half
percent (2.5%) of such overdue amount, which will be due and payable on the next succeeding
Rent Payment Date; provided, however, such late charge and any interest pursuant to Section 4.4
below shall be waived if Tenant makes payment of the amount past due within ten (10) days of
receipt of notice. 
4.3  Default Interest. Any Annual Base Rent, Additional Rent or any other
amounts due and payable under this Lease that have not been paid within thirty (30) calendar
days of the due date thereof will bear interest from the original due date until paid in full at an
annual rate equal to the prime rate as announced from time to time in the Wall Street Journal, or
if the Wall Street Journal shall no longer exist any comparable financial publication, plus three
percent (3%) (“Default Rate”), which will be due and payable as Additional Rent. Such amounts
will accrue on a daily basis. 
SECTION 5: SECURITY DEPOSIT. 
[This Section omitted intentionally] 
SECTION 6: UTILITIES; CERTAIN OTHER CHARGES. 
Tenant shall pay for all heating, air conditioning and utility costs associated with the
Premises, including but not limited to gas, oil, electricity, water and sewer, cable, telephone or
other such charges. Tenant is solely responsible for selecting the provider of utilities to the
Premises provided Tenant restores the original utility providers at the termination of this Lease at
its own cost and expense unless waived in writing by the Landlord. To the extent any such
Page 6 of 26 
Page 21
payments to be made by Tenant described in this Section 6 are billed directly to Tenant, Tenant
will make each such payment in a timely fashion directly to the vendor/supplier and in a manner
so as to avoid any liens on the Premises. To the extent any such payments to be made by Tenant
described in this Section 6 are billed directly to Landlord, Tenant will make each such payment
to Landlord as Additional Rent hereunder within the later of twenty (20) days after given notice
of the bill or on or before the next Rent Payment due hereunder. 
SECTION 7: PERMITTED USES
7.1  Operations. Excepting those times reserved to Landlord in Section 7.2 herein, 
Tenant shall have exclusive use the Premises solely for the purposes of operating as center for
the education, benefit and welfare of Brazilian immigrants and in accordance with the terms and
conditions of Section 11.4 of this Lease (the “Permitted Uses”). Tenant shall not use the
Premises for any other purposes or in any way which could reasonably be considered to cause
discomfort or annoyance to Landlord. It is expressly agreed and understood by and between
Landlord and Tenant that only Tenant has the use, as set forth in this Lease, of the Premises
leased hereunder for the purposes and uses herein stated and Tenant shall not use the Premises in
any other manner. 
7.2  Landlord’s Use of the Premises. Tenant agrees that Landlord shall have the
right to use, without the payment of any rent to Tenant by Landlord, those portions of the
Premises it needs to conduct Parish meetings and religious education classes. If Landlord uses
the Premises pursuant to this Section 7.2, then Landlord shall be responsible for ensuring that
such portions of the Premises following the conclusion of any such use are left in good and clean
condition. 
7.3  Notwithstanding anything in this Lease to the contrary, it is understood and
agreed by Landlord and Tenant that Tenant’s use of the Premises will at all times be consistent
with the teaching of the Roman Catholic Church as enunciated by the Holy Father and the
Bishops in communion with him. In this regard, the Landlord and Tenant shall rely on, and defer
to, the teaching authority of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Boston. 
SECTION 8: IMPROVEMENTS
8.1  During the Term of this Lease, neither Landlord nor Tenant is obliged by this
Lease to make any repairs, replacements, modifications, improvements, alterations or additions
of any nature (“Improvements”), other than those specifically provided in this Lease. 
8.2  Tenant Necessary Improvements. Tenant shall make all essential non-
structural interior repairs to the Premises necessitated by Tenant’s occupancy at Tenant’s own
expense and shall keep the Premises in the same (or better) condition and repair as existing on
the Commencement Date, excepting only ordinary wear and tear, damage caused by fire and
other casualty and repairs for which Landlord is expressly responsible under this Lease. 
8.3  Other Improvements. Except with respect to necessary repairs for which
Tenant is obligated to perform under Section 8.2, Tenant shall make no Improvements to the
Page 7 of 26 
Page 22
Premises without the prior written consent of Landlord, which consent will not be unreasonably
withheld, conditioned or delayed. All such Improvements will be made solely at Tenant’s cost
and expense (which Tenant agrees to pay promptly when due) and must be performed in
accordance with plans and specifications approved in writing by Landlord, which consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed, prior to being commenced. All such
Improvements will be performed in such manner, and by such persons as will not cause any
damage to the Premises. Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, such work will be
performed by general contractors first approved by Landlord. Tenant shall secure and pay for all
licenses and permits necessary for any of the foregoing Improvements, it being agreed that
Landlord, at Tenant’s cost and expense, shall reasonably cooperate and assist Tenant to the
extent necessary in connection with obtaining any such licenses or permits. Before any
Improvements requiring Landlord’s consent are started, Tenant shall deliver to Landlord a
statement of the names of all its contractors (as previously approved by Landlord) and the
estimated cost of all labor and material to be furnished by them. Tenant shall cause each
contractor to carry (i) workmen's compensation insurance in statutory amounts covering all the
contractor's and subcontractor's employees and (ii) comprehensive public liability insurance with
such limits as Landlord may reasonably require, but in no event less than a combined single limit
of $1,000,000 (all such insurance insuring Landlord and Tenant as well as the contractors), and, 
upon request by Landlord, to deliver to Landlord certificates of all such insurance. Landlord
agrees to cooperate, at Tenant’s sole cost and expense, with Tenant’s applications for building, 
zoning and construction permits and approvals, including without limitation by executing permit
applications if so required, provided that Tenant pays any costs incurred by Landlord in
connection therewith. To the extent any improvements/work by Tenant causes Landlord to make
required improvements or expenditures to the Premises in accordance with any federal, state or
municipal laws, regulations or ordinances said improvements or expenditures shall be performed
by Tenant at Tenant’s sole cost and expense. 
8.4  Disposition of Improvements – End of Term. If any Improvements are
consented to as provided in Section 8.3, Tenant shall, if Landlord notifies Tenant in writing at
the time Landlord approves of an Improvement, at the end of the Term remove the same and
restore the Premises to the condition and state of construction and arrangement in which they
were at prior to the installation thereof, ordinary wear and tear, damage by fire and casualty only
excepted (other than to the extent that such casualty is caused by Tenant, its agents, servants, 
employees and invitees).  Landlord may, at its discretion, waive this requirement in writing upon
written request from Tenant. 
SECTION 9: LANDLORD'S COVENANTS DURING THE TERM
9.1  Landlord covenants during the Term or until earlier termination of this Lease, 
in each case except for any of the following matters resulting from or arising from the
negligence, intentional acts or willful misconduct of Tenant, its agents, servants, employees, 
contractors and invitees :
(a)  to maintain, repair, and replace as necessary, all structural elements of 
the Building and the Premises and the common areas providing access to and egress from the
Premises including, without limitation, the roof, the foundation, all load bearing walls and floor
Page 8 of 26 
Page 23
slabs of the Building and the Premises. Landlord shall be responsible to replace the boiler
serving the Premises during the Term of this Lease if necessary, otherwise Tenant shall maintain
and repair the boiler as set forth in Section 11.2 herein; 
(b)  to maintain in good order and repair all electrical, mechanical, 
plumbing, fire/life safety and mechanical systems serving the Premises; 
(c)  to repair, replace, and maintain as necessary all asphalt, brick and 
concrete and other areas of the sidewalks and facade of the Building, and exterior and interior
common area lighting; 
(d)  to provide and maintain adequate connections with local water supply, 
sewerage systems, electrical and other utilities; and 
and snow. 
(e)  to keep the parking area and access to the Premises free and clear of ice
9.2  Quiet Enjoyment. Tenant, on paying the Rent and performing its obligations
hereunder, shall peacefully and quietly have, hold, and enjoy the full possession and the use of
the Premises throughout the Term. The foregoing covenant of quiet enjoyment is in lieu of any
other covenant, express or implied. 
SECTION 10:  INTERRUPTIONS
10.1 Except to the extent resulting from or arising from the negligence, intentional
acts or willful misconduct of Landlord, its agents, employees or contractors, Landlord will not
have any liability for (a) any power losses, shortages, or any other interruption in the provision of
any utilities, (b) Landlord's entering the Premises for any of the purposes authorized in this
Lease, or (c) repairing the Premises or any part thereof to the extent permitted in this Lease
provided, however, that with respect to (b) and (c) above, Landlord shall use reasonable efforts
to not interfere with Tenant’s use of the Premises. In case Landlord is prevented or delayed from
making any Improvements, or furnishing any service or performing any other covenant or duty
to be performed on Landlord's part, by reason of any cause beyond Landlord's reasonable
control, Landlord shall not be liable to Tenant therefor, nor, except as expressly otherwise
provided in this Section 10 or in Section 12, shall Tenant be entitled to any abatement or
reduction of Rent by reason thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Landlord agrees to use
reasonable efforts to restore any service which has been interrupted as soon as is reasonably
practicable. 
10.2 Landlord reserves the right to stop any service or utility system when
necessary by reason of accident or emergency or until necessary repairs have been completed. 
Except in case of emergency repairs, Landlord will give Tenant reasonable advance notice of any
contemplated stoppage and will use its commercially reasonable efforts and all reasonable
diligence to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to Tenant by reason thereof. 
Page 9 of 26 
Page 24
10.3 Notwithstanding the foregoing, if as a result of negligence of Landlord, the
Premises are rendered untenantable to such an extent that Tenant is unable to, and does not
actually, occupy and use the Premises or a portion thereof for the operation of its business, and if
such problem continues for a period in excess of two (2) consecutive business days, Tenant, shall
be entitled to an abatement for Rent to the extent such Rent is attributable to both the portion of
the Premises rendered unfit for use and the period for which it is unfit. 
SECTION 11:  TENANT'S COVENANTS DURING THE TERM. 
Without limiting any other covenant of Tenant under this Lease, Tenant covenants, during the
Term and such further time as Tenant occupies any part of the Premises: 
11.1 Tenant's Payments. To pay when due (a) all Rent; (b) all taxes which may be
imposed on Tenant's personal property in the Premises (including, without limitation, Tenant's
fixtures and equipment) regardless to whomever assessed, and (c) all other payments required to
be made by Tenant under this Lease. 
11.2 Boiler, Exterior Maintenance and Repair. Except as otherwise provided in
Section 9 and Section 12 hereof, to perform, at its sole cost and expense, all maintenance and 
repair of the mechanical systems serving the Premises, including, without limitation, all
plumbing fixtures, heating systems, and all windows and doors located within and exclusively
serving the Premises necessary to keep the Premises in good order, repair and condition, 
reasonable wear and tear, casualty and condemnation only excepted. Tenant shall also obtain
and maintain a service contract for the boiler both located in and exclusively serving the
Premises with the cost and expense of said service contract to be borne by Tenant, it being
agreed, however, that Tenant shall have no obligation for the costs to replace such boiler which, 
if necessary, is solely Landlord’s obligation pursuant to Section 9 hereof. 
11.3 Yielding Up. At the expiration or termination of this Lease, to peaceably
yield up the Premises, and all alterations and additions therein, in good order, repair and
condition, excepting only reasonable wear and tear, casualty and condemnation and Landlord’s
repair obligations. Prior to yielding up the Premises, Tenant shall remove all goods and effects
of Tenant and all of Tenant's Property (as defined in Section 11.9) and shall repair all damage
caused by such removal and shall leave the Premises in broom clean condition. 
11.4 Occupancy and Use. 
(a) To use and occupy the Premises only for the Permitted Uses; 
(b) not to injure or deface the Premises; 
(c) not to use or permit any use of the Premises which will (i) make 
voidable the insurance covering the Building or its contents, or (ii) increase the premiums for any
insurance on the Building or on the contents of the Premises (Tenant hereby agreeing that if such
premiums are increased Tenant shall reimburse Landlord for the costs of all such increased
Page 10 of 26 
Page 25
insurance premiums caused by Tenant’s use of the Premises and all such amounts will constitute
Additional Rent and will accrue immediately);
(d) not to dump, flush, or in any way introduce any hazardous substance 
or any other toxic substances into the sewage, or other waste disposal system serving the
Premises; not to generate, store or dispose of hazardous substances in or on the Premises
(excluding normal office and cleaning supplies and use and storage of Tenant's educational
supplies including materials commonly used in middle school and high school science classes, 
without first submitting to Landlord a list of all such hazardous substances and all permits
required therefor and thereafter providing to Landlord on an annual basis Tenant's certification
that all such permits have been renewed with copies of such renewed permits) or dispose of
hazardous substances from the Premises to any other location without the prior written consent
of Landlord and then only in compliance with the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of
1976, as amended 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management
Act, G.L. c. 21C, as amended, the Massachusetts Oil and Hazardous Material Release Prevention
and Response Act, G.L. c. 21E, as amended, and all other applicable laws, ordinances, and
regulations; 
(e) If the transportation, storage, use or disposal of any hazardous 
substances by Tenant anywhere on the Premises or the Building results in (i) contamination of
the soil or surface or ground water or (ii) loss or damage to person(s) or property, then Tenant
agrees (1) to notify Landlord immediately of any contamination, claim of contamination, loss or
damage, (2) after consultation with and approval by Landlord, to clean up all contamination in
full compliance with all applicable statutes, regulations and standards, and (3) to indemnify, 
defend, and hold Landlord harmless from and against any claims, suits, causes of action, costs
and fees, including, without limitation, attorneys’ fees, arising from or connected with any such
contamination, claim of contamination, loss or damage, Tenant hereby agreeing that this
provision shall survive the termination of this Lease and that no consent or approval of Landlord
shall in any way be construed as imposing upon Landlord any liability for the means, methods, 
or manner of removal, containment, or other compliance with applicable law for and with respect
to hazardous substances introduced to the Premises by Tenant and that it is the specific intent and
purpose hereof to ensure that Tenant takes no actions on or at the Premises that would result in
either the Premises or Tenant's activities therein failing to comply with any applicable
governmental orders or regulations. ("hazardous substances" shall have the meaning as defined
in the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as
amended, 42 U.S.C. §9601 and regulations adopted pursuant to said Act);
(f) to notify Landlord of any incident which would require filing of a
notice under applicable federal, state, or local law; and
(g) without limiting its obligations pursuant to Sections 7 or 8, 
(i) to conduct its operations under this Lease in strict compliance with, and not to permit any use
or activity contrary to, the laws of the United States (including, without limitation, Title III of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, if applicable to Tenant’s use of the Premises), the
laws of The Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the ordinances, standards, rules, and
requirements, if any, established by the City of Framingham or any other state or municipal
Page 11 of 26 
Page 26
agency having jurisdiction; (ii) to comply with the orders and regulations of all governmental
authorities with respect to zoning, building, fire, health and other codes, regulations, ordinances
or laws applicable to the Premises and not to be contrary to any codes or standards from time to
time established by the National Fire Protection Association (or any successor organization); (iii) 
to make, at its sole cost and expense, all Improvements to the Premises required by such codes, 
regulations, ordinances, or laws as a result of Tenant’s use of the Premises; (iv) to keep the
Premises equipped with all safety appliances so required; and (v) at Tenant’s sole cost and
expense, to procure and pay for all licenses, certificates, and permits necessary for the conduct of
its operations hereunder and its occupancy of the Premises (including, without limitation, 
payment for any Improvements to the Premises of any nature which are necessary in order to
obtain and maintain all such licenses, certificates, and permits).
11.5 To: 
(a) keep the inside and outside of all glass windows in the doors and 
windows of the Premises reasonably clean; 
(b) replace promptly any cracked or broken glass of the Premises with
glass of like kind and quality; 
(c) maintain the Premises in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition; 
(d) keep any garbage, trash, rubbish or other refuse in vermin-proof 
containers within the interior of the Premises until removed (and Tenant shall cause the Premises
to be inspected and exterminated on a regular basis by a reputable, licensed exterminator and
shall provide Landlord, on request, with a copy of Tenant’s contract for such services); and
(e) keep all mechanical apparatus free of vibration and loud noise
which may be transmitted beyond the Premises. 
11.6 To not: 
(a) place or maintain any trash, refuse or other articles in any vestibule or 
entry of the Premises, on the sidewalks or corridors adjacent thereto or elsewhere on the exterior
of the Premises so as to obstruct any corridor, stairway, sidewalk or common area; 
(b) permit undue accumulations of or burn garbage, trash, rubbish or 
other refuse within or without the Premises; 
(c) cause or permit objectionable odors to emanate or to be dispelled 
from the Premises; or
(d) commit, or suffer to be committed, any waste upon the Premises or
any public or private nuisance or other act. 
Page 12 of 26 
Page 27
11.7 Rules and Regulations. To comply with rules and regulations, as may be
reasonably promulgated in good faith and in writing from time to time by Landlord, for the care
and use of the Premises and their facilities and approaches and provided such rules and
regulations do not unreasonably interfere with the Tenant's use and enjoyment of the Premises or
impose any additional costs on Tenant and are not applied or enforced in a discriminatory
manner. 
11.8 Landlord’s Right of Entry. To permit Landlord and Landlord’s agents, 
contractors, and employees entry: (a) upon reasonable notice (except no notice is required in the
event of any emergency), and at reasonable times, to make repairs, alternations or substitutions
for the protection and maintenance of the Building or Premises or any part thereof which are
required or permitted to be made by Landlord hereunder; (ii) to examine the Premises upon
reasonable notice (except no notice is required in the event of any emergency), at reasonable
times in the company of a Tenant representative; (iii) upon not less than five (5) calendar days’ 
prior notice, to remove, at Tenant’s expense, any Improvements, signs, shades, awnings, aerials, 
flagpoles, or the like required to be approved by and not approved by Landlord; and (iv) to show
the Premises to prospective tenants during the six (6) months preceding the expiration of the
Term and to any prospective mortgagees at all reasonable times upon written notice to Tenant. 
11.9 Tenant's Property. All the furnishings, fixtures, furniture, equipment, 
inventory, effects and property of every kind, nature and description of Tenant and of all persons
claiming by, through or under Tenant which may be on the Premises during the Term of this
Lease or any occupancy of the Premises by Tenant or anyone claiming under Tenant, as well as
all property that may be brought to the Premises by Tenant (“Tenant’s Property”), will remain
the personal property of Tenant or such other person and will be at the sole risk and hazard of
Tenant (except as otherwise provided herein), and if the whole or any part thereof is destroyed or
damaged by fire, water or otherwise, or by the leakage or bursting of water pipes, steam pipes, or
other pipes, by theft, or from any other cause or in any other way or manner, no part of said loss
or damage is to be charged to or to be borne by Landlord in any case whatsoever unless and to
the extent, subject to the provisions of Section 14.21 hereof, due to the negligence, intentional
acts or willful misconduct of Landlord, its employees, agents, contractors or other
representatives. 
11.10 Security. To provide, at all times and under all circumstances during the
Term of this Lease, adequate security to the Premises and its own personnel, provided however, 
that Tenant may, but shall not be obligated to, hire a commercial security company. 
11.11 Labor or Materials Liens. To pay promptly when due the entire cost of any
work done on the Premises by Tenant, its agents, employees, or independent contractors, unless
Tenant is disputing such items in good faith; not to cause or permit any liens for labor or
materials performed or furnished in connection therewith to attach to the Premises; and to
discharge or bond off any such liens which may so attach within thirty (30) calendar days of
notice of the same. 
11.12 Holdover. To vacate the Premises immediately upon the expiration or sooner
termination of this Lease. If Tenant retains possession of the Premises or any part thereof after
Page 13 of 26 
Page 28
the expiration or termination of the Term without Landlord’s express prior written consent, 
Tenant shall pay Landlord Annual Base Rent at 150% of the then monthly market rate for rental
property in the Framingham area for the time Tenant thus remains in possession and, in addition
thereto, shall pay Landlord for all damages sustained by reason of Tenant’s retention of
possession. The provisions of this Section 11.12 do not exclude or be deemed to constitute a
waiver of Landlord’s rights of re-entry or any other right hereunder, including, without
limitation, the right to refuse 150% the monthly Annual Base Rent and instead to remove Tenant
through summary proceedings for holding over beyond the expiration of the Term of this Lease. 
Such holding over shall not be deemed to create any tenancy, but Tenant shall be a tenant at
sufferance only. 
11.13 Signs. Subject to the Landlord’s prior approval and written consent, the
Tenant my erect signs on the exterior of the Building. Tenant agrees to remove all such signs
upon the termination of this Lease and restore the area where such signs were placed to their
original condition, ordinary wear and tear excepted. 
11.14 No Transfers. Not to assign, sublet, underlet, mortgage, pledge or encumber
all or any part of the Lease or any of Tenant’s rights or obligations hereunder except with the
approval of the Landlord at its sole discretion. 
11.15 Indemnity. 
(a) Except to the extent arising from the negligence or willful 
misconduct of Landlord or its agents, contractors, employees or invitees, to defend, with counsel
approved by Landlord, all actions against Landlord, any trustee, manager, member, beneficiary, 
agent, employee, representative or any other affiliate of Landlord (collectively, "Landlord
Indemnified Parties"), and to pay, protect, indemnify and save harmless all Landlord Indemnified
Parties from and against any and all liabilities, losses, damages, costs, expenses (including
reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses), causes of action, suits, claims, demands or judgments
of any nature owed to or asserted by any third party arising from or related to (a) injury to or
death of any person, or damage to or loss of property, occurring in or on the Premises during
Tenant’s occupancy thereof or connected with the use, condition, or occupancy by Tenant of any
part thereof, unless caused by the negligence or willful misconduct of Landlord or its servants, 
employees, agents or invitees; (b) violation of any of the provisions of this Lease by Tenant; (c) 
any act, fault, omission, or other misconduct of Tenant or its agents, employees, representatives, 
contractors, licensees, invitees, assignees or sublessees; (d) any violation by Tenant of any
federal, state, or local statute, ordinance, or bylaw, including, without limiting the generality of
the foregoing, any violation of Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act arising from or
related to this Lease; (e) any charges assessed under state, local, and federal statutes and
ordinances governing the use, occupancy, or both, of the Premises by Tenant; or (f) Tenant’s use
and occupancy of the Premises. 
(b) To indemnify Landlord for all reasonable costs and expenses actually
incurred by Landlord in connection with the successful enforcement of the terms and provisions
of this Lease. 
Page 14 of 26 
Page 29
This Section 11.15 will survive expiration or earlier termination of this Lease. 
11.16 Cleaning, etc. The cleaning of the Premises shall be the sole responsibility
and at the sole cost and expense of the Tenant. Tenant shall at its sole cost and expense provide
such cleaning, janitorial, and maintenance services of the Premises as may be reasonably
required including, but not limited to, trash removal. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Landlord
shall be responsible for any cleaning of the Premises with respect to the Landlord’s use of the
Premises pursuant to Section 7.2 herein. 
11.17 Pets. No pets shall be allowed on or in the Premises, except in the case of
service animals and animals commonly used in science classes (e.g. fish, reptiles, small rodents
and frogs).
SECTION 12:  DAMAGE; DESTRUCTION; CONDEMNATION
12.1 Fire or other casualty. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of Section 12.1(b) hereof, in the event during
the Term hereof any portion of the Building or Premises shall be partially damaged (as
distinguished from "Substantially Damaged" as such term is hereinafter defined) by fire, 
explosion, casualty or any other occurrence covered or as may be required to be covered by
Landlord's insurance as herein provided; Landlord shall forthwith proceed to repair such damage
and restore the Premises (including the Building) but exclusive of Tenant’s Property and
leasehold improvements installed by Tenant, to substantially its condition at the time of such fire, 
explosion, casualty or occurrence. Landlord shall not be responsible for any delay which may
result from any cause beyond Landlord's reasonable control; provided, however, Tenant shall be
entitled to terminate this Lease if Landlord, for any reason, shall fail to restore the Building and
the Premises to their condition prior to such fire or other casualty within 120 days of the date of
such fire or other casualty. 
(b)  In the event of a casualty which renders the Building or the Premises
unfit for use or occupancy by Tenant, then Landlord will make a determination in its reasonable
judgment as to whether or not Landlord, using its reasonable efforts, and proceeding diligently, 
can repair or restore the Building or Premises (exclusive of Tenant’s Property and Improvements
installed by Tenant) to their condition prior to said casualty within a period of one hundred
twenty (120) days from the date of such casualty. Within thirty (30) days of any such casualty, 
Landlord shall provide Tenant notice of its intent to repair or restore the Building or Premises to
their condition prior to such casualty within such one hundred twenty (120)-day period. If, 
however, Landlord, exercising its reasonable judgment, determines that said repair or restoration
cannot be completed within a period of one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of such
casualty (in which case the Building and Premises shall be deemed to be “Substantially
Damaged”), then either Landlord or Tenant, upon ten (10) calendar days’ prior notice, may
terminate this Lease without further obligation on either party's part, except for the return of the
Security Deposit and any pre-paid Rent, pro-rated to the time of the casualty. If this Lease is not
terminated pursuant to the terms of this Section 12.1(b), then Landlord shall perform such repairs
set forth in Section 12.1(c) hereof and Tenant shall perform such repairs as set forth in Section
Page 15 of 26 
Page 30
12.1(d) hereof and the Term shall continue without interruption and this Lease shall remain in
full force and effect, except as otherwise expressly provided herein. 
(c)  If this Lease is not terminated pursuant to the terms of Section 12.1(b) 
hereof and if Tenant is not then in default of any of its obligations under this Lease beyond any
applicable notice and cure period provided for herein, Landlord shall, provided the mortgagee of
the Building, if any, makes insurance proceeds available for restoration, restore the Building and
Premises to their condition prior to such fire or other casualty using such insurance proceeds
only (it being understood by Tenant that Landlord shall not be responsible for any of Tenant’s
personal property, fixtures or equipment, which shall be the sole responsibility of Tenant), but
Landlord shall not be responsible for any delays which may result from any cause beyond
Landlord's reasonable control. If, for any reason, the repairs and restoration are not completed
within said period of one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of such casualty, then, at any
time thereafter, Tenant may terminate the Lease at its sole election. 
(d)  If this Lease is not terminated as provided in Section 12.1(b) hereof, 
Tenant shall, at its own cost and expense, following Landlord’s repair, replace its fixtures, 
furnishings and equipment. 
(e)  All proceeds payable from Landlord's insurance policies with respect to
the Building and Premises shall belong to and shall be payable to Landlord. If this Lease is not
terminated as provided in Section 12.1(b) hereof, Landlord shall disburse and apply so much of
any insurance recovery as shall be necessary against the cost to Landlord of restoration and
reconstruction of the Building and Premises referred to in Section 12.1(c) hereof, subject to the
rights of any holder of any mortgage liens against the Building. 
(f)  In the event that the provisions of Section 12.1(a) or Section 12.1(b) shall 
become applicable, the Annual Base Rent and Additional Rent will be abated or reduced
proportionately during any period in which Tenant may be required to discontinue in whole or in
part its business on the Premises, and such abatement or reduction will continue for the period
commencing with such destruction or damage and ending with the completion by Landlord of
such work of restoration or reconstruction as Landlord is obligated to do hereunder (exclusive of
any of Tenant’s fixtures, furnishings, equipment and the like or work performed therein by
Tenant and the prompt completion of any required Tenant leasehold improvements).
12.2 Eminent Domain. 
(a)  If after the execution and before termination of this Lease, access to the 
Premises shall be materially reduced as a direct result of a taking by eminent domain or in the
event of conveyance in lieu thereof, or more than ten percent (10%) of the Premises is so taken
or conveyed or such lesser amount, if such taking or conveyance otherwise materially interferes
with the Tenant's use and enjoyment of the Premises, then, at the election of Tenant, the Lease
shall terminate as of the day possession shall be taken by such authority. 
(b)  If after the execution and before termination of this Lease, as a direct 
Page 16 of 26 
Page 31
result of a taking by eminent domain or in the event of conveyance in lieu thereof, access to the
Premises is not materially reduced or if less than ten percent (10%) of the Premises is taken or
conveyed, or if such taking does not otherwise materially interfere with Tenant's use and
enjoyment of the Premises, then, at the election of Tenant, this Lease will terminate only as
respects the portions so taken or conveyed, as of the day possession is taken, and Tenant shall
pay Rent up to that day, with an appropriate refund by Landlord of such Rent as may have been
paid in advance for a period subsequent to the date of the taking of possession, and thereafter the
Annual Base Rent will be equitably adjusted. Pending agreement of such Rent adjustment, 
Tenant agrees to pay to Landlord the Annual Base Rent in effect immediately prior to the taking
by eminent domain, reduced pro-rata by the square footage taken. Landlord shall, at its expense, 
make all necessary repairs or alterations so as to reconstitute the remaining portion of the
Premises a complete architectural unit and in substantially the same conditions as prior to the
taking. 
(c)  If after the execution and before termination of this Lease, as a direct
result of a taking by eminent domain or in the event of conveyance in lieu thereof, access to the
Premises is materially reduced or more than ten percent (10%) of the Premises is taken or
conveyed (or if Tenant otherwise has the right to terminate this Lease pursuant to Section
12.2(a)) and Tenant has not elected to terminate, the Term will cease only as respects the part so
taken or conveyed, from the day possession is taken, and Tenant shall pay Rent to that date with
an appropriate refund by Landlord of such Rent as may have been paid in advance for a period
subsequent to the date of the taking of possession, but Landlord will have the right to terminate
this Lease upon notice to Tenant in writing within thirty (30) calendar days after such taking of
possession. If Landlord does not elect to terminate the Lease, all of the terms herein provided
shall continue in effect except that the Annual Base Rent and Additional Rent will be equitably
adjusted, and Landlord shall make all necessary repairs or alterations so as to constitute the
remaining portion of the Premises a complete architectural unit and in substantially the same
condition as prior to the taking. 
(d)  All compensation awarded for any such taking or conveyance, whether
for the whole or a part of the Premises will be awarded to Landlord. Tenant hereby assigns to
Landlord all of Tenant's right, title and interest in and to any and all such compensation except as
provided below. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, the Tenant will be entitled to seek a
separate award for Tenant's leasehold improvements, leasehold interest, trade fixtures, relocation
expenses and any other claim permitted by law. In the event of any taking of the Premises or any
part thereof for temporary use, this Lease will be and remain unaffected thereby and Annual
Base Rent and Additional Rent will be equitably adjusted. 
SECTION 13:  DEFAULT
13.1 Events of Default. If any default in the payment of Annual Base Rent, 
Additional Rent or any other monetary obligation due to Landlord by Tenant (a “Monetary
Default”) is not cured within ten (10) calendar days of written notice of such Monetary Default
from Landlord to Tenant, provided, however, Landlord shall not be required to give more than
two (2) such written notices during any twelve (12) month period, in which case Landlord may
exercise its remedies under this Section 13 immediately upon any such Monetary Default; or if
Page 17 of 26 
Page 32
any other default under the terms hereof continues for more than thirty (30) calendar days
following written notice thereof from Landlord to Tenant plus such additional time, if any, as is
reasonably necessary to cure the default if the default is of such a nature that it can be cured but
cannot reasonably be cured in thirty (30) calendar days and Tenant is diligently and continuously
endeavoring to cure such default; or if Tenant files a petition under any chapter of the U.S. 
Bankruptcy Code, 11 U.S.C. 101 et seq., as it may be amended, or if any such petition is filed
against Tenant and is not dismissed within ninety (90) calendar days; or if Tenant commences
any dissolution, liquidation, composition, financial reorganization or recapitalization with
creditors, makes an assignment or trust mortgage for benefit of creditors; or if a receiver, trustee, 
custodian or similar agent is appointed or takes possession with respect to any property of Tenant
and such appointment as ordered is not dismissed within ninety (90) calendar days; or if the
leasehold hereby created is taken on execution or other process of law in any action against
Tenant; then, and in any such case, Landlord and the agents and servants of Landlord may, in
addition to and not in derogation of any remedies for any preceding breach of covenant, 
immediately or at any time thereafter while such default continues and without further notice, at
Landlord’s election, do any one or more of the following: (1) give Tenant written notice stating
that the Lease is terminated, effective ten (10) calendar days after the giving of such notice or
upon a date stated in such notice, as Landlord may elect, in which event the Lease shall be
terminated as stated in such notice without any further action, or (2) with an execution for
possession issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, enter and repossess the Premises as of
Landlord's former estate, and expel Tenant and those claiming through or under Tenant, and
remove its and their effects, without being guilty of trespass, in which event the Lease shall be
irrevocably terminated at the time of such entry, or (3) pursue any other rights or remedies
permitted by law. Any such termination of the Lease will be without prejudice to any remedies
which might otherwise be used for arrears of Rent or prior breach of covenant, and, in the event
of such termination, Tenant shall remain liable under this Lease as hereinafter provided. In any
such event, Tenant hereby waives all statutory rights (including, without limitation, rights of
redemption, if any) to the extent such rights may be lawfully waived, and Landlord, without
notice to Tenant, may store Tenant's effects and those of any person claiming through or under
Tenant at the expense and risk of Tenant and, if Landlord so elects, after not less than thirty (30) 
calendar days' written notice without Tenant's having removed its property from the Premises, 
may sell such effects at public auction or private sale and apply the net proceeds thereof to the
payment of all sums due to Landlord from Tenant, if any, and pay over the balance, if any, to
Tenant. 
Notwithstanding anything in this Lease to the contrary, should any Event of Default
occur, Landlord shall use reasonable efforts to mitigate damages; provided, however, it is
specifically understood and agreed that Landlord shall not be required to give priority to the re-
letting of the Premises over other properties of Landlord. 
13.2 Tenant’s Obligations after Termination. In the event that this Lease is
terminated under any of the provisions contained in Section 13.1, Tenant shall pay punctually to
Landlord all the sums and shall perform all the obligations that Tenant covenants in this Lease to
pay and to perform in the same manner and to the same extent and at the same time as if this
Lease had not been terminated. In calculating the amounts to be paid by Tenant pursuant to the
preceding sentence, Tenant shall be credited with the net proceeds of any Rent obtained by
Page 18 of 26 
Page 33
Landlord by re-letting the Premises, after deducting all Landlord’s reasonable expenses in
connection with such re-letting, including, without limitation, all repossession costs, brokerage
commissions, fees for legal services, and expenses of preparing the Premises for such re-letting, 
it being agreed by Tenant that Landlord may (i) re-let the Premises or any part or parts thereof
for a term or terms that may, at Landlord’s option, be equal to or less than or exceed the period
that would otherwise have constituted the balance of the Term hereof (as the same may be
terminated pursuant to Section 2.2) and may grant such concessions and free rent as Landlord in
its reasonable judgment considers advisable or necessary to re-let the same and (ii) make such
alterations, repairs, and decorations in the Premises as Landlord in its reasonable judgment
considers advisable or necessary to re-let the same, and no action of Landlord in accordance with
the foregoing or failure to re-let or to collect rent under re-letting shall operate or be construed to
release or reduce Tenant’s liability as aforesaid. 
13.3 Nothing contained in this Lease will limit or prejudice the right of Landlord to
prove and obtain, in proceedings for bankruptcy or insolvency by reason of the termination of
this Lease, an amount equal to the maximum allowed by any statute or rule of law in effect at the
time when, and governing the proceedings in which, the damages are to be proved, whether such
amount be greater, equal to, or less than the amount of the loss or damages referred to above. 
13.4 Landlord shall in no event be in default in the performance of any of
Landlord’s obligations hereunder unless and until Landlord has failed to perform such
obligations within thirty (30) days, or such additional time as is reasonably required to correct
any such default, after notice by Tenant to Landlord specifying Landlord’s defaulted obligation, 
provided Landlord commences such cure within such thirty (30) day period and diligently
pursues the same. Tenant shall have no right, for any default by Landlord, to offset or
counterclaim against any Rent due hereunder. 
SECTION 14:  MISCELLANEOUS
14.1 Notices from One Party to the Other. All notices required or permitted
hereunder must be addressed to the respective addresses of Landlord and Tenant indicated in
Section 1 hereof and must be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested or by a
national overnight carrier, with copies in each instance as follows: 
With respect to Landlord: 
Archdiocese of Boston
66 Brooks Drive
Braintree, Massachusetts 02184
Attn: Chancellor
Archdiocese of Boston
66 Brooks Drive
Braintree, Massachusetts 02184
Attn: General Counsel 
Page 19 of 26 
Page 34
With a copy to: 
St. Tarcisius Parish
35 Cedar Street
Framingham, MA 01702-6925
Attn: Pastor
With respect to Tenant: 
Brazilian American Center, Inc. 
562 Waverly Street
Framingham, Massachusetts 01702
Attn: 
All notices sent by the United States Mail will be deemed received on the third (3rd) business day
immediately following the day on which such notice is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service. 
Notices sent by national overnight carrier shall be deemed received on the first (1st) business day
after having been deposited with such carrier. 
14.2 Bind and Inure. This Lease is binding upon and inures to the benefit of the
parties hereto and their respective authorized successors and assigns, except that Landlord named
herein and each successive owner of the Premises will be liable only for the obligations accruing
during the period of its ownership. No officer, trustee, manager, member, beneficiary, employee
or any other affiliate of Landlord will be personally liable or subject to levy, execution or other
enforcement procedure against their personal assets for the satisfaction of the remedies of Tenant
against Landlord. The reference herein to authorized successors and assigns of Tenant is not
intended to constitute consent to assignment from Landlord to Tenant, but has reference only to
those instances in which Landlord may later give consent to a particular assignment as permitted
by the provisions of this Lease. 
14.3 No Surrender. The delivery of keys to any employee of Landlord or to
Landlord's agent or any employee thereof will not operate as a termination of this Lease or a
surrender of the Premises. 
14.4 No Waiver, Etc. The failure of Landlord or of Tenant to seek redress for
violation of, or to insist upon the strict performance of any covenant or condition of this Lease, 
or, with respect to such failure of Landlord, any of the rules and regulations referred to in Section
11.6 hereof, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted by Landlord, shall not be deemed a waiver
of such violation nor prevent a subsequent act, which would have originally constituted a
violation, from having all the force and effect of an original violation. The receipt by Landlord of
Annual Base Rent or Additional Rent with knowledge of the breach of any covenant of this
Lease shall not be deemed a waiver of such breach by Landlord, unless such waiver is in writing
and signed by Landlord. No consent or waiver, express or implied, by Landlord or Tenant to or
of any breach of any agreement or duty will be construed as a waiver or consent to or of any
other breach of the same or any other agreement or duty. 
Page 20 of 26 
Page 35
14.5 No Accord and Satisfaction. No acceptance by Landlord of a lesser sum than
the Rent then due shall be deemed to be other than on account of the earliest installment of such
Rent due, nor shall any endorsement or statement on any check or any letter accompanying any
check or payment as Rent be deemed an accord and satisfaction, and Landlord may accept such
check or payment without prejudice to Landlord's right to recover the balance of such installment
or pursue any other remedy provided in this Lease or at law or in equity. 
14.6 Cumulative Remedies. The specific remedies to which Landlord or Tenant
may resort under the terms of this Lease are cumulative and are not intended to be exclusive of
any other remedies or means or redress to which it may be lawfully entitled in case of any breach
or threatened breach by the other party of any provisions of this Lease. In addition to the other
remedies provided in this Lease, Landlord or Tenant may seek injunctive relief regarding any
attempted or threatened violation of any of the covenants, conditions or provisions of this Lease
or to a decree compelling specific performance of any such covenants, conditions or provisions. 
14.7 Landlord’s Right to Cure. If Tenant defaults at any time in the performance
of any obligation under this Lease beyond the applicable notice and grace period or cure period, 
if any, then, if Tenant has failed to cure or to have commenced to cure such default within five
(5) calendar days following an additional written notice to Tenant (but in cases of emergency, no
notice will be required), Landlord will have the right, but not the obligation, to enter upon the
Premises, if necessary, and to perform such obligation, notwithstanding the fact that no specific
provision for such substituted performance by Landlord is made in this Lease with respect to
such default. In performing such obligation, Landlord may make any payment of money or
perform any other act. All sums so paid by Landlord (together with interest at the Default Rate
and all necessary and reasonable incidental costs and expenses in connection with the
performance of any such act by Landlord) shall be deemed to be Additional Rent under this
Lease and shall be payable to Landlord immediately on demand. Landlord may exercise the
foregoing rights without waiving any other of its rights or releasing Tenant from any of its
obligations under this Lease. 
14.8 Estoppel Certificate. Tenant agrees, from time to time, upon not less than
thirty (30) calendar days' prior written request by Landlord, to execute, acknowledge and deliver
to Landlord a statement in writing certifying that this Lease is unmodified and in full force and
effect; that Tenant has no defenses, offsets or counterclaims against its obligations to pay the
Annual Base Rent and Additional Rent and to perform its other covenants under this Lease; that
there are no uncured defaults of Landlord or Tenant under this Lease (or, if there have been
modifications, or if there are any defenses, offsets, counterclaims, or defaults, setting them forth
in reasonable detail); and the dates to which the Annual Base Rent, Additional Rent and other
charges have been paid. Any such statement delivered pursuant to this Section 14.8 shall be in a
form reasonably acceptable to and may be relied upon by a prospective purchaser or mortgagee
of the Building or the Premises or any prospective assignee of any such mortgagee. 
14.9 Acts of God. In any case where either party hereto is required to do any act
and delays are caused by or result from causes beyond such party's reasonable control, these
delays will not be counted in determining the time during which the work or cure must be
Page 21 of 26 
Page 36
completed, whether such time be designated by a fixed date, fixed time or a "reasonable time" 
and such time will be deemed to be extended by the period of such delay. 
14.10 Submission Not an Offer. The submission of a draft of this Lease or a
summary of some or all of its provisions does not constitute an offer to lease or demise the
Premises, it being understood and agreed that neither Landlord nor Tenant will be legally bound
with respect to the leasing of the Premises unless and until this Lease has been executed by both
Landlord and Tenant and a fully executed copy has been delivered to each of them. 
14.11 Service of Process; Jury Trial Waiver. 
(a)  TENANT AND LANDLORD EACH HEREBY WAIVES ANY RIGHT
TO TRIAL BY JURY OF ANY CLAIM, DEMAND, ACTION OR CAUSE OF ACTION (I) 
ARISING UNDER THIS LEASE OR (II) IN ANY WAY CONNECTED WITH OR RELATED
OR INCIDENTAL TO THE DEALINGS OF THE PARTIES HERETO IN RESPECT OF THIS
LEASE OR ANY AGREEMENT OR TRANSACTION RELATED HERETO OR THERETO
IN EACH CASE WHETHER NOW EXISTING OR HEREAFTER ARISING, AND
WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT, EQUITY OR OTHERWISE. TENANT AND
LANDLORD EACH HEREBY AGREES AND CONSENTS THAT ANY SUCH CLAIM, 
DEMAND, ACTION OR CAUSE OF ACTION SHALL BE DECIDED BY COURT TRIAL
WITHOUT A JURY AND THAT TENANT OR LANDLORD MAY FILE AN ORIGINAL
COUNTERPART OF A COPY OF THIS LEASE WITH ANY COURT AS WRITTEN
EVIDENCE OF THE CONSENT OF THE PARTIES HERETO TO THE WAIVER OF THEIR
RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY. 
(b)  Tenant and Landlord each hereby consents to the service of process in 
the manner provided for notices under this Lease. 
14.12 Severability. If any term, covenant, condition or provision of this Lease or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is declared invalid or unenforceable by the
final ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction having final review, the remaining terms, 
covenants, conditions and provisions of this Lease and their application to persons or
circumstances will not be affected thereby and will continue to be enforced and recognized as
valid agreements of the parties, and in the place of such invalid or unenforceable provision, there
will be substituted a like, but valid and enforceable provision which comports to the findings of
the aforesaid court and most nearly accomplishes the original intention of the parties. 
Notwithstanding the previous sentence, it is expressly understood and agreed by Landlord and
Tenant that if Section 7.3 is severed, found invalid or unenforceable for any reason, this Lease
Agreement will terminate upon written notice from Landlord, such termination to become
immediately effective upon Landlord giving notice thereof. Landlord agrees it will not provide
said notice to Tenant if Landlord determines, in its sole discretion, that Tenant is not in violation
of Section 7.3 at all times during the term of this Lease. 
14.13 Integration. This Lease supersedes all prior oral or written agreements or
understanding concerning the terms hereof and constitutes and represents the complete and final
agreement between the parties hereto. 
Page 22 of 26 
Page 37
14.14 Headings. The titles of the several Sections contained herein are for
convenience only and must not be considered in construing this Lease. 
14.15 Unless repugnant to the context, the words "Landlord" and "Tenant" 
appearing in this Lease shall be construed to mean those named above and their respective heirs, 
executors, administrators, successors and assigns, and those claiming through or under them, 
respectively. 
14.16 Amendments. This Lease may be amended and the provisions hereof may be
waived or modified, only by instruments in writing executed by Landlord and Tenant. 
14.17 Authority of Tenant. Tenant represents and warrants to Landlord (which
representations and warranties shall survive the delivery of this Lease) that: (a) Tenant (i) is a
duly organized and validly existing Massachusetts not for profit corporation, and in good
standing under the laws of The Commonwealth of Massachusetts; (ii) has the power and
authority to carry on businesses now being conducted and is qualified to do business in The
Commonwealth of Massachusetts; and (iii) has the power to execute and deliver and perform its
obligations under this Lease; and (b) (i) the execution, delivery, and performance by Tenant of
its obligations under this Lease have been duly authorized, and will not violate the organizational
documents of the Tenant or any indenture, agreement or other instrument to which it is a party or
by which it is bound; and (ii) the Tenant signed hereunder is duly authorized to execute this
Lease on the Tenant’s behalf. 
14.18 Authority of Landlord. Landlord represents and warrants to Tenant (which
representations and warranties shall survive the delivery of this Lease) that: (a) Landlord (i) is a
Corporation Sole, established and maintained as a religious corporation pursuant to Chapter 506
of the Massachusetts Acts of 1897, (ii) has the power and authority to carry on businesses now
being conducted and is qualified to do business in Massachusetts, and (iii) has the power to
execute and deliver and perform its obligations under this Lease; and (b) the execution, delivery
and performance by Landlord of its obligations under this Lease have been duly authorized by all
requisite organizational action and will not violate the organizational documents of Landlord or
any indenture, agreement, or other instrument to which it is a party or by which it is bound. 
14.19 Brokers. Each party warrants and represents that it has not dealt with any
broker or agent in connection with this transaction. In the event any broker claims are made
against Landlord as a result of Tenant’s prior dealings with said broker Tenant agrees to release, 
indemnify and hold harmless Landlord from and against all loss and damage, including
reasonable attorney’s fees, incurred as a result of Tenant’s misrepresenting the above facts. In
the event any broker claims are made against Tenant as a result of Landlord’s prior dealings with
said broker Landlord agrees to release, indemnify and hold harmless Tenant from and against all
loss and damage, including reasonable attorney’s fees, incurred as a result of Landlord’s
misrepresenting the above facts. 
14.20 Counterparts. This Lease may be executed in any number of counterparts, but
all of such counterparts will together constitute but one and the same agreement. In making
Page 23 of 26 
Page 38
proof of this Lease, it will not be necessary to produce or account for more than one counterpart
thereof signed by each of the parties hereto. Delivery of an executed counterpart of this Lease by
facsimile or other electronic method of transmission will have the same force and effect as
delivery of an original executed counterpart of this Lease. 
14.21 Limitation on Damages. Neither Landlord nor Tenant will be liable to the
other for any consequential damages, including, without limitation, any so-called “lost profits” 
except for Tenant’s holding–over in the demised premises after the expiration of the Term
hereof. Nor shall Landlord be liable to Tenant for any reason for any losses resulting from any
computer or electronics failures, including, without limitation, any losses or damages suffered in
connection with a loss of data. 
14.22 Enforcement Expenses. Unless prohibited by applicable law, Tenant agrees to
pay to Landlord the amount of all fees and expenses (including, without limitation, attorneys’ 
fees and costs) incurred by Landlord arising out of or resulting from any act or omission by
Tenant with respect to this Lease or the Premises, including, without limitation, any breach by
Tenant of its obligations hereunder, irrespective of whether Landlord resorts to litigation as a
result thereof. 
14.23 Interpretation. Unless indicated otherwise, the term “or” in this document is
used in the inclusive sense. 
14.24 Survival. In addition to those provisions specifically noted as surviving
termination of this Lease, the following provisions will survive termination of this Lease: this
Section 14.24 (Survival), Section 11.12 (Holdover), and Section 14.1 (Notices). In addition, if
the Lease is terminated because of a breach of the Lease by the non-terminating party, the
terminating party’s right to pursue all legal remedies will survive such termination unimpaired. 
[Remainder of page intentionally left blank; signature page to follow]
Page 24 of 26 
Page 39
Page 25 of 26 
Page 40
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Lease to be duly
executed as an instrument under seal and delivered as of the day and year first above written. 
ROMAN CATHOLIC ARCHBISHOP OF 
BOSTON, A CORPORATION SOLE, as
Landlord 
By:   
 
Very Rev. William P. Joy, Assistant Clerk 
BRAZILIAN AMERICAN CENTER, INC., as
Tenant 
By: 
Title: 
Page 41
EXHIBIT A
Page 26 of 26 
