Article VIII
Business and Commerce Provisions 
Page 2
Article VIII: Business and Commerce Provisions
Section 1.  Stretch Energy Code
1.1  Definitions
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 
The International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building energy code created by the International
Code Council. It is a model code adopted by many state and municipal governments in the United States
for the establishment of minimum design and construction requirements for energy efficiency, and is
updated on a three-year cycle. The baseline energy conservation requirements of the MA State Building
Code are the IECC with Massachusetts amendments as approved by the Board of Building Regulations and
Standards. 
Codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA of the 8th 
edition Massachusetts building code, the Stretch Energy Code is an appendix to the Massachusetts building
code, based on further amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) to improve the
energy efficiency of buildings built to this code. 
1.2  Purpose
The purpose of 780 CMR 115.AA is to provide a more energy efficient alternative to the base energy code
applicable to the relevant sections of the building code for both new construction and existing buildings. 
1.3  Applicability
This code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not included in this scope shall
comply with 780 CMR 13,34,51, as applicable. 
1.4  Stretch Code
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix
115.AA, including any future editions, amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference
into the City of Framingham General Ordinances, Article VIII, Section 1. The Stretch Code is enforceable
by the City’s Building Commissioner. 
Section 2.  Display of Cash Totals 
A cash register or any other mechanical device maintained at a check-out counter for totaling the monetary value of
customer purchases shall be so placed that the indications may be readily observed by the purchaser when standing
in normal position in the area provided for such purchasers. Whoever maintains such a register or device not so
placed shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50) for each such register or device. 
Section 3.  Junk Collectors 
3.1  The council may license suitable persons to be dealers in and keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or
barter of junk, old metals, or second-hand articles, in the City. They may also license suitable persons as
junk collectors, to collect, by purchase or otherwise, junk, old metals, and second-hand articles, from place
to place in the City, and they may provide that such collectors shall display badges upon their persons or
upon their vehicles, or upon both, when engaged in collecting, transporting, or dealing in junk, old metals, 
or second-hand articles; and may prescribe the design thereof. They may also provide that such shops and
all articles of merchandise therein, and any place, vehicle or receptacle used for the collecting or keeping of
the articles aforesaid, may be examined at all times by the council or by any person by them authorized
thereto. The aforesaid licenses may be revoked at pleasure, and shall be subject to the provisions of
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 102, Sections 186 to 189, inclusive, of the Revised Laws, as
amended by subsequent Acts of the General Court of Massachusetts. 
3.2  Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals, or second-hand articles, within
the limits of the City, shall keep a book, in which shall be written, at the time of every purchase of any
article, a detailed description thereof, the name, age, and residence of the person from whom, and the day
and hour when such purchase was made; such book shall at all times be open to the inspection of the Board
of License Commissioners and of any person by them authorized to make such inspection; every keeper of
such shop shall put in a suitable and conspicuous place on his shop a sign having his name and occupation
VIII - 2 
Page 3
Article VIII: Business and Commerce Provisions
legibly inscribed thereon in large letters; such shop, and all articles of merchandise therein, may be at all
times examined by the council or by any person by them authorized to make such examination; and no
keeper of such shop and no junk collector shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of
barter or exchange any of the articles aforesaid of a minor or apprentice, knowing or having reason to
believe him to be such, and no article purchased or received by such shopkeeper shall be sold until at least
thirty days from the date of its purchase or receipt has elapsed; such shops shall be closed when so ordered
by the council, between the hours of 6 p.m. and 7 a.m., and no keeper thereof and no junk collector shall
purchase any of the articles aforesaid during such hours. 
Section 4.  Transient Vendors, Hawkers & Peddlers 
4.1  No person shall sell, solicit or display goods, articles, wares or merchandise upon the public ways of the
City unless duly licensed so to do, without first having obtained a permit from the Board of License
Commissioners. 
4.2  No person, either principal or agent, shall engage in a temporary transient business in this City selling
goods, wares, periodicals or merchandise, or go door-to-door for any commercial selling purposes or
canvassing, without a license issued by the Board of License Commissioners. Such person shall make
written application, under oath, for such license stating his or her name and address, the name and address
of the owner or parties in whose interest said business is to be conducted, and a brief description of the
business to be conducted. Such person shall permit the police department to photograph and fingerprint him
or her for the purpose of identification. The fee for such license shall be set by the council. Such license
shall be affixed in a prominent place to the outer garment of each licensee whenever he or she shall be
engaged in such business so that it may be seen by all prospective customers. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to: (a) any person conducting a "garage sale;" (b) any person who goes door-to-door to sell
goods, wares, periodicals or merchandise on behalf of any group organized for any of the purposes
described in M.G.L., Ch. 180, s. 2; (c) any person (other than an Ice Cream Truck Vendor as defined under
G.L. c. 270 §25 and 520 CMR 15.02) operating a “Food Truck” that has been duly licensed by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Division of Standards under G.L. c. 101 and the Framingham Board of
Health; and (d) in the case of an event at a fixed location featuring sales from one or more Food Truck(s), a
farmer’s market, festival or similar event, any Ice Cream Truck Vendor that participates as a pre-arranged
vendor at such event and remains stationary at such event location. For purposes of this section, a “Food
Truck” shall mean a motor vehicle truck from which the operator offers for sale any prepared or packaged
food or beverages, but shall not (except in the case of an event described in the immediately preceding Sub-
section 4.2(d) above) include an Ice Cream Truck as defined in G.L. c. 270 §25 and 520 CMR 15.02. 
4.3  (Deleted by Attorney General) 
4.4  No transient vendor, hawker or peddler shall sell or offer or expose for sale any of the article enumerated in
Section 17 Chapter 101 of the General Laws or in any act in amendment thereof or any addition thereto
until he has recorded his name and residence with the Board of License Commissioners, provided, however, 
that this section shall not apply to religious publications or newspaper which are not of a commercial nature. 
Every commercial agent or other person selling by sample, lists, catalogues or otherwise for future delivery, 
and every person licensed under the preceding section as a transient vendor, hawker or peddler shall record
his name and residence in like manner with the Board of License Commissioners before conducting any
business within the City. 
4.5  No person hawking, peddling, or carrying or exposing any articles for sale, shall cry his wares to the
disturbance of the peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the City, nor otherwise than in vehicles and
receptacles which are neat and clean and do not leak. 
4.6  Every transient vendor, hawker and peddler licensed by the Board of License Commissioners shall be
assigned a number and shall be provided by the Board of License Commissioners with a badge which shall
be conspicuously worn by him; and every other such hawker and peddler as described in subsection 4.4
shall provide himself with a badge of such type and design as may be approved by said Board of License
Commissioners, which he shall wear in like manner. Whoever neglects to wear, or wears such badge
without authority, shall be punished by the penalty provided in subsection 4.11. 
VIII - 3 
Page 4
Article VIII: Business and Commerce Provisions
4.7  Every vehicle or other receptacle used by a licensee as a conveyance for articles offered or exposed for sale
by him shall have attached thereto on each side a number plate, to be furnished by the City with his license, 
bearing the number and date of expiration of such license. 
4.8  No person shall be registered or assigned a badge or number plate under the provisions of subsections 4.6
and 4.7, until he presents a certificate from the Sealer of Weights and Measures stating that all weighing and
measuring devices intended to be used by such person have been duly inspected and sealed as required by
law. The use of, or possession by such person with intent to use, any false or unsealed weighing or
measuring devices shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of his license, or the cancellation of his
registration. 
4.9  Nothing in these Ordinances shall be construed as conflicting with any license issued under the authority of
the Commonwealth. 
4.10 Any license granted under Article VIII, Section 4 of these Ordinances or any Ordinance amendments or
additions, may be revoked by the council or Board of License Commissioners. 
4.11 Whoever violates any provision of Article VIII, Section 4 of these Ordinances shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300) for each offense. 
Section 5.  (Deleted 1998 Annual Town Meeting) 
Section 6.  Licensing and Display of Motor Vehicles 
6.1  Classification
As provided in M.G.L., Ch. 140, s. 58, motor vehicles shall be classified as follows: 
Class I.....................................................New Vehicles
Class II ...................................................Used Vehicles
Class III ..................................................Junk Vehicles
6.2  Licensing
Pursuant to M.G.L., Ch. 140, ss. 57-59, all Class I, II and III motor vehicle dealer licenses must be renewed
on January 1st of each year. The Board of License Commissioners or their designee shall be responsible for
the granting or renewal of said licenses. 
In addition to the requirements imposed by M.G.L., to be eligible for a motor vehicle dealer's license, an
applicant must: 
1. have the sale of motor vehicles their principal business. 
2. maintain or demonstrate access to repair facilities sufficient to enable the dealer to satisfy the
warranty repair obligations imposed by state statute. This provision shall apply to Class I & II
dealers only. 
3. have a valid special permit granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless otherwise
"grandfathered" from this provision
4. have all property taxes and fees paid to and documented by the City Treasurer. 
5. have the site of the dealership inspected by the designated City departments to determine if all
conditions of the special permit and all safety regulations are met. 
6.3  Outdoor Display of Motor Vehicles
Motor vehicles for sale or lease may not be displayed more than one foot above finished grade, nor on
buffer areas designed for landscaping. 
Section 7.  Regulation of Donation Collection Bins 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to address the proliferation
of donation collection bins within the City of Framingham, and provide regulations to ensure that donation
VIII - 4 
Page 5
Article VIII: Business and Commerce Provisions
collection bins are located and maintained so as to promote public safety, health and welfare, in a clean and
safe condition. 
7.1  Definitions
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
Donation Collection Bin – Any enclosed receptacle or container made of metal, steel, fiberglass, wood, or
similar product designed or intended for the donation and the temporary storage of clothing, books or other
goods and materials, which is accessible to and allows the public to deposit goods without assistance, and
which is owned, operated or controlled by an entity other than the owner or lessee of the lot on which it is
located. 
Operator – Any person or legal entity that owns, operates or is otherwise in control of a donation collection
bin in the City of Framingham. 
7.2  Prohibitions and Standards
7.2.1  It shall be unlawful for any person to place a donation collection bin within the City of
Framingham without first obtaining an annual license from the Building Commissioner as
hereinafter provided. Each operator who seeks to place a donation collection bin in the City shall
complete a written application on a yearly basis on a form provided by the Building
Commissioner. 
A donation collection bin subject to the provisions of this chapter must have clearly identified, in
writing on its face the name, address, and telephone number of the entity or organization that is
maintaining the donation collection bin. No further advertising shall be permitted on the donation
collection bin. 
7.2.2  A license for a donation collection bin may be granted only in accordance with and subject to the
following provisions, conditions and restrictions: 
(a) Donation collection bin licenses may be granted only for properties owned or leased by a non-
profit entity and used for non-profit purposes in Business or manufacturing Zoning Districts, 
but excluding the Central Business District, and churches and other houses of worship in any
Zoning District. Only one donation collection bin is allowed per property, which includes all
contiguous land in common ownership. 
(b) The donation collection bin shall be appropriately located so as to not interfere with sight
triangles, on site circulation, required setbacks, landscaping, parking or any other zoning
requirements and shall be placed on a concrete or other paved surface. The donation collection
bin shall not be place at any location directly abutting a residential property and shall comply
with all setbacks for accessory structures under the Zoning Ordinances. All donation collection
bins shall be properly screened from view as approved by the Building Commissioner or his
designee and shall not consume any available parking spaces required for the permitting or
zoning requirements of the premises where sited. The donation collection bin shall be placed
such that there is safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular access to it. 
(c) The donation collection bin shall be of the type that is enclosed by use of a receiving door and
locked so that the contents of the bin may not be accessed by anyone other than those
responsible for the retrieval of the contents. 
(d) Each donation collection bin shall not cover a ground surface area in excess of five feet by five
feet, nor be more than six feet in height. 
(e) Each donation collection bin must be regularly emptied of its contents so that it does not
overflow. Used clothing or other donated goods and materials may not be placed about the
surrounding area. All donation collection bins must be maintained in a state of good repair and
in a neat and clean condition, and free of trash, debris, refuse or like material. 
7.3  Application for License 
VIII - 5 
Page 6
Article VIII: Business and Commerce Provisions
7.3.1  Any person or entity desiring a license under this chapter shall file with the Building
Commissioner an original and one copy of an application, submitted under oath, in writing on a
form furnished by the Building Commissioner. 
7.3.2  The application shall set forth the following information: 
(a) The applicant’s name, business name, business address and telephone number as well as the
name, address and telephone number of the person or persons responsible for maintaining each
donation collection bin which shall be posted on each bin as required by Section 7.2. 
(b) Whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, a corporation or another entity, and if
another entity, a full description thereof and whether the entity is a non-profit organization. 
(c) If the applicant is an individual, the applicant’s residential address. 
(d) If the applicant is a partnership, the full name and address of each partner. 
(e) If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, in the case of a corporation, the full name and
residential address of each major officer, the name and address of the registered agent and the
address of the principle office. 
(f) A description of the donation collection bin to be covered by the license as well as the address
where the donation collection bin will be located, including a site plan showing the proposed
location of the donation collection bin on the property as well as existing conditions on the
property. 
(g) If the applicant is not the owner of the property upon with the donation collection bin is to be
located, the written notarized consent of the property owner must be attached to the
application. The consent shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, 
lessee or other person or legal entity in control of the property where each such donation
collection bin shall be placed. 
(h) The regular interval schedule at which the operator or person identified in the license collects
the items donated and performs regular maintenance. Said interval shall not exceed thirty days. 
The Building Commissioner or his designee shall deny a license application which does not
comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
7.4  Fees
7.4.1  The application fee for a license for a donation collection bin shall be $150.00 for each donation
collection bin. The license period for each donation collection bin shall be January 1 through
December 31 of each year. 
7.4.2  Upon the granting of a license, a permit issued to the applicant shall be affixed to the donation
collection bins used by the license holder prior to placement of the bin. The permit shall be clearly
placed on the same side of the bin as the chute used to deposit donated items. Next to the permit
there shall be placed in clear lettering the name and telephone number of the operator. Upon the
sale or transfer of a bin, a new license and permit shall be sought and if granted to a subsequent
owner, the permit must be affixed to the bin prior to placement in service. 
7.5  Applicability 
7.5.1  The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to both existing and future donation collection bins
located within the City of Framingham. Property owners with existing donation collection bins
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall come into compliance as follows: 
(a) Within sixty days of the effective date of this Ordinance, the operator shall file an application
for a license as required under Section 7.3 for each existing donation collection bin. The
application shall demonstrate how the existing donation collection bin complies with this
Ordinance or show the proposed changes that shall be completed to achieve compliance. 
Within ninety days after the effective date of this Ordinance, each existing donation bin shall
VIII - 6 
Page 7
Article VIII: Business and Commerce Provisions
be brought into compliance with this Ordinance or removed from the City, except as provided
below. 
(b) For those existing donation collection bins that are located on properties in Business or
Manufacturing Zoning Districts, but excluding the Central Business District, but which are not
devoted to non-profit purposes as required by Section 7.2.2.(a),  one existing donation
collection bin may continue to be located and operated on the property, provided that it can be
brought into compliance with all other requirements of this Ordinance. The operator of each
such prior nonconforming donation collection bin must apply for and receive an annual license
as provided in this Ordinance. Upon sale of the property or the business located on the
property on which such prior nonconforming donation collection bin is located, the prior
nonconforming donation collection bin must be removed within ten days. 
7.6  Violation, penalties and enforcement
7.6.1  Any person, entity, partnership, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00, but not exceeding $100.00 for each
individual violation. 
7.6.2  Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense. 
7.6.3  The owner, lessee, or other person or legal entity in control of the property where the donation
collection bin is being maintained and the operator of said bin in violation of this Section shall be
jointly and severally liable for each violation thereof. 
7.6.4  The Building Commissioner or his designee may issue an enforcement order for any failure to
comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
7.6.5  The Building Commissioner or his designee shall enforce this Ordinance. 
7.6.6  In the discretion of the enforcing officer, a noncriminal penalty of $50.00 for each violation may
be imposed as provided in G.L. c. 40 §21D and Article X, Section 1 of the General Ordinances. 
7.7  Severability
In the event that any provision of this Ordinance shall be deemed illegal or otherwise unenforceable by a
court of competent jurisdiction, then only that specific provision shall not be enforced, and all other sections
shall remain in full force and effect. 
Section 8.  Plastic Bag Reduction Ordinance 
8.1  Purpose and Intent
The production and use of thin-film single-use plastic checkout bags have significant impacts on the
environment, including, but not limited to: contributing to the potential death of marine animals through
ingestion and entanglement; contributing to pollution of the land environment; creating a burden to solid
waste collection and recycling facilities; clogging storm drainage systems; and requiring the use of millions
of barrels of crude oil nationally for their manufacture. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to eliminate the usage of thin-film single-use plastic bags by all retail and
grocery stores in the City of Framingham, on or after January 1, 2018. 
8.2  Definitions
8.2.1  Checkout bag: A carryout bag provided by a store to a customer at the point of sale. Checkout
bags shall not include bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose produce or products are placed
by the consumer to deliver such items to the point of sale or checkout area of the store. 
8.2.2  Grocery Store: A retail establishment where more than fifty percent (50%) of the gross floor area
is devoted to the sale of food products for home preparation and consumption, which typically also
offers home care and personal care products. 
VIII - 7 
Page 8
Article VIII: Business and Commerce Provisions
8.2.3  Retail Store: An establishment that offers the sale and display of merchandise within a building. 
8.2.4  Reusable checkout bag: A bag, with handles, that is specifically designed for multiple use and is
made of thick plastic, cloth, fabric or other durable materials. 
8.2.5  Thin-film single-use plastic bag: Typically with plastic handles, these are bags with a thickness
of 2.5 mils or less and are intended for single-use transport of purchased products. 
8.3  Use Regulations
8.3.1  Thin-film single-use plastic bags shall not be distributed, used or sold for checkout or other
purposes at any retail or grocery store within the City of Framingham. 
8.3.2  Customers are encouraged to bring their own reusable or biodegradable shopping bags to stores. 
Retail or grocery stores are strongly encouraged to make reusable checkout bags available for sale
to customers at a reasonable price. 
8.3.3  Thin-film plastic bags used to contain dry cleaning, newspapers, produce, meat, bulk foods, wet
items and other similar merchandise, typically without handles, are still permissible. 
8.4  Enforcement Process
Enforcement of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility of the mayor or his/her designee. The mayor shall
determine the inspection process to be followed, incorporating the process into other City duties as
appropriate. Any retail or grocery store in violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to a non-criminal
disposition fine as specified in Article X of the City Ordinances under M.G.L. Chapter 40, §21D. Any such
fines shall be paid to the City of Framingham. 
Section 9.  Marijuana Establishments 
9.1  Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of
Framingham, and to provide regulations to ensure that Marijuana Establishments and Medical Marijuana
Treatment Centers, as the same are defined in M.G.L. c. 94I and M.G.L .c 94G and in the regulations of the
Cannabis Control Commission promulgated thereunder, are operated and maintained in a manner that
promotes public safety, health and welfare, and in a clean and safe condition. 
9.2  Definitions
The definitions set forth in M.G.L. c. 94I and M.G.L. c. 94G are incorporated herein by reference. 
9.3  Licensing 
No person shall operate a Marijuana Establishment or a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center unless duly
licensed so to do by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
The number of Marijuana Retailers in Framingham shall not exceed six (6), which is 20 per cent of the
number of licenses issued within the City of Framingham for retail sale of alcoholic beverages not to be
drunk on the premises where sold under Chapter 138 of the General Laws, as set forth in M.G.L. c. 94G, 
§3(a)(2)(ii).
9.4  General Operational Requirements
Any person operating a Marijuana Establishment or a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or who sells, 
solicits or display goods, articles, marijuana related goods, wares, or merchandise for the ingestion of any
marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, Section 1, as amended), cannabinoids or
products containing the same shall: 
a.  Enter into a host agreement pursuant to M.G.L. c. 94G, § 3(d) containing the following provisions: 
i.  Hours of operation; 
VIII - 8 
Page 9
Article VIII: Business and Commerce Provisions
ii.  Reasonable restrictions of public signage that are no more restrictive than those set forth
in the City’s  then-applicable “RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES”;
iii.  Reasonable conditions concerning the delivery or transportation of cannabis; 
iv.  Security and safety plan developed in cooperation with the Framingham Police
Department and Fire Department, which shall include, but not be limited to: parking lot
surveillance; detail policing; prohibition against entertainment; and prohibition against
on-premises consumption of marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 
94C, 1, as amended), cannabinoids or products containing the same; 
v.  One-time payment of community impact deposit prior to commencing operations; and
vi.  Annual payment of community impact fee. 
b.  Enforce state laws and the regulations promulgated thereunder with respect to the operation of the
licensed business. 
c.  Ensure that all business within the licensed premises and within areas under the licensee’s control
that abut the licensed premises, is conducted in a responsible manner so that no activity shall
detract from the quality of life in the City generally, or in the neighborhood in which the licensed
premises is located. This shall include, but shall not be limited to, ensuring that there shall be no: 
disorder; unlawful use, sale, barter or exchange of drugs or alcohol; indecency; prostitution; 
assaults; lewdness; or gambling on or about the premises, including within any parking area on the
licensed premises. 
d.  Provide for regular training of employees engaged in selling or producing marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, Section 1, as amended), cannabinoids or
products containing the same, in accordance with the Cannabis Control Commission’s Responsible
Vendor requirements set forth in 935 CMR 500.105(2).
e.  Promptly report to the Police Department all instances of attempted purchases or procurement of
marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, Section 1, as amended),
cannabinoids or products containing the same by minors, including attempts to gain access to
premises upon which such products are produced or sold and appropriate action taken by the
licensee in response thereto. Such appropriate action shall include: i) Reporting to the Registry of
Motor Vehicles instances involving possession or use of a false, forged or counterfeit license to
operate motor vehicles or identification card issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles; ii) 
confiscation of liquor identification cards or motor vehicle operator’s license presented by the
minor; and iii) if a purchase was made or service was procured, the name of the licensee’s
employee participating therein. 
f.  Ensure that the licensed premises including the exterior, are kept clean, neat and sanitary at all
times. 
g.  Ensure that exterior doors to the licensed premises remain closed during all times that the licensed
premises are open for business. 
h.  Ensure that exterior lighting and functioning security cameras or recording mechanism equipment
are placed in such a manner to allow for complete interior and exterior observation of the licensed
premises at all times. 
i.  Ensure that the Framingham Police Department, the Framingham Fire Department, and authorized
agents of the licensing authority shall have immediate access to the licensed premises at all times
and under all circumstances. 
j.  Ensure that no marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, Section 1, as
amended) or cannabinoids or products containing the same are sold by an adult-use marijuana
establishment to anyone under the age of 21 years. It shall be a defense to any alleged claim of
sale of marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, Section 1, as amended) or
VIII - 9 
Page 10
Article VIII: Business and Commerce Provisions
cannabinoids or products containing the same to a minor if the licensee can show that the patron
produced a valid Massachusetts driver’s license, a valid Massachusetts Liquor Identification Card, 
a valid Passport issued by the United States or by a government of a foreign country recognized by
the United States government, or a valid U.S. issued Military ID card or a valid U.S. Passport
Card. Licensees may accept out of state licenses as proof of age, but licensees shall bear the risk
that such licenses are real and valid. 
k.  No marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, Section 1, as amended) or
products containing marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol shall be sold to an intoxicated person. 
l.  No alcoholic beverages may be sold or advertised on the premises of a cannabis establishment, and
no license may display any advertisement or sign upon which appears any brand name of an
alcoholic beverage product on the façade of a cannabis establishment. 
m.  No licensee shall provide or allow on-premises sales promotion events or entertainment. 
n.  No licensee shall make any distinction, discrimination or restriction on account of race, color, 
creed, sex, sexual orientation or ancestry relative to the admission or treatment of any person. 
9.5  Prohibitions and Standards
Only on-premises purchase of marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, Section 1, 
as amended) or products containing marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol is permitted under this Ordinance. 
No person who operates a Marijuana Establishment or a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center shall offer
for on-premises ingestion, consumption or use, or allow on-premises ingestion, consumption or use, of any
marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, Section 1, as amended) cannabinoids or
products. 
No person who operates a Marijuana Establishment or a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center shall offer
marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, Section 1, as amended), cannabinoids or
products containing the same as a gift. 
Any person offering or allowing on-premises ingestion, consumption or use, of marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, Section 1, as amended) or products containing
marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol shall in violation of this section shall be subject to civil and criminal
penalties, and such products containing marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol may be seized and safely held
until final adjudication of the charge against the person or persons arrested or summoned before the court, 
at which time they shall be returned to the person entitled to lawful possession. 
9.6  Weights and Measures
A Marijuana Establishment or a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center shall comply with the applicable
provisions of the Massachusetts Grocery Pricing Law, M.G.L. c. 94, section 184B-184E and the regulations
promulgated by the Division of Standards enforces the accuracy of item pricing and price scanners, scales, 
weights and measures and those promulgated by the Attorney General as 940 C.M.R. 3.13 for applies to
non-grocery stores or to the non-grocery items of a mixed-product retailer, as applicable. 
9.7  Availability of Books and Records for Inspection and Data Security
A Marijuana Establishment or a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center shall ensure that no less than the
minimum standards to be met in connection with the safeguarding of personal information contained in both
paper and electronic records in accordance with M.G.L. c. 93H and the regulations promulgated thereunder
as 201 C.M.R. 17: Standards for the Protection of Personal Information of Residents of the Commonwealth. 
9.8  Applicability of Nuisance Ordinance
No cannabis establishment shall sell, solicit or display goods, articles, wares or merchandise in such a
manner that violates Article V, Section 22 of the General Ordinance, regarding Nuisance. 
No Marijuana Establishment shall emit or allow to be emitted from the premises any smoke, vapor, or
aroma from any of the products sold therein. 
VIII - 10 
Page 11
Article VIII: Business and Commerce Provisions
9.9  Secure Disposal of Refuse Containing Marijuana or Tetrahydrocannabinol
A Marijuana Establishment shall ensure that refuse containing marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol, or
cannabinoids is disposed of securely and maintained under license’s control at all times. 
9.10 Community Impact Fees
M.G.L. c. 94G, Section. 3(d) allow municipalities to impose a community impact fee that is reasonably
related to the costs imposed upon the municipality by the operation of the cannabis establishment. The fee
to operate a Marijuana Establishment shall be up to 3% of gross sales. The license shall be January 1
through December 31 of each year. 
9.11 Applicability
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all Marijuana Establishments or a Medical Marijuana
Treatment Center located within the City of Framingham. 
9.12 Enforcement
Civil penalties imposed pursuant to this Ordinance may also be enforced by the Framingham Police
Department by utilizing the non-criminal disposition procedures provided in M.G.L. c. 40, Section 21D and
any fines imposed shall inure as provided therein. 
9.13 Severability
In the event that any provision of this Ordinance shall be deemed illegal or otherwise unenforceable by a
court of competent jurisdiction, then only that specific provision shall not be enforced, and all other sections
shall remain in full force and effect. 
VIII - 11 
