Town of Framingham
Fiscal Year 2014 
Budget Recommendation
General Fund Budget
A Strategic Investment in Framingham’s Future 
Office of the Town Manager &
Chief Financial Officer
Page 2
FY14 General Fund Operating Budget 
FY14 Revenue 
Overview
The total revenue estimate for the FY14 General fund operating budget is $236,548,526. This is
an increase of $8.4 million or 3.7% more than FY13. The major revenue source assumptions
are: 
Taxes
  Assumes a levy increase of the maximum 2.5%. This is an increase of $4.16 million
from FY13. 
  This is an increase to the FY13 total levy which was increased 1.5%. The FY14
proposed tax levy maintains the 1% untaxed levy capacity created in FY13. 
  New Growth tax revenue of $884,000. There are no substantial projects in the permitting
queue that have come on line this year which would generate additional tax revenue for
FY14; projects are relatively small. 
State Aid
  Chapter 70 aid increase $3,338,423 or 11.9%.  The legislature will not go along with the
Governor’s recommendation. Analysis and discussions with a number of informed
officials indicates this increase is slightly ambitious but not completely unrealistic. The
fact that we have adequately funded reserves makes an ambitious revenue estimate a little
less risky. 
  Unrestricted General Government Aid is level funded. As advised by the Legislature any
additional aid for this category would only be fueled by additional taxes, which seem
unlikely. 
Local Receipts 
  Revenue sources specific to Framingham, generated locally by people and businesses that
live and work in the Town. This is a slight increase of 2.1% or $335,000. Primarily
moved by increasing licenses and permit revenue and room and meals taxes. 
Free Cash
  Unstable revenue source because it is the ending “bank” balance from a previous fiscal
year. 
  Reduce the general operating fund allocation from $1.5 million to $1.3 million. 
  Policy allocation of $589,695 to the Stabilization Fund. This is the minimum amount to
keep the fund at the 5% budget threshold. 
1 
Page 3
FY14 General Fund Operating Budget 
  Another portion of the remaining amount of free cash is allocated to the Capital budget to
be used instead of borrowing. For FY14 this would be $393,130. However it is our
recommendation to set this aside for this year while borrowing costs are low and begin to
build a Capital Reserve for more expensive projects coming in the future. 
  New this year, we are allocating a 10% share of Free Cash to the OPEB Trust Fund to
begin to reduce our outstanding retiree health benefits liability. This amount is $196,565. 
  The remaining amount of free cash, $589,695 is to remain in the General Fund balance. 
This balance is exceedingly low given the size of the budget. By comparison, if your
household income was $100,000 you would have $249 in your checkbook at the end of
the year. In the future, the Town should move toward spending no free cash in the
operating budget; allocate a maintenance amount into the stabilization fund; allocate a
significant portion to the OPEB liability; and a significant portion should remain in the
General Fund balance as a savings measure. 
Enterprise Fund Indirect Charges
  Both the Water Department and the Sewer Department require the management and
oversight services of staff and resources funded by the General Fund. We charge each of
these departments the cost of that staffing and resources. 
  The total for the Water Department is $1.45 million and the total for the Sewer
Department is $1.35 million. This is an increase for FY43 of 3%, or $81,680 combined
for both of the enterprise funds. 
FY14 Recommended Expenditures 
For the first time since 2007, the finances of the Town allow us the make investments in the
services provided to residents. Total recommended spending for the CFO recommended budget
is $236,282,906. In addition to the recommendations for the operating budgets this plan includes
the recommendation for a special purpose account to fund a School/Town Safety Plan which
includes enhancements to safety training, equipment and staffing. There will be more details on
the plan as the final project is presented. 
NEW
We have significantly changed the format of how we present the budget for FY14. The detail
data on salary and operating costs are still available in the more in depth background material, 
however, attached to this narrative is a comprehensive table that summarizes the base budget
increase from FY13 (Level Service Budget); the specific Service Improvements added to the
budget and the Requested Items that were excluded. This summary sheet is organized by
Department, listed alphabetically for easy reference. The Level Service budget changes are
broken down by salary and operating costs; the number of FTEs that are funded and unfunded. 
The same detail is provided for the Strategic Investments for Service Improvement
recommended for FY14 and the requests that were excluded. This is the first time that we have
2 
Page 4
FY14 General Fund Operating Budget 
attempted to provide a comprehensive look at the budget, by Department, in one single
document. The budget data for Centralized costs is included in the narrative below. Highlights
of the recommended Strategic Investments are listed immediately below. 
Strategic Investments
 Enhancements in Education: 
o FY14 budget recommended at $102.1 million for Framingham School
Department, includes fully funding Level Service budget increase of $3.35
million, plus $1.2 million for education improvement
 Investment in Public Safety
o Add 7 police officers to increase the ability to be more proactive, improve traffic
enforcement, community interaction, and allocate resources to schools
o Add Inspection and Fire Protection staff to the Fire Department to which will
reduce need for firefighters and fire apparatus to perform routine inspections and
speed up the permitting process
o Add 2 Code Enforcement Inspectors to improve the function of the
Interdepartmental Code Enforcement Task Force and assist in the HOME
program
 Investment in Economic Development
o Allocation of Room and Meals tax to EDIC for Project Development investment, 
creates a $110,000 fund (9.2% of room and meals tax) to give the EDIC resources
to engage developers to invest in Framingham
 Improve Departmental Operations
o Dedicated DPW maintenance staff to Downtown
o Increased Activity and Support Services to Seniors
o Increased support Services to Veterans
o Additional Hazardous Waste Collection Day
o Additional Library hours on Sundays to match the School year to support to
school students
o Enhanced Technology Services to include high level Web and Network support to
manage the increasing demand on the Town website, the town wide data network
and interactive web programs coming online in FY14
3 
Page 5
FY14 General Fund Operating Budget 
Centralized/Fixed Costs
Stabilization/Reserve Fund [$589,695 decreased $1.6 million] 
The Stabilization Fund and the Reserve Fund are not the same. The Reserve Fund is an
operating budget item that is appropriated every year as an immediate emergency fund to be used
for unforeseen circumstances in that fiscal year only. This fund is under the authority of the
Town’s Finance Committee, appointed by the Moderator. The funds are transferred for specific
projects or costs based on an application for need made to the Finance Committee. Funds are
transferred after a public meeting, review and a vote of the Finance Committee. If there are
funds remaining after the end of the fiscal year, they close out to free cash. The fund is $400,000
the same as prior years. 
The Stabilization Fund is a permanent fund created to mitigate drastic decreases in revenue or
extraordinary Town wide expenditure such as a natural disaster. The Town policy for the
Stabilization Fund sets a full funding amount at 5% of the total budget. For FY14 that would be
$589,695. 
Salary Reserve [$878,000 increased $252,801]
The salary reserve for FY14 has two components: (1) funds for a 2% cost of living adjustment
for all Town employees if that is negotiated during the 2014 fiscal year; and (2) funds for a
$78,000 for adjustments recommended by the Human Resources Director and Personnel Board
for updated Classification and Compensation Plan. 
Liability Insurance [$1,268,307 increased $135,622 or 12%]
This insurance covers all Town buildings and equipment, including schools, and all Town
employees and public officials for liability. 
Health Insurance [$35,157,691 increased $2.1 million 6.3%]
The FY14 Health Insurance budget assumes no changes in plan design of contribution costs
between employees and the Town. The current contract will cover the first six month of FY14
and makes no changes. The cost of health insurance is increasing due to the higher cost of
claims and inflation. The Town will bargain this summer/fall for a new agreement for calendar
year 2014. 
The control of the future cost of health insurance is critical to the financial viability of the Town. 
It is important not only to reduce the burden that health insurance creates on the budget, and
therefore the taxpayer, but to create plans that actually reduce the overall cost of health care
coverage. The administration of the Town will continue to move in that direction to reduce the
burden of health insurance on the overall budget. 
4 
Page 6
FY14 General Fund Operating Budget 
Retirement [$11,998,971 decreased $280,692, -2.3%]
The Retirement budget category includes the Town’s contributory pension fund and the Town’s
non-contributory pension fund and an appropriation for the unfunded “other post employment
benefits” liability (OPEB).  The contributory pension funding is based on an approved actuarial
valuation of pension costs including an unfunded liability of future pensions. The pension
funding amount includes a portion for the actual annual pension cost of retirees plus a portion to
fund the future liability. The current pension funding schedule increases by 4.5% each year, and
that is include here. The current pension valuation includes a funding schedule that intends to
fully fund the pension system by the year 2030. 
The FY14 recommended allocation to the unfunded OPEB liability is less than half of the
amount in FY13. OPEB is the future cost of health insurance coverage for current and future
retirees. While this does not nearly fund the required annual contribution, it does begin the
process of paying down this liability. At the same time the Town will be bargaining with
employees to further reduce the cost of health insurance overall, which will reduce the OPEB
liability. If we can get the annual amount down to $7 million or $8 million, then the amount we
are contributing to the unfunded pension liability can be shifted after 2031 to fund the OPEB
liability. For the near future, the funding recommendation will be to use some free cash and the
room and meals tax to increase this appropriation when the stabilization fund is fully funded. 
The 2012 valuation of this liability was recently completed. A reduction of more than $16
million to $184.6 million was achieved. More work needs to be done to reduce the overall
liability but we are moving in the right direction. 
Debt Service [$10,909,344 increased $465,073, 4.5%]
This category of spending includes the principle and interest payments for outstanding bonds, the
interest costs for short term borrowing, and the interest on abatements settled at the Appellate
Tax Board. Principle and interest on bonds is recommended at $10,181,758. This is an increase
of $381,758. Short term interest is budgeted at $527,586, an increase of $83,315. Interest on
abatements is budgeted at $200,000, level with FY13. 
Snow and Ice Removal [$1.5 million increased $32,717 or 2.2%]
This budget is increased by anticipated inflation in salt and salaries. Remaining costs are level
funded. 
Non-Appropriations
This segment of the budget is not voted by Town Meeting, however it is still required as part of
the total budget. The budget for tax title costs, Cherry Sheet charges, any snow and ice or
overlay deficits, and the tax overlay amount is included in this category. The budget for tax title
costs, the funds spent by the Treasurer taking delinquent taxpayers to land court, is $50,000. 
5 
Page 7
FY14 General Fund Operating Budget 
This budget amount has been relatively constant for a number of years. Cherry Sheet Charges
are the costs assessed by the State for certain services. These include the MBTA assessment for
the commuter rail, the MWRTA assessment for regional bus service, tuition assessments for
Framingham students attending the McAuliffe Charter School and school choice. Cherry sheet
charges total $5.1 million for FY14. 
Impact on Taxes
The impact of the budget on taxes depends upon how much the budgeted amount requires an
increase in the levy. The CFO budget recommended here assumes a 2.5% increase in the levy. 
There are other factors that cause the tax rate to increase: the value of residential property in the
Town; the value of commercial, industrial and business personal property (CIP); and the shift of
the tax burden from residential to commercial (CIP). Assuming all the value and shift factors do
not change from FY13, the increased cost to the average single family home tax bill is $148
(including the high school debt service payment).  In order to eliminate this increase in the
average single family residential tax bill the budget would need to be reduced by $3.4 million
dollars. For every $10 decrease to that $148 impact the budget would have to be reduced by
$288,680. 
More property valuation analysis is underway; the tax impact with be more defined as we get
closer to Town Meeting. 
6 
