~~ 
O 
4
=3:-
r~r l s
i~ L ~E ~ ~ fz T ~ ~; 5~ '~,~;
~,aa..~.  ~;  -  ,
f1,~1ASSACH~SETTS 
;~ ~_
~_  F 
Wit' 
~ ti ~ 'M'' t '~*
i. 
~ ~ ~~ -1;~ ~~
7  ~  ~1  L
f 
j~  _ 
'~_.¢_ ~ E FT
~C  =j 
} 
} 'q
~~"~ ~ S
~;-, 
~~,,_ 
~—  ~
~,
~~ 
~ ~,,
~ 
z
~ 
~'. ~~ ~  X 
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
Ph: 508-532-5655
Fax: 508-532-5409
www.framinghamma.gov/CityCouncil
FRAMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL
ORDER N0. 2019-036-001
REQUEST OF THE ENVIRONMENT & SUSTAINABILITY SUBCOMMITTEE
UPON THE REQUEST OF THE ENVIRONMENT & SUSTAINABILITY SUBCOMMITTEE, THE CITY OF FRAMINGHAM, 
THROUGH THE FRAMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL, IT IS SO ORDERED: 
That the City Council votes to amend the General Bylaws, Section V: Health and safety with a
new Section 32: Nuisance Noise Ordinance. The full text of the Ordinance follows this Order. 
~iR Sr RFa nin~~;
YEAS: Cannon, Giombetti, Grove, Kind, Richardson, Rossi, Shepard, Sisitsky, Steiner, Tully Stoll
NAYS: None
ABSTAIN: None
ABSENT: Torres
PASSED IN COUNCIL: OCTOBER 15, 2019
SECOND READING
YEAS: Cannon, Giombetti, Grove, King, Richardson, Rossi, Shepard, Sisitsky, Steiner, Torres, Tully Stoll
NAYS: None
ABSTAIN: None
PASSED IN COUNCIL: OCTOBER 29, 2019
A True Record, Attest: 
/~ 3a
Date Approved
isa .Ferguson City Clerk 
l
Date Approved
Yvonne M. Spicer, yor
Page 2
CitY of Framingham Massachusetts
Article V: 
Section 32 
Health and Safety
Nuisance Noise Ordinance
Effective January 1, 2020
32.01 Purpose
The Massachusetts Association of Health Boards finds that chronic or repeated exposure
to excessive noise is recognized by public health experts as a hazard to both physical
and mental health. It has been linked to a range of non-auditory health effects including
annoyance, sleep disturbance, cardiovascular diseases, and impairment of cognitive
performance in children. (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3988259~ 
The purpose of this Noise Ordinance is to allow the City of Framingham, Massachusetts
(the City) to establish reasonable guidelines, restrictions and limitations to maintain
acceptable noise conditions within the City. 
This ordinance defines noise criteria limits and restrictions for the purposes of (1) 
maintaining acceptable existing conditions, equipment operations, social interactions, 
and avoidance of disruption of the peace, and (2) managing and controlling potential
future noise conditions in the City stemming from development of new properties, 
equipment operations, and infrastructure. 
This ordinance is not intended to define safe noise levels to protect people's hearing or
avoid auditory damages from loud noises either within the workplace or from private
activities. As such, this ordinance is not intended to maintain public health and safety
with respect to noise. 
To enforce this Ordinance, the City may seek civil penalties pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, §
21D and/or misdemeanor criminalpenalties permitted under M.G.L. c. 272, § 53, and
may seek injunctions to prohibit current and future noise. 
Therefore, it shall be unlawful for a person or persons to knowingly generate, or allow
continued generation of noise levels which exceed the criteria limits found in Section
32.03, 32.04 32.05 or 32.06, except under conditions defined in Section 32.09, when
measured at a receiving party's property line or at any location on the receiving
property, as defined by the applicable Noise Determination methods found in Sections
32.07 and 32.08
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 1of 12
Page 3
32.02A Acoustical Terms Definitions
Community noise is generated by natural and man-made sources such as transportation
systems, industrial processes, construction operations, building air handling systems, 
power generation, agricultural processes, landscaping machinery, human activities, 
meteorological conditions, etc. In general, noise can be quantified by its magnitudinal
(loudness), tonal (frequency) and temporal (time) characteristics. The following are
definitions of terms typically used to describe community noise: 
SOUND DEFINITIONS
SOUND is a physical parameter which is produced when a vibrating surface transfers
energy in the form of air pressure waves which fluctuate above and below barometric
pressure to such a degree and within a frequency range that it can be perceived by the
human auditory system (i.e. sound can be heard.)
SOUND LEVEL METER (SLM)—Asound level meter is a calibrated electrical device used
to measure the loudness of noise. For the purposes of this bylaw, a SLM must be
capable of measuring and expressing noise levels in A-weighted decibels using an RMS
"slow" time constant in accordance with Type 2 or better accuracy requirements of ANSI
Standard S1.4. In addition, an "integrating" SLM must be used if any time-averaged
noise metrics (such as Leq or Ln percentiles) are to be reported. 
AUDIBLE FREQUENCY RANGE (and A-weighting) —Human beings can perceive noise
only if the fluctuating air pressure waves are within the so-called "audible frequency
range" of about 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz (Hertz, orcycles-per-second). However, people do
not hear noise equally well at all frequencies. As such, a frequency weighting
adjustment has been standardized in ANSI Standard S1.42 to account for humans
responding less sensitively to lower and higher frequency ranges. This frequency
weighted adjustment is referred to as "A-weighting", with results expressed as A-
weighted decibels, or d6(A).
DECIBELS (dB) —The magnitude or loudness of noise is expressed in units of decibels
(d6). Decibels relate the actual fluctuating air pressure levels against a standardized
reference air pressure level of 20micro-pascals. Human beings can hear noise over a
tremendously large range of air pressure so the use of a decibel scale (from about 0 dB
to 140 dB) is used for convenience. Zero decibels represents the "threshold of hearing",
while at the other extreme, pain and hearing damage can occur at noise levels of about
140 decibels. 
EQUIVALENT SOUND LEVEL (Leq) —The Leq represents the energy-averaged noise level
over some time period of interest. The Leq is expressed in dBA, and the time period
over which the Leq value applies should also be stated, i.e., Leq (lmin) represents a one-
minute average; Leq (24h) represents a 24-hour average, etc. 
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page Z of 12
Page 4
PURE TONE —Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a set of single
pitches. For the purposes of this chapter, a "pure tone" shall exist if an octave-band
analysis indicates one octave-band or more over both the band above and below. 
TONAL SOUND -Any sound that is judged by a listener to have the characteristics of a
pure tone, whine, hum or buzz. 
NOISE DEFINITIONS
NOISE is defined as "unwanted sound" which can occur when a source is either too
loud, uncontrollable, conveys unwanted information, masks-out other desirable sound, 
occurs at unacceptable times, or has annoying characteristics. 
BACKGROUND NOISE — is the prevailing or pre-existing noise conditions that can be
measured at a given location of interest without the contribution the noise source of
concern. 
CLEARLY AUDIBLE -means any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her
unaided hearing faculties. (As an example, if the sound source under investigation is a
portable or personal vehicular sound amplification or reproduction device, the
enforcement officer need not determine the title of a song, specific words, or the artist
performing the song. The detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is
sufficient to constitute a clearly audible sound).
NOISE POLLUTION — A condition caused by a noise source that increases noise levels
ten (10) dB(A) or more above background noise level except that it the noise source
produces a tonal sound an increase at five (5) dB(A) or more above background noise
level shall be considered sufficient to cause noise pollution. 
NUISANCE NOISE —Nuisance typically exhibits aspects such as pure tone squealing or
whining, loud impulsive noises, repetitive thumping, low-frequency airborne vibrations, 
etc. Nuisance noise is defined qualitatively by listing specific examples, as in Section
32.03 of this Ordinance. 
STATIONERY NOISE SOURCE —Sources that emit noise on a continuous or repeatable
basis and that are located in fixed positions. Example stationary noise sources would
include, but are not limited to, building mechanical (HVAC) systems, power
transformers, commercial processing machinery, etc. 
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 3 of 12
Page 5
32.026 General Definitions
CONSTRUCTION -Any and all activity necessary or incidental to the erection, 
assembling, altering, installing, repair or equipping of buildings, roadways, or utilities, 
including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling and paving. 
COMMERCIAL SERVICE EQUIPMENT —All engine- or motor-powered equipment
intended for infrequent service work in inhabited areas, typically requiring commercial
or skilled operators. Examples: chain saws, log chippers, paving rollers, pavement
breakers, pile drivers etc. 
DAYTIME Weekdays: Monday -Friday - 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Weekends: Saturday and Sunday - 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
DEMOLITION -Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, 
utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
EVENING: Weekdays: Sunday -Thursday - 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
Weekends: Friday and Saturday - 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 Midnight
EMERGENCY - An occurrence or set of circumstances requiring immediate action
involving the restoration of public utilities or the restoration of propertyto a safe
condition following a public calamity or the protection of persons or property from
imminent exposure to danger. 
EMERGENCY WORK -Work which must be performed to alleviate an emergency. 
HEAVY MOTOR VEHICLE —shall be defined as all motor vehicles having a gross vehicle
weight in excess of 10,000 pounds
HOMEOWNER'S LIGHT RESIDENTIAL OUTDOOR EQUIPMENT: All engine- or motor-
powered garden or maintenance tools intended for repetitive use in residential areas, 
typically capable of being used by a homeowner. Examples of homeowner's light
residential outdoor equipment are lawn mowers, garden tools, power tools, riding
tractors, snow blowers, snowplows, etc. 
MOTORCYLE: Any motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, 
including any bicycle with a motor or driving wheel attached, except a tractor or a motor
vehicle designed for carrying golf clubs and not more than four (4) persons, an industrial
three-wheel truck, or a motor vehicle on which the operator and passengers ride within
an enclosed cab. 
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 4 of 12
Page 6
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by a motor, such as, 
but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, buses, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, 
go-carts, snowmobiles, dune buggies, or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles. 
NIGHTTIME Weekdays: Sunday -Thursday - 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Weekends: Friday and Saturday - 12:00 Midnight to 8:00 a.m. 
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, syndicate, company, trust, 
corporation, department, bureau or agency, or any other entity recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties, including the city, its agencies and departments and any
person, as herein defined, operating under a contractual arrangement or agreement
with the city. 
PAVEMENT BREAKER: Any hydraulically or pneumatically powered impact device
intended to cut or trench pavement, subbase macadam, gravel, concrete or hard
ground. 
PILE DRIVER: An impact device designed or used for the driving of piles, columns and
other supports into soil or other material by means of impact, vibrations, pressure or
other means. 
REASONABLE PERSON —Acting on behalf of the greater good of the pubic, a reasonable
person is able-to judge in an unbiased manner the appropriatenessof a given social
situation. A reasonable person is appropriately informed, rational, capable, aware of
the law, and fair-minded when applications of the law is sought, compatible with
planning, working, or getting along with others. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a
reasonable person shall be defined as a police officer of the City, as further described in
Section 32.07
RESIDENTIAL AREA -For the purpose of this ordinance, a Residential Area will be
defined as land used in which housing predominates within the boundary from street
corner to street corner irrespective of any other Zoning Ordinance or By-Law. Housing
may vary significantly between, and through, residential areas. These include single-
family housing, multi-family residential, apartment complexes, mixed use, mixed use
complexes, mobile homes, or any building who use includes human habitation. For the
purpose of this ordinance, an apartment complex will be considered residential, not
commercial. 
32.03 Nuisance Noise Prohibitions
Noise which has the potential to annoy or disturb can be described as nuisance noise. 
Nuisance noise typically exhibits aspects such as pure tone squealing or whining, loud
impulsive noises, repetitive thumping, low-frequency air-borne vibrations, etc. 
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 5 of 12
Page 7
Noise criteria limits in this ordinance are based on the type of noise being produced, the
time of day during which the noise is generated, and the existing background noise
level. For the purposes of this bylaw, nuisance noise shall be qualitatively defined by
listing specific examples which are deemed to be annoying. 
It is prohibited for persons or equipment to generate the following nuisance noises
during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. Sunday -Thursday and 11:00 p.m. to 8:00
a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
1. The use of loud music, radios, automobile sound systems (i.e. radios). public
address systems, shouting, or other noises associated with communications or
advertisement, that have the potential to disturb receiving party or parties. 
2. The offering for sale or selling of anything by shouting or outcry within a
residential area of the city by peddlers, or hawkers. 
3. Operating or causing to be operated apublic-address loudspeaker, whether
mobile or stationary, without a permit granted by the permitting authority. 
4. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any, radio, stereo, 
compact disc player, phonograph, television, musical instrument, public address
system, loudspeaker, or sound amplifier from any source (including, but not
limited to, smart phones, tablets, computers, musical instruments, etc.) or
similar device which produces, reproducesoramplifiessound in a mannerthat
makes it clearly audible across either a residential real property boundary or in
the case of multi-unit dwellings, the receiving parties abode. 
a. Exemption: Activities open to the public, or special occasions, for which a
proper permit has been granted. 
b. Any establishment granted a license for entertainment that is amplified
by microphone, amplifier, or the like shall be subject to this provision
with the extension of one (1) hour from 11:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on
Friday and Saturday nights. 
5. The use of loud amplified or non-amplified instruments, including, but not
limited to, Brass (trumpet, trombone) Percussion (drums, cymbals) or any other
instruments that have the potential to disturb nearby residents. 
6. The unnecessary (i.e. false) sounding of vehicle security alarm systems. 
7. The emptying and/or replacing of waste dumpsters. 
8. The use of HOMEOWNER'S LIGHT RESIDENTIAL OUTDOOR EQUIPMENT such as
but not limited to lawn mowers and leaf blowers. 
9. The keeping of any animal or bird which frequently and for continued periods of
time causes a condition of noise. 
10. The loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, 
containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects in a mannerthat
causes a condition of noise pollution across a residential real property boundary. 
11. No establishment granted a liquor license shall permit crowd noise to be audible
beyond the premises that has the potential to disturb nearby residents. 
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 6 of 12
Page 8
12. Construction and/or demolition activities. It is understood that construction and
demolition are inherently noisy activities which will likely be heard by adjacent
residents and business operators. As such, the intent is to balance the needs for
the construction contractors to perform the necessary work with the needs of
the community for peace and quiet. (See Table #2 -Construction Noise Criteria
Limits -for Hours.)
32.04 Stationary Noise Sources
Stationary sources of noise may include, but are not limited to, building HVAC systems, 
power generation facilities, industrial equipment, water or sewage pump stations, 
railroad and subway lay-over facilities, electric power transformers, commercial
factories and plants, truck depots, and recreational events. The noise level emitted by
stationary noise sources shall not exceed the limits contained in Table 1when measured
at the property line of the receiving property. 
Table 1
Noise Criteria Limits from Stationary Noise Sources
Receiver Lan -Use
Residential: 
-including private residences, 
multi-family residences, 
apartment complexes, 
retirement homes, etc. 
Residential within Commercial: 
-mixed land-use, primarily
commercial areas but with
some residential development, 
hotel/motels, hospitals etc. 
Commercial: 
-including retail stores, 
business offices, houses of
worship, restaurants, libraries, 
theaters, public parks etc. 
Daytime
Noise Limit
(7 a.m. to 6 p.m.)
55 dBAs Leq (1
minute) or
Background Leq (1
min), whichever is
greater
60 dBAs Leq (1
min) or
Background Leq (1
min), whichever is
greater
65 dBAs Leq (1
min) or
Background Leq (1
min), whichever is
greater 
Evening
Noise Limit
(6 p.m. to 10 p.m.)
50 dBAs Leq (1
minute) or
Background Leq (1
min), whichever is
greater
60 d6As Leq (1min) or
Background Leq (1
min), whichever is
greater
65 dBAs Leq (1min) or
Background Leq (1
min), whichever is
greater 
Nighttime
Noise Limit
(10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)
45 dBAs Leq (1
minute) or
Background Leq (1
min), whichever is
greater
55 d6As Leq (1min) or
Background Leq (1
min), whichever is
greater
60 dBAs Leq (1min) or
Background Leq (1
min), whichever is
greater
Note: Background Leq (1min) noise levels should be measured without the noise source
in question operating. 
Average Noise levels measurements can be estimated if an integrating leq noise meter
is not available. 
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 7 of 12
Page 9
Section 32.05 Construction Noise Sources
In general, construction and/or demolition activities shall only be permitted to occur
within the City during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. However, it is understood that
construction and demolition are inherently noisy activities which will likely be heard by
adjacent residents and business operators during short periods of time. As such, the
intent of this section is to balance the needs for the construction contractors to perform
the necessary work with the needs of the community for peace and quiet. 
Therefore, cumulative noise generated by construction and/or demolition activities and
operations shall not exceed the limits contained in Table 2 when evaluated at the
property line of the receiving property, nor shall the noise emission level of any
individual piece of construction equipment exceed the noise emission limits contained
in Table 2 when measured at a distance of 50 feet from the loudest side of the piece of
equipment. 
Table 2Construction Noise Criteria Limits
Daytime Evening Nighttime
Receiver Land-Use  Noise limit
(7 a.m. to 6 p.m.) 
Noise limit
(6 p.m. to 10 p.m.) 
Noise Limit
(10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)
Residential: -including private 65 dBAs L10 or Bkgd 60 dBAs L10 or N/A (*)
residences, multi-family L10 + 5 dBAs, Bkgd L10 + 5  Non-emergency
residences, apartment whichever is great dBAs,  construction and/or
complexes, retirement homes,  whichever is  demolition activities
etc  greater are prohibited
Residential within Commercial: 75 dBAs L10 or Bkgd 70 dBAs L10 or N/A (*) Non-
- mixed land-use, primarily L10 + 5 dBAs, Bkgd L10 + 5  emergency
commercial areas but with whichever is greater dBAs,  construction and/or
some residential development, whichever is  demolition activities
hotel/motels, hospitals, etc.  greater are prohibited
Commercial: including retail 80 dBAs L10 or Bkgd 75 d6As L10 or N/A (*)
stores, business offices, houses L10 + 5 dBAs, Bkgd L10 + 5  Non-emergency
of worship, restaurants, whichever is greater d6As,  construction and/or
libraries, theaters, public parks,  whichever is  demolition activities
etc.  greater are prohibited
Notes: Criteria approach taken from FHWA Roadway Construction Noise Handbook (FHWA, 2006).
1. X10 noise levels shall be measured over a period of 20 minutes. 
2. Background (Bkgd) L10 noise levels should be measured prior to construction commencing in the field
or without the noise source in question operating. 
3. L10 noise levels measurements can be estimated if an integrating noise meter is not available by
determining the average or leq noise level plus 3 dBA. 
4. Table 2 noise limits do not apply to roadway construction activities. 
(*) Except when determined necessary by the City Council to protect public safety. 
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 8 of 12
Page 10
Section 32.06 Motor Vehicle Noise Sources
No person shall operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor vehicle or
motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the sound level
emitted by the vehicle exceeds the following limits measured at a distance of 50 feet or
15 meters from the center line of travel. 
Table 3
Motor Vehicle and Motorcycle Noise Criteria Limits
Vehicle Class
Vehicles in excess of 10,00 pounds engaged in
interstate commerce as permitted by 40 CFR 303
(EPA Noise emission standards) 
All other vehicles if 10,000 pounds or more
Motorcycles 
Speed limit
35 mph or Less
86 dBAs
86 d6As
82 dBAs 
Speed limit
over 35 mph
90 dBAs
90 d6As
86 dBAs
32.07 Nuisance Noises Determination
It shall be unlawful to knowingly generate, or allow continued generation of, noise as
listed in Section 32.03. 
To be applicable, the police officer must hear for him/herself the noise source in
question. The police officer must take conditional, circumstantial and extenuating
factors into account. Time of day is not to be considered an extenuating circumstance. 
The following are examples of extenuating circumstances: 
1. The necessity of the noise source to continue to operate. 
2. The quality of the noise, e.g., volume, pitch, and intensity of the noise
complained of. 
3. The duration of time that the noise is expected to continue. 
32.08 Noise Compliance Measurements Determination
If fines do not result in compliance with this ordinance, or it becomes necessary to
collect quantitative noise level measurements in order to demonstrate compliance or
exceedance of the various noise criteria limits contained in this ordinance, they must be
collected in accordance with accepted practices and procedures as recommended in
ASTM Standards E1686-03, E1780-04, and E1014-84, using a sound level meter (SLM) 
capable of meeting or exceeding ANSI Standard S1.4 for Type 2 accuracy. 
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 9 of 12
Page 11
Noise data shall be collected using a calibrated SLM using a "slow" time constant with
results expressed in A-weighted decibels (dBAs). The minimum information necessary
to collect and report shall include the following: 
1. The make and model of SLM and portable calibrator used for the noise readings
2. The date which the SLM was last certified by the manufacturer, or other
independent calibration laboratory, as meeting ANSI S1.4StandardsforType 2
or better accuracy requirements (should be within previous two years).
3. TheSLM calibration readings obtained prior to, and immediately following, 
performing the compliance noise measurements. 
4. The type of windscreen used to cover the microphone. 
5. The height at which the noise readings were collected (should be at least 5 feet
above ground), and an estimate of the distance (in feet) from the noise source to
the SLM. 
6. The time of day, date, and duration of noise data collected by the SLM. 
7. An indication of the background noise level collected in the absence of the noise
source in question. 
8. A brief description of the meteorological conditions during the noise readings
including wind speed and direction, air temperature, precipitation, and ground
cover conditions. 
9. A clear and concise comparison of the measured noise level data (expressed in
dBAs) versus the applicable noise criteria limits contained in Tables 1, 2 and 3 of
this Ordinance. 
10. The findings and conclusions to be drawn from the noise compliance
measurements taken. 
32.09 Exceptions
The following cases shall be exceptions to the restrictions and criteria limits contained in
this noise ordinance. 
1. Grandfathering: All existing residential, commercial, industrial and/or agricultural
stationary noise sources as described in Section 32.04, which have been operating
on a lawful basis prior to the effective date of this ordinance, shall be allowed. 
However, this exception does not apply to any new or upgraded sources of noise
subsequently brought into operation at an existing location. 
2. Noise generated by transportation systems, such as aircraft overflights, 
commuter trains, public transit systems and buses, are generally not regulated by
local ordinances, and as such, shall not be a part of this noise ordinance. 
3. Noise emitted by State, utility or City service crews and equipment performing
emergency repairs to restore supply of and/or operation of critical public utilities
such as natural gas, electrical power, steam, potable water, telecommunications, 
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 10 of 12
Page 12
sewerage removal, etc., or when it is determined that non-emergency utility work
at night is the preferred course of action due to vehicular traffic concerns. 
4. Any noise emitted by public safety or emergency response vehicles while
performing their intended duties. Specific examples of exempt emergency
equipment include sirens, horns, generators, pumps, public address systems, 
created by schools, factory bells or whistles or governmental alerts, such as noon
whistles or siren. 
5. Noise generated by sources intended for public entertainment, when said sources
are part of a legal activity such as, but not limited to, parades, sporting events, 
public concerts, fireworks display, etc. and which have been granted a permit
from the permitting authority. 
a. Any establishment granted a license for entertainment that is amplified by
microphone, amplifier, or the like will be subject to this Ordinance. 
6. All snow clearance activities at any time of day, evening or night performed by
the municipality. 
7. Noise from snow blowers, snowplows, and other snow removal equipment during
or immediately after a snowfall, and the use of power equipment necessary for
emergency repairs or debris removal due to severe weather. 
8. The performance of City-sponsored street sweeping operations at night on public
ways which are otherwise inaccessible during daytime hours. 
32.10 Enforcement
1. A noise complaint may be made by a resident or business owner, or, at any time
at the discretion of the City in and of their own accord, to request a response
and investigation by a representative of the Framingham Police Department, of
the circumstances surrounding the noise issue. 
2. In the case of a multi-unit dwelling, the front door of the closest unit to the unit
being complained against by a properly designated investigating agent of his
own accord. 
3. The investigating agent shall collect all relevant information and prepare a
written report summarizing their findings if the circumstances are determined to
be a violation of Sections 32.03, 32.04, 32.05 or 32.06. 
4. If the investigating agent's findings indicate a violation of Sections 32.03, 32.04, 
32.05 or 32.06 said noise shall be found in violation of this Noise Ordinance and
will be cited to a civil penalty consistent with the guidelines in Section 32.11
Penalties
32.11Penalties
1. The first violation of this ordinance shall result in the issuance of a written
warning indicating the reason(s~ for the violation and stating, at the investigating
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 11 of 12
Page 13
agent's discretion, a time period within which the offender(s), must cease
production of the noise, or mitigate (reduce) the noise down to acceptable levels
which will then comply with the restrictions and noise criteria limits in this
ordinance. 
2. The second violation of this ordinance stemming from the same noise issue within
any 12-month period shall be punished by a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
3. Further violations of this ordinance within any 12-month period shall be punished
by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
4. Each such act in violation of this ordinance which either continues or occurs more
than one hour after issuance of notice of violation of this ordinance shall be
deemed a separate offense and shall be prosecuted as such. 
5. If the violation occurs on the premises of rental property which is not owned by
the offender, then in the interest of assisting property owners in exercising
responsible property management, the City will notify the owner-of-record in
writing that the violation has occurred, including the nature and circumstances of
the violation. 
32.12 Appeals
1. An offender who has been cited and/or fined under the terms and procedures of
this noise ordinance can appeal the citation within 30 days after receiving it by
presenting to the City appointed Hearing Officer any alternative information, 
situational evidence, noise measurement data, extenuating circumstances, or
explanation to the contrary of the investigating agent's findings. 
2. The Hearing Officer will serve in judgment of the appeal, and will have full
discretion to reject, request additional details, reduce the severity of the
penalties, continue, or enforce as issued the violation under appeal. 
3. The Hearing Officer may allow an offender a reasonable amount of time, as
determined by the chief of police, to come into compliance with this Ordinance, 
and may take into-account the time and cost of any required remediation
efforts. 
4. The ruling of the Hearing Officer shall be final and not subject to further appeals
within the City's governance system. 
32.13 Severability
If any provision of this ordinance shall be determined to be invalid or unenforceable by
final judgment or order of a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of
this ordinance shall continue in effect to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
Nuisance Noise Ordinance  Page 12 of 12
