r ~
r,r~ 
,~~  t, 
a  `~~~
r~r  ~  ; {~  t
~t~ '.(
~:~~! 
~.~
N1AS SAC H U S E TTY 
cEr~`~~~~~S~~'~'~~~,=~~~~j
OfiFI~~
1i?i~ ~v'G _g p ~~~; 5b
•  ~  ' i • •
Rules & Regulations
PERM[T ~  FRAMINGHAM
PLAf~! ~ ~UIL~ ~ ~~~~/
Amended July 25, 2019
Framingham Planning Board
Memorial Building •Room B14 n 150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702-8373
(508) 532-5450 • pianning.board@framinghamma.gov
Page 2
[This page is intentionally left blank] 
Page 3
Framingham Planning Board 
Rules & Regulations 
Amended July 25, 2019 
Framingham Planning Board
Memorial Building ▪ Room B14 ▪ 150 Concord Street 
Framingham, MA 01702-8373 
(508) 532-5450 ▪ planning.board@framinghamma.gov 
Page 4
City of Framingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
On September 8, 1998, pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws (M.G.L.) Chapter (c.) 40A, Section 9, the 
Framingham Planning Board held a public hearing to solicit comments on the proposed draft Planning
Board Rules & Regulations. Subsequently, at the Planning Board meeting held on September 15, 1998, 
the Planning Board voted (4-1-0) to adopt said Rules & Regulations. Hereinafter, these rules and
regulations shall be referred to as “Rules & Regulations” and may be cited as the “Planning Board Rules
& Regulations.”
Over the years,  during open public meetings, the Planning Board has voted from time to
time to amend the Rules & Regulations. Such amendments occurred on January 11, 2000, March 27, 
2001, July 12, 2007, June 12, 2008, January 14, 2010, July 7, 2011, February 16, 2012, April 12, 2012, 
May 21, 2012 March 21, 2013, April 25, 2013, June 20, 2013, July 11, 2013, July 17, 2013, June 6, 
2015, July 16, 2015, October 8, 2015, March 3, 2016, November 21, 2016, May 25, 2017, January 8, 
2018, and July 25, 2019. 
Table of Contents of the Framingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Article 1: Adoption & Amendment 
Article 2: Powers and Duties of the Planning Board 
Article 3: Organization: Membership, Terms of Office, Officers, and Vacancies 
Article 4: Associate Member 
Article 5: Duties of Officers 
Article 6: Minutes 
Article 7: Meetings: Time, Location, and Executive Session 
Article 8: Conduct of Meetings & Public Hearings 
Article 9: Quorums and Voting 
Article 10: Adoption of M.G.L. c. 39, Section 23D, “Mullin Rule” 
Article 11: Agenda Management 
Article 12: Standards of Conduct for Planning Board Members 
Article 13: Site Visits 
Article 14: Regulations Governing Administrative Fees and Administrative Fee Schedule 
Article 15: Planning Board Personnel 
Article 16: Budget and Finance 
Article 17: M.G.L. c. 44, Section 53G, Special Funds for Employing Outside Consultants 
Article 18: Central Business (CB) Zoning District Design Standards 
Article 19: Landscape Design Guidelines 
Article 20: Regulations Governing Applications for Site Plan Review for Dover Amendment Uses 
Article 21: Site Plan Review Plan Requirements 
Article 22: Site Plan Review Lighting Requirements 
Article 23: Shoppers World Sign Requirements 
Article 24: Land Disturbance and Stormwater Management Documentation Submittal Requirements 
Article 25: Special Permit Application Submittal Requirements 
Article 26: 
Article 27: Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
1 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 5
Article 1: Adoption & Amendments
Section 1.1 These Rules & Regulations were duly adopted in 1998, effective immediately upon the
majority vote of the Planning Board. After such adoption, these Rules & Regulations may be
amended from time to time during an open public meeting to remain current and compliant
with applicable regulations. 
Section 1.2 These Rules & Regulations shall be retained in the Planning Board Office and a copy
filed with the City Clerk. 
Article 2: Powers and Duties of the Planning Board
Section 2.1 In accordance with M.G.L c. 41, the Planning Board shall be responsible for, but not
limited to Section 2.1.1 – 2.1.8 of these Rules & Regulations. 
Section 2.1.1 Preparation, adoption, amendments, and the implementation of a Master Plan
for the City of Framingham under M.G.L. c. 41, Section 81D. 
Section 2.1.2 Preparation of an official Zoning Map under M.G.L c. 41, Section 81E. 
Section 2.1.3 Draft and submittal of zoning amendments for consideration by the City Council. 
Section 2.1.4 Adoption, administration, and amendments of the Rules & Regulations
Governing the Subdivision of Land in Framingham (M.G.L c. 41, Section 81K).
Section 2.1.5 Special Permit Granting Authority, when applicable. 
Section 2.1.6 Site Plan Review approval, when applicable. 
Section 2.1.7 Administer Public Way Access Ordinance, when applicable. 
Section 2.1.8 Recommend designation of scenic roads and hold public hearings on requests
regarding the Scenic Roads Act. 
Article 3: Organization: Membership, Terms of Office, Officers, and Vacancies
Section 3.1 The Planning Board shall consist of five members, each with a three year term. 
Members of the Planning Board shall be appointed by the Mayor at the recommendation and
concurrence of the City Council in staggered terms so that no more than two members’ terms
expire per year. 
Section 3.2 Term of office shall commence immediately upon appointment and qualification by the
City Clerk. 
Section 3.3 Members of the Planning Board shall elect the following officers from its members: 
Chairperson, Vice-chairperson, and Clerk. 
Section 3.4 Officers shall be elected annually during reorganization as the first order of business at
a designated meeting. 
2 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 6
Section 3.5 In the event, there is a vacancy of a member, a new member shall be appointed to the
Planning Board in accordance with M.G.L. c. 41, Section 81A.
Article 4: Associate Member 
Section 4.1 An Associate Member may be appointed in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40A, Section 9. 
Section 4.2 The term of office for the Associate Member Position shall be for one year.
Section 4.3 An Associate Member shall have only the duties as authorized by M.G.L., c. 
40A, Section 9 “for the purposes of acting on a special permit application, in the case of
absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest, on the part of any member of the planning board
or in the event of a vacancy on the board.”
Section 4.4 A vacancy occurring for any reason other than by expiration of term, may be filled for
the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner. 
Article 5: Duties of Officers
Section 5.1 The Chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall be responsible for the conduct
and decorum of the meeting. 
Section 5.2 The Vice-chairperson shall assume the duties of the Chairperson in the absence of the
Chairperson. 
Section 5.3 The Clerk shall be responsible for taking meeting minutes in the absence of the
Planning Board staff. The Clerk shall preside over the reorganization election of officers as the
first order of business of the designated meeting. 
Article 6: Minutes
Section 6.1 Minutes of all Planning Board meetings shall be prepared by the Clerk or his/her
designee, or Planning Board Office staff member, in accordance with the provisions of the
Massachusetts Open Meeting Law. Written format to be used shall be provided by the Planning
Board Administrator. 
Section 6.2 Minutes of open sessions shall become public record immediately, regardless of form. 
Minutes should be marked “DRAFT” until they are officially adopted by the Planning Board. 
Section 6.3 Approval of open meeting and executive session minutes shall be made in open session
by a majority vote of the Planning Board. Executive session minutes shall not be released to the
public until such time is deemed appropriate that the matter for which an executive session
was needed has been resolved. 
Section 6.4 Once the Planning Board approves minutes, such minutes may be amended to improve
clarity, accuracy, and completeness, but shall not be amended to re-open debate on a
previously decided agenda item. Amendments must be made in open session and noted in that
meeting’s minutes. Revised minutes should be marked, as amended, with the revision date. 
3 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 7
Section 6.5 Official minutes shall be signed by the Clerk or his/her designee and the presiding
Chairperson at the time the vote is taken. Minutes shall be released and filed with the City Clerk
on or after the following meeting. 
Section 6.7 Executive Session minutes remain closed to the public for as long as their publication
would defeat the purpose of the session. Executive Session minutes must be made public as
soon as the reason for secrecy no longer applies. 
Article 7: Meetings: Time, Location, and Executive Session
Section 7.1 All meetings of the Planning Board shall be held in accordance with the provisions of
the Massachusetts Open Meeting Law. 
Section 7.2 All meetings of the Planning Board shall be held in the Memorial Building or such other
available municipal building, unless restricted by space availability. 
Section 7.3 Meetings of the Planning Board shall begin at 7:00 p.m. unless the Planning Board by
majority vote sets a different time for a particular meeting. No Planning Board meeting shall
begin earlier than 7:00 p.m., except for scheduled Executive Sessions. Executive Sessions may
begin at 6:00 p.m. 
Article 8: Conduct of Meetings & Public Hearings
Section 8.1 The Chairperson shall establish rules of parliamentary procedure to enforce order and
decorum as may be necessary. Such rules shall promote efficient time management as well as
professional conduct of Planning Board business, guided by a desire to engage public input on
matters requiring such input before the Planning Board. 
Section 8.2 A public meeting or public hearing shall be directed by the Planning Board Chairperson,
as applicable. 
•  Opening of a public hearing, reading of the legal ad, introduction of the project or topic, 
in addition to an explanation of the basic process and expected conduct of the meeting; 
•  Invite the Applicant/presenter/project team to provide a presentation; 
•  Invite the Planning Board’s peer review consultant to provide a presentation; 
•  Request for the Planning Board Administrator to provide project review statement
and/or presentation of comments and/or relevant material(s) including a recap of any 
Technical Review Team (TRT) meeting, and relative notes; 
•  Request comments, questions, clarification, etc. from members of the Planning Board; 
and
•  Open the hearing to the public to solicit comments, questions or points of clarification
from abutters and all other parties of interest; invite follow-up and/or closing remarks 
from the Applicant, Planning Board, or Planning Board peer review consultant, and/or
Planning Board Administrator. 
4 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 8
Section 8.3 The Chairperson shall reserve the right to limit presentations to those that are only
relevant and non-repetitive regarding matters being discussed. All comments by the public shall
be limited to five minutes in the interest of preserving an efficient process, unless otherwise
allowed at the discretion of the Chairperson. 
Article 9: Quorums and Voting
Section 9.1 A quorum of three members of the Planning Board shall be required to conduct
business. 
Section 9.2 All votes must take place at a Planning Board meeting in person. Remote participation
is prohibited, therefore no phone-in, email, video conference, or fax votes are permitted. 
Section 9.3 Planning Board members present may be counted to determine whether a quorum is
present even if they abstain from voting affirmatively or negatively. Exception: if the Planning
Board member is abstaining due to conflict of interest, he/she cannot be counted as being
present for the quorum for that portion of the meeting for which he/she is disqualified due to a
conflict of interest. 
Section 9.4 A tie vote defeats a motion. 
Section 9.5 Planning Board votes shall be a simple majority of those present and voting except for
special permits requiring a “super majority” four-fifths vote by statute. 
Section 9.6 A “super majority” of a five member Planning Board is four. This number is required for
passage of a motion regardless of the number present. 
Section 9.7 Any member of the Planning Board can move to reconsider a vote either on the same
night of the vote taken or as the first order of business at the next scheduled meeting. A two-
thirds (three out of four / four out of five) is necessary for reconsideration to prevail. 
5 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 9
Article 10: Adoption of M.G.L. c. 39, Section 23D, “Mullin Rule” 
Section 10.1 Language from M.G.L. c. 39, Section 23D 
(a) Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, upon municipal
acceptance of this section for 1 or more types of adjudicatory hearings, a member of
any municipal board, committee or commission when holding an adjudicatory hearing
shall not be disqualified from voting in the matter solely due to that member’s absence
from no more than a single session of the hearing at which testimony or other evidence
is received. Before any such missed session, which evidence shall include an audio or
video recording of the missed session or a transcript thereof. The written certification
shall be part of the record of the hearing. Nothing in this section shall change, replace, 
negate or otherwise supersede applicable quorum requirements. 
Section 10.2 In May of 2013, Annual Town Meeting voted to adopt M.G.L. c. 39, Section 23D, the
“Mullin Rule.” This adoption solely pertains to the Planning Board. 
Section 10.3 Applicability of the “Mullin Rule”: Upon missing a public hearing a member may enact
his/her rights under the Mullin Rule by reviewing all material presented and discussed during the
public hearing including the official audio, video, or transcript of the missed hearing. The member
must then complete the adopted affidavit and file it with the City Clerk’s Office. A copy shall be
retained in the Planning Board Office and placed in the corresponding project folder as part of
the permanent record. 
Article 11: Agenda Management
Section 11.1 The Planning Board Administrator and the Chairperson shall be responsible for
management of meeting agendas. 
Section 11.2 The Planning Board Administrator and staff shall prepare a weekly package of
correspondence and supporting documents. Such packets shall be provided electronically
and/or mailed to all Planning Board members for review within a reasonable time to
accommodate such review. 
Section 11.3 Application submittals whether new or revised shall be made in a timely manner to
accommodate proper review needed for consideration at the following meeting. The Planning
Board reserves the right to accept or deny such consideration. Documents requiring staff or
department review and response must be submitted one week prior to the scheduled hearing’s
submittal deadline unless otherwise determined to be allowed by the Planning Board
Administrator. 
6 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 10
Section 11.4 The Planning Board Administrator shall not schedule any application deemed
incomplete for Planning Board consideration. Requests for waivers shall be taken up as first
order of business during the opening public hearing. 
Article 12: Standards of Conduct for Planning Board Members
Section 12.1 Planning Board members are obligated to serve the public interest, to conduct
himself/herself to maintain public confidence in the Planning Board, to meet the fundamental
responsibility of fairness, and to comply with all statutory regulations. 
Section 12.2 A member of the Planning Board shall conduct himself/herself in accordance with
M.G.L. c. 268A (Conflict of Interest). This includes but is not limited to the following: 
1. Not asking for or accepting anything (regardless of value), if it is offered in exchange for
your agreeing to perform or not perform an official act. 
2. Not asking for or accepting any “gift” worth $50.00 or more from anyone with whom
you have official dealings. 
3. Not taking any action that could create an appearance of conflict unless you make a
proper public disclosure. 
4. Not disclosing confidential information. 
5. Not taking official action that will affect the financial interests of yourself, your family, a
business partner, etc. 
Section 12.3 Individual Planning Board members shall not meet with an Applicant and/or their
representative outside of a Planning Board meeting unless authorized to do so by the Planning
Board. For administrative purposes only, the Chairperson may meet jointly with the Planning
Board Administrator, Applicant, and/or their representative. 
Article 13: Site Visits
Section 13.1 A “site visit” is defined as a visit by the Planning Board to a location that is the subject
of an application before the Planning Board. The visit shall be in the company of the owner, 
applicant, and/or the applicant’s representative when it involves visiting areas that are not
customarily available for public inspection. 
Section 13.2 No formal motions shall be made nor votes taken at a “site visit”.
Article 14: Regulations Governing Administrative Fees and Administrative Fee Schedule
Section 14.1 Procedural History: On March 27, 2001, the Planning Board held a public hearing to
consider regulations governing administrative fees and an administrative fee schedule (M.G.L. 
c. 40, Section 22F). At such time, the Planning Board voted to adopt regulations governing
administrative fees and an Administrative Fee Schedule. These Rules & Regulations governing
administrative fees and the Administrative Fee Schedule are subject to revisions in a manner
spelled out herein. 
7 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 11
Section 14.2 This Article has been adopted to produce a more equitable administrative fee 
schedule that more accurately reflects the cost of technical review of applications for the
Planning Board. 
Section 14.3 The Planning Board may impose reasonable administrative fees for the review of
applications that come before it as deemed necessary from time to time. 
Section 14.4 Administrative fees shall be assessed with regard to all Planning Board applications, in
order to offset the expense of review by the Planning Board, the Planning Board Office, as well
as other municipal departments. 
Section 14.5 Administrative fees shall be submitted at the time of the submittal of the application. 
Any application filed without appropriate administrative fees shall be deemed incomplete. No
review of the application shall commence until the fee has been paid in full. 
Section 14.6 The following administrative fee schedule applies to the various applications reviewed
by the Planning Board. This administrative fee schedule supersedes all previous schedules as
they may have appeared in the Framingham Zoning Ordinances, the Rules & Regulations 
Governing the Subdivision of Land in Framingham, and any other listing that may have been
compiled from time to time for the benefit of applicants. 
8 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 12
Subdivision Rules and Regulation Fee Schedule
1. Approval Not Required (ANR) Plans 
a. Approval Not Required Application - $100 
b. Creation of new lot, per lot created - $50 
2. Preliminary Subdivision Plans -$1000.00 
3. Definitive Subdivision Plans 
a. Major Definitive Subdivision Plans - $1,500.00, plus $300.00 for each lot; or $750.00, 
plus $300.00 for each lot, when a preliminary plan has been filed within the last seven 
months. 
b. Minor Definitive Subdivision Plans $200.00 plus $100.00 for each lot created or affected. 
Framingham General Ordinances Applications
4. Application to Modify AScenic Way -$200.00 
5. Public Way Access Permit - $200 
Framingham Zoning Ordinances Applications 
6. Site Plan Review -Review of Site Plans shall require the following application fees: 
i. Major Site Plan -$2,000.00 plus $0.06 per square foot of new gross floor area
ii. Minor Site Plan/Limited Site Plan Review (Dover) -$1,000.00 plus $0.03 per square foot of new
gross floor area
iii. Minor Modification to an Approved Site Plan with no change in square footage of the
structure- $500 
7. Special Permits –
i.  One or the first Special Permit application -$500.00 
ii. Each Special Permit after the first Special Permit - $200.00 
iii. Each Special Permit filed with a SitePlan Review application - $200.00 
8. Modification of Special Permit -$200.00
9. Special Permit for P.U.D. -$ 5,000.00 +$15.00/unit at Prelim plus -$35.00/unit at Definitive 
Submittal 
10. Extension of time for an Approved Site Plan Review or Special Permit - $200 
Other Planning Board Applications/Review
11. Application to Modify Zoning District - $500.00 
12. Shoppers World Sign Application - Application fee in accordance with the Department of
Inspectional Services (Building Department) Sign Application – fee paid to the
Department of Inspectional Services (Building Department) 
Section 14.7 Schedule of Miscellaneous Administrative Fees and Charges are as follows: 
1. Copies of Documents 
i. Letter or legal Size - $0.25 per sheet* 
ii. 11”x17” - $0.50 per sheet* 
2. Zoning Ordinances - $15.00* 
3. Zoning Map -$6.00* 
4. Subdivision Rules and Regulations - $10.00* 
5. * Postage Charge for Mailing - Additional $4.00 
6. Large Plan Sheet $4.00 
9 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 13
Section 14.8 The Planning Board reserves the right to waive or reduce any Administrative Fee at
their discretion. 
Section 14.9 No Administrative Fee refunds will be given by the Planning Board once an application
review has commenced. Application withdrawal constitutes forfeiture of all administrative fees
paid. 
Section 14.10 The Planning Board may review and revise its regulations and administrative fee
schedules, from time to time, as it deems necessary. 
Section 14.10.1  Any new regulations or alterations to the administrative fee schedule shall
take effect upon vote of the Planning Board and filing of a copy of the
amendments with the City Clerk. 
Article 15: Planning Board Personnel
Section 15.1 The Planning Board shall employ necessary staff, such as an Administrator,
Administrative Assistant/Communication Outreach Coordinator, Associate Planner, and any
other position deemed necessary. Such positions shall be approved through the appropriate
municipal process to accommodate the department’s needs. 
Section 15.2 The Planning Board Administrator’s primary responsibilities are to carry out the City’s
development review process, to manage the administrative and planning operations of the
Planning Board Office, and to carry out the duties and responsibilities identified in the approved
job description for the position. The Planning Board Administrator serves as the municipal point
of contact for all M.G.L. c. 43D expedited permitting applications, point of contact for all
inquiries by applicants and their attorneys, Chairs of Boards, Commissions, Committees, and
other interested parties. This position also conducts wide range of development and land use
planning activities, such as project construction conformance review, master land use plan
implementation, and long range planning projects. The Planning Board Administrator reports
directly to the Planning Board and the Mayor. 
Section 15.3 The Administrative Assistant/Communication Outreach Coordinator’s primary role is
to assist the Planning Board Administrator with the financial and outreach and communication
operations of the Planning Board Office and to carry out the duties and responsibilities as
identified in the approved job description for this position. This position reports directly to the
Planning Board Administrator. 
Section 15.4 The Associate Planner assists in planning operations and reports directly to the
Planning Board Administrator. Responsibilities include a wide range of development and land
use planning activities, such as project construction conformance review, master land use plan
implementation, and long range planning projects, and to carry out the duties and
responsibilities identified in the approved job description for this position. 
10 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 14
Article 16: Budget and Finance
Section 16.1 The Planning Board Administrator is responsible for managing the budget and all
associated accounts relative to the Planning Board. 
Section 16.2 The Planning Board Administrator is responsible for the preparation of the Annual
Planning Board Budget, subject to review and approval of the Planning Board. The Planning
Board Administrator shall develop the budget in consultation with the Planning Board. 
Article 17: M.G.L. c. 44, Section 53G, Special Funds for Employing Outside Consultants
Section 17.1 On July 24, 1990, at a Public Hearing, the Framingham Planning Board voted 5-0-0 to
adopt the Acts of 1989, M.G.L. c. 44, Section 53G. 
Section 17.2 These Rules & Regulations for outside consultants are adopted for special permit
applications under M.G.L. c. 40A, Section 9 and M.G.L. c. 44, Section 53G, as amended. 
Section 17.3 The Planning Board, at its sole discretion, may determine that a proposed project’s
size, scale, complexity, potential impact, or particular land use warrants retaining the use of
licensed professional independent consultants in any given respective field. Such consultants
shall provide professional guidance to assist the Planning Board with the necessary review and
analysis needed to make informed decisions that comply with all relevant laws and regulations
regarding complex issues. The Planning Board shall select and retain for a reasonable fee such
consultants at the expense of the Applicant. 
Section 17.4 Consultant Review Fees shall be based upon an estimated review cost. Upon notice of
receipt, Review Fees shall be deposited in an account established pursuant to M.G.L. c. 44, 
Section 53G. No review shall begin nor shall a decision be granted until such fee has been paid
in full by the applicant. 
Section 17.5 Independent project consultants shall submit a scope of work and all associated
predictable costs for their services as requested by the Planning Board for review prior to
retaining their services. No supplemental change orders will be approved unless deemed
necessary by the Planning Board Administrator with the concurrence of the Planning Board. 
Section 17.6 As a condition of approval of a Site Plan Review or special permit, the Planning Board
may require a Supplemental Consultant Review Fee for ensuring the availability of funds during
the inspection phase of the review process. 
Section 17.7 The Consultant Review Fee is to be deposited into a special account as set forth in
M.G.L. c. 44, Section 53G. 
Section 17.7.1 Outside consultants retained by the Planning Board to assist in the review of an
application shall be paid from this account. 
Section 17.7.2 Consultant Review Fees shall be turned over to the City Treasurer by the
Planning Board for deposit into a Consultant Review Account. 
11 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 15
Section 17.7.3 A copy of the latest statement from the banking institution handling the
Consultant Review Account shall be forwarded from the office of the City
Treasurer to the Planning Board Office as soon as it is received for timely and
accurate accounting. 
Section 17.7.4 The City Treasurer shall prepare a report on activity in the Consultant Review
Account on an annual basis. This report shall be submitted to the City Council
and the Mayor for their review. 
Section 17.8 The applicant shall be notified of the consultant selection prior to initiation of
consultant efforts. As provided in M.G.L. c. 44, Section 53G, the applicant may administratively
appeal the selection of the consultant to the City Council (M.G.L. c. 44, Section 53G), on
grounds that the proposed consultant selected has a conflict of interest or that the proposed
consultant does not possess the minimum required qualifications of an educational degree or
three or more years of practices in, or closely related to, the field at issue. Such an appeal may
be initiated by the applicant filing notice with the City Clerk within seven calendar days of
notice of the selection. If no decision is rendered by the City Council within one month of said
appeal then the Planning Board consultant selection shall prevail. The required time limits for
action upon an application by the Planning Board shall not preclude further judicial review, if
otherwise permitted by law, on the grounds provided for this section. 
Section 17.9 Failure of an applicant to pay consultant review fees determined by the Planning
Board may be grounds for application disapproval. 
Article 18: Central Business (CB) Zoning District Design Standards
Refer to the Planning Board’s Project Review Guidelines for the Central Business (CB) Zoning District
Design Standards. 
Article 19: Landscape Design Guidelines
Refer to the Framingham Planning Board’s Project Review Guidelines for Landscaping Design
Guidelines. 
Article 20: Regulations Governing Applications for Site Plan Review for Dover Amendment Uses
Section 20.1 This Article has been adopted to provide additional explanation regarding the
requirements and scope of review for site plan applications and hearings held by the Planning
Board. This Article is intended to provide guidance under Framingham Zoning Ordinances, Section
VI.F, Site Plan Review, for those applicants and applications partially exempt from the Framingham
Zoning Ordinances under M.G.L. c. 40A, Section 3, the Dover Amendment Uses (hereinafter, 
“Dover Uses”).
12 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 16
The Dover Amendment states: 
No zoning ordinance or by-law shall…prohibit, regulate or restrict the use of land or
structures for religious uses or for educational purposes…provided, however, that such
land or structure may be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and
height of structures and determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking
and building coverage requirements.
Section 20.2 Applicability 
Section 20.2.1 This Article applies to any structure, use, alteration, and/or improvement as to
which the Dover Uses applies, requiring limited site plan review and approval
under the Framingham Zoning Ordinances, Section VI.F.2. With regard to Dover
Uses, the provisions of this Article shall govern and any other Regulations adopted
by the Planning Board for Site Plan Review under Section VI.F of the Zoning
Ordinances are not applicable. 
Section 20.2.2 Nothing in this Article relieves the applicant of its obligation to comply with and
satisfy all relevant sections and requirements under the Framingham Zoning
Ordinances. 
Section 20.3 Application and Review Procedure 
Section 20.3.1 Determination of Status under M.G.L. c. 40A, Section 3. 
Pursuant to the Framingham Zoning Ordinances, Section VI.F.2, prior to filing an application for
Site Plan Review with the Planning Board, an applicant must submit a request to the Building
Commissioner for a written determination of whether the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40A, Section 3,
are applicable. This determination as to whether the Dover Uses applies to a particular proposed
use will be made solely by the Building Commissioner. 
Section 20.3.2 Submission of Applications: Following a written determination from the Building
Commissioner, an applicant shall submit the application for Site Plan Review approval in
accordance with the Framingham Zoning Ordinances, Sections VI.F.4.a.2)iii; 3), 10), and plans
compliant with the requirements set forth on Section VI.F.4.b to the Planning Board, together
with a copy of the Building Commissioner’s written determination. The application shall comply
with those requirements of Article 21: Site Plan Review Plan Requirements, as applicable to
Minor Site Plan Review.
Section 20.3.3 Contents and Scope of Application: The Planning Board has identified specific
subsections of the Framingham Zoning Ordinances, not applicable to Dover Use applicants. 
Specifically, a Dover Uses applicant is exempt from the following sections of the Framingham
Zoning Ordinances: 
1. Section VI.F.5, with the exception of items in Section VI.F.5.b. pertaining to bulk and height
of the structure and Section VI.F.5.e pertaining to open space review; 
2. Section VI.F.4.11) Traffic Impact Report; 
3. Section VI.F.4.12) Environmental Impact Report; 
13 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 17
4. Section VI.F.6.a Retain Community Character; 
5. Section VI.F.6.c Environmental Impact, in its entirety; 
6. Section VI.F.6.d Health, in its entirety; 
7. Section VI.F.6.e Public Services and Utilities, in its entirety; 
8. Section VI.F.6.f Land planning; 
9. Not required to address the Traffic portion of Section VI.F.6.b. 
Section 20.4 At the outset of the opening of a public hearing on a Dover Use application, the
Chairperson will: 
1. identify those Sections of the Framingham Zoning Ordinance within Section VI.F that are
relevant to the review of the application by the Planning Board; 
2. inform the public of the Building Commissioner’s written determination of the applicability
of M.G.L. c. 40A, Section 3, including making available at that hearing a copy of such
determination; and
3. review for the public the provisions of Article 8 of these Rules & Regulations regarding
conduct of meetings and public hearings. 
Section 20.5 A public hearing is also an opportunity for members of the public to ask questions or
make comments about the proposed development project. At the outset of public comment, 
the Chairperson will direct the public to frame their questions and comments to issues raised by
the application that are within the scope of the Planning Board's jurisdiction. 
Section 20.6 A decision on a Dover Use application will be made in accordance with the Framingham
Zoning Ordinances, Section VI.F.7.a-b. Subject to administrative or other municipal requirements
beyond its control, the Planning Board will work diligently to complete its limited site plan review
within 60 days of the filing of a complete application. Approval of a Dover Use application will not
require off-site improvements as a condition of approval. 
Section 20.7 The Planning Board shall approve a Dover Use application in accordance with Section
VI.F.7.b. of the Framingham Zoning Ordinances, but the Planning Board’s review shall be limited to 
those provisions imposing reasonable regulations upon the bulk and height of structures and
determining yard sizes, lot areas, setbacks, open spaces, parking and building coverage
requirements as provided in M.G.L. c. 40A, Section 3. 
Section 20.8 In granting approval of a Dover Use application the Planning Board may impose
reasonable conditions, limitations, and safeguards that shall be in writing and shall be a part of
such approval. Such conditions will not include matters and subjects contained in the
Framingham Zoning Ordinances: 
1. Sections VI.F.8(a),(b), (c), (d), (e), (g) and (i);
2. Section VI.F.8 as to mitigation measures. 
Section 20.9 The Planning Board shall be responsible for deciding the meaning or intent of any
provision of the Framingham Zoning Ordinances, Section VI.F.9. The Planning Board may consult 
with the City Solicitor to determine the meaning or intent of any unclear provision that may be in
dispute. 
14 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
Page 18
Article 21: Site Plan Review Plan Requirements
Refer to the Framingham Planning Board’s Project Review Guidelines for Site Plan Review Plan
Requirements. 
Article 22: Lighting Requirements 
Refer to the Framingham Planning Board’s Project Review Guidelines for Lighting Requirements. 
Article 23: Shoppers World Sign Requirements 
Refer to the Framingham Planning Board’s Project Review Guidelines for the Shoppers World Sign
Requirements 
Article 24: Land Disturbance and Stormwater Management Documentation Submittal 
Refer to the Framingham Planning Board’s Project Review Guidelines for the Land Disturbance and
Stormwater Management Documentation Submittal Requirements. 
Article 25: Special Permit Application Submittal Requirements
Refer to the Framingham Planning Board’s Project Review Guidelines for Special Permit Applicant
Submittal Requirements. 
Article 26: 
Article 27: Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Refer to the Framingham Planning Board’s Project Review Guidelines for the Nobscot Village Design
Guidelines (Article 8).
15 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d R u l e s  & R e g u l a t i o n s  J a n u a r y 8 ,  2 0 1 8 
