BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods/Design
  Discussion
Background
Methods/Design
Ten lessons to successfully conduct research with vulnerable populations using the Belmont report
  Respect for persons
    Lesson 1: There’s no ‘simple’ way to conduct studies with vulnerable populations, but make every attempt to be prudent
    Lesson 2: Information, like people, requires protection
  Beneficence
    Lesson 3: Procedures for data security need to be thorough even if they didn’t exist previously
    Lesson 4: Trailblazing for your study requires tremendous effort but could yield significant rewards
    Lesson 5: Findings could be useful without direct benefits
  Justice
    Lesson 6: Remember the “so what” factor about your study
    Lesson 7: Bring stakeholders to the table to obtain buy-in
    Lesson 8: Bear in mind the significance of the population you’re studying
    Lesson 9: Do exceptional work and share it with stakeholders/constituents
    Lesson 10: Persistence and principled: knowing your work matters
Discussion
Competing interests
Acknowledgements
References
Page 1
Quinn Health and Justice (2015) 3:1
DOI 10.1186/s40352-014-0013-z
STUDY PROTOCOL  Open Access
General considerations for research with
vulnerable populations: Ten lessons for success
Camille R Quinn
Abstract
Background: This paper offers practical insights for researchers who conduct studies with vulnerable populations,
including those using secondary data sources from government entities.
Methods/Design: The paper is based on the approval process to secure secondary government data from a
Midwestern county juvenile probation department and the state courts for the author’s dissertation study.
Discussion: This paper proposes general considerations and ten lessons learned to successfully conduct research
with vulnerable populations and/or their information.
Youth involved in the juvenile justice system comprise a
vulnerable population based on their age and because of
their system involvement. Scholars have identified a pro-
file of vulnerable youth that is made up of primarily
poor, African American males (Foster et al. 2005),  and
risk factors associated with delinquency (Fraser et al.
1999; Werner 2000). Consequently, future research must
continue to elucidate ways to address the complex and
multi-faceted needs of vulnerable populations, especially
those involved in the juvenile justice system. One of the
key issues facing researchers studying justice involved
youth, is their designation as a vulnerable population,
and how that impacts the researchers’ ability to include
them as subjects in their studies. Consequently, re-
searchers whose studies include vulnerable populations
need to understand the specific issues related to con-
ducting research with them.
Researchers face many challenges in conducting re-
search, especially when vulnerable populations are in-
volved. The Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS) federal regulations recognize certain categories
of individuals as ‘vulnerable,’ so “they need to be accorded
special protections to make sure that researchers do not
take advantage of them” (Coleman, Menikoff, Goldner,
and Dubler 2005). Also, the federal government regulates
human subjects research with institutional review boards
Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:camille_Quinn@urmc.rochester.edu"] camille_Quinn@urmc.rochester.edu
NIH/NMIH NRSA Postdoctoral Fellow Department of Psychiatry, School of
Medicine & Dentistry, 300 Crittenden Boulevard Box PSYCH, Rochester, NY
14642, USA 
(IRBs) at academic institutions that conduct research stud-
ies. Among other things, the IRB wants to ensure that
researchers maintain privacy and confidentiality of subjects
(Schwenzer 2008) or the subjects’ information. Achieving
IRB approval for studies is a complex and time-consuming
process, and studying vulnerable populations, such as
youth in the juvenile justice system, makes the process
even more difficult. Moreover, the use of government
information about vulnerable youth requires the approval
of government entities as well as IRBs.
Background
Human ethics and research committees act as research
gatekeepers, and since many research activities involve
multiple applications and approvals, the process can
significantly delay the start and completion of a project
(McCauley-Elson et al. 2009). Consequently, it is critical
for researchers to understand the ethical principles out-
lined in the Belmont Report, especially when studying
vulnerable populations. The Belmont Report is a useful
reference for highlighting important considerations about
conducting research with vulnerable populations including
justice-involved youth. The report, prepared by the Na-
tional Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects
of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, is a declaration on
the ethical principles overseeing human experimentation
(Public Health Service 1979). The report continues to ar-
ticulate enduring normative standards regarding research
practices with vulnerable populations even though it was
originally issued in 1979 (Dresser 1996).
© 2015 Quinn; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Quinn Health and Justice (2015) 3:1  Page 2 of 7
Prisoners are a particularly vulnerable group who have
historically been included as research subjects but have
also been exploited by investigators in pursuit of useful so-
lutions to complex research problems (Gostin, Vanchieri,
and Pope 2007; Hornblum 1997, 1998; Mitford 1974).
Moreover, youth involved in the juvenile justice system
are an especially vulnerable group of research participants
who are considered to be less able to defend themselves,
and require special protection from possible abuse, ex-
ploitation, or discrimination by others in positions of
power (Rose, and Pietri 2002).
Methods/Design
The method for this paper was framed using the three
basic principles of the Belmont Report: 1) Respect for
Persons, etc.
The three basic ethical principles in the Belmont Report:
1) Respect for Persons, 2) Beneficence, and 3) Justice
provide general judgments to justify and guide research
involving human subjects. The aim of this paper is to
provide future scholars and graduate assistants with a
guide to conducting research with vulnerable popula-
tions, especially those involved in the juvenile justice
system. The ten lessons were devised based on the
author’s experience securing the government adminis-
trative data to complete a dissertation using secondary
analysis.
The issues associated transcend juvenile delinquency
as incarceration impacts all vulnerable populations includ-
ing justice involved women. Specifically, incarceration im-
pacts vulnerable populations based on their race, gender,
age, and socio-economic status as many of them may be
impoverished. Consequently, it is prudent to recognize
and reinforce the specific issues that are associated with
conducting research with these groups.
Ten lessons to successfully conduct research with
vulnerable populations using the Belmont report
Respect for persons
The Belmont Report defines respect for persons in re-
search as:
…honoring the choices of subjects capable of
exercising autonomy and protecting subjects
incapable of making their own decisions. Ethical
human experimentation preserves respect for the
subjects whose participation is essential to the
humanitarian mission of biomedical and social science
research. (Dresser 1996)
In the context of studying detained or juvenile offenders,
providing significance to these simple instructions is a
complex undertaking. 
Lesson 1: There’s no ‘simple’ way to conduct studies with
vulnerable populations, but make every attempt to be
prudent
The inclusion of vulnerable subjects in a study, espe-
cially youth involved in the justice system, significantly
adds to the difficulty. This is because justice involved
youth may not be capable of exercising autonomy to
make their own choices, so they require protection.
Their inclusion adds to the complexity that a researcher
must address in their research plan. Also, collecting data
directly from justice involved populations may not even
be an option depending upon the geographic location.
So, it’s critical for the researcher to have a clear under-
standing about the feasibility of the study and the greater
likelihood of what is needed to successfully complete it.
For example, many researchers suggest using secondary
data for research studies because of its accessibility, con-
venience, and reduced costs in time, money, and incon-
venience to participants (Vartanian 2010).  However,
these issues become more challenging when juvenile of-
fenders are included given their involvement in govern-
ment systems that must also approve the research project.
Specifically, parens partriae, “the principle that the state
must care for those who cannot take care of themselves”
is applicable to juvenile offenders (Campbell 1991, p. 769;
Snyder, and Sickmund 2006). The researcher has the task
of securing approval from their local IRB, as well as the
government entity(ies) to use the data for empirical inves-
tigation. The research plan must clearly articulate the
steps that will be taken to protect the youths’ information,
identity and confidentiality.
Lesson 2: Information, like people, requires protection
The Belmont Report contains a requirement to protect
those with diminished autonomy, including those in need
of extensive protection, such as juvenile offenders. Yet,
what must be considered when the information about
the juveniles is the focus of the study versus the juvenile
offenders themselves? In this case, the youth are not exer-
cising autonomy because those acting on their behalf are.
Consequently, the researcher must bear in mind that the
information they want is tied to those (vulnerable) individ-
uals. Unlike other large-scale publicly available datasets,
the information used for the author’s dissertation study
was not collected for research purposes; it is routinely
collected by juvenile justice personnel to conduct case
planning with the youth and their families. Also, the study
required that unique identifiers be included in the data
files so they could be merged to conduct the analysis. The
proprietors of the data had a primary concern about the
author’s procedures to ensure protection of the individ-
uals’ information. Consequently, data security procedures
were devised to assuage these concerns (these procedures
are discussed in Lesson 3).
Page 3
Quinn Health and Justice (2015) 3:1  Page 3 of 7
Specifically, one datafile came from local responses on
the Youth Assessment and Screening Instrument (YASI),
which assesses risk, need, and protective factors for
youth on probation. Also, probation officers completed
the YASI to develop case planning services for the youth.
For each case, they score the YASI following multiple
semi-structured interviews with the youth, parents or an
alternative legal guardian. Interview-based data are sup-
plemented with a systematic review of collateral sources
including police files, probation records, as well as school
and mental health reports (Orbis Partners, Inc. 2007). The
information collected with this instrument constituted the
basis for the dataset used in the author’s dissertation study.
Use of the YASI results in a score that is used for risk clas-
sification (M. Lewis, personal communication, October
10, 2012) and the scores help probation officers develop
the case plans for youth. The single YASI score is not used
in this study, but all of the individual measures of risk and
protective factors are to create variables that were ana-
lyzed in the study. The YASI “can be used in juvenile pro-
bation, detention, day reporting, youth services, schools,
police diversion and other settings with a requirement to
assess risk of negative outcomes and identify service
needs” (K. Hickey, personal communication, December
15, 2011; Orbis Partners, Inc. 2007).  Probation officers
enter YASI information into the Caseworks database while
the YASI files are maintained by a private entity (subcon-
tractor with the Administrative Office of the Courts) and
their Director of Research created a codebook for the
datafile.
The other data used in the dissertation study included
an indicator for recidivism that was derived from the
probation department management information system.
Data from 2011 to 2013 were used in this study. This file
included entries for all court orders that occurred after
an initial court finding leading to probation. In addition,
demographic information was included: age, ethnicity,
and additional unique identifiers (probation ID#,  name
and birthdate) needed to merge the YASI and recidivism
datafiles into a unique dataset for the study. Probation
officers also enter the probation and recidivism informa-
tion into the computer system and the Office of the
Chief Judge and the probation department who manage
the files. The merge was conducted by a statistics and
database consultant and comprised a series of steps to
link youth in the YASI and recidivism files using the
probation ID#,  petition ID, last name, first name, and
DOB. First, the files were linked using ID#,  a unique
identifier assigned to each youth. The probation ID# is
generated by the state's attorney's office for each youth.
While the probation ID# was ideal, it was not available
for each youth’s record in the YASI file. Therefore, a
merge strategy was employed to create a recidivism file
using probation ID#. For those records that did not find 
a match using the probation ID#,  a second merge
matched records using a petition ID. The County Clerk’s
Office assigns petition IDs for any case the youth has
and some may have several petitions ID numbers but
only one probation ID#. A final merge matched records
on first name, last name, and date of birth. Some of the
records from the recidivism file did not merge with the
YASI file either because (1) the youth didn’t recidivate
or (2) the youth recidivated but the merge failed, 3) re-
cords were in the YASI file and not in the recidivism file,
and 4) records in the recidivism file and couldn’t find a
match in the YASI files. Several checks were conducted
to identify the files that did not successfully merge with
the YASI file and 15 records were found and manually
entered. The inability to merge all of the records resulted
in an error rate of 23%. After the records were successfully
merged, a new database was created and it was deidenti-
fied by stripping the youth names, birthdates, and ID
numbers from the dataset. All of these steps were taken to
ensure the privacy and confidentiality of the youth infor-
mation that was used in the author’s study.
Beneficence
Promoting human welfare is the focus of the beneficence
principle. The Belmont Report suggests two moral duties
in a research context: 1) avoid harm, and 2) maximize
possible benefits and minimize possible harms. Current
federal policy includes additional requirements meant to
reduce the experimental risk to which children, prisoners,
and fetuses are exposed (Dresser 1996).
Lesson 3: Procedures for data security need to be thorough
even if they didn’t exist previously
The initial response from the convened review from the
University of Illinois at Chicago IRB included several
modifications including a request for the contract with a
state court’s subcontractor so they could review the data
security procedures that should be included. However,
the subcontractor did not have specific procedures for
third parties and neither did the university. Therefore,
the author consulted with numerous IT experts at the
university including the College of Social Work IT de-
partment and the University Information Technology
Officer to create the appropriate security procedures.
Consistent with the Belmont Report, procedures to
reduce risk and the potential risk of harm to subjects in
this study was critical even though this study only in-
volved administrative data with minimal risks. The
process to collect information for vulnerable popula-
tions had to be completed in conjunction with existing
protocols of governing entities and this included the
data security measures. All the data use agreements
and the IRB applications and appendices reflected the
specific data security procedures to ensure privacy and
Page 4
Quinn Health and Justice (2015) 3:1  Page 4 of 7
confidentiality of the data since it included the identi-
fiers. The greatest risk in the author’s study involved
the potential for a breach of privacy and confidentiality
of the youth by sending the data files with the identi-
fiers that were required to merge them. Some of the
procedures included having a dedicated computer in a
locked office on campus. Also, this computer had to
undergo software upgrades including the installation of
firewall, antivirus, secure file transfer and encryption
software, so that all data manipulation took place on
the encrypted computer. In addition, individuals at
each organization that would transfer the data had to
use secure file transfer software as well. Representa-
tives from each organization were assigned a university
ID and password (registered to the author’s faculty
sponsor for site access) to transfer the datasets to the
secure site. After the data files were secured and suc-
cessfully merged by the statistics and database consult-
ant, the identifiers were stripped resulting in a merged
deidentified dataset. With these procedures, the risk of
a confidentiality and privacy breach was addressed to
the greatest extent possible.
Lesson 4: Trailblazing for your study requires tremendous
effort but could yield significant rewards
Devising a study that has not been done before is a her-
culean task and pursuing one with vulnerable popula-
tions only adds to the potential for scrutiny. The
ultimate focus of the beneficence principle is to not do
harm and maximize benefits while minimizing harm to
the subjects. Since the information in this study had
never been used for empirical investigation, the author
had to lead the effort in bringing the study to fruition.
Numerous issues had to be addressed.
Lesson 5: Findings could be useful without direct benefits
It is understood that research burdens should not be im-
posed on historically disadvantaged populations including
those involved with the justice system. However, to aban-
don research on these conditions alone would suggest that
their issues warrant less attention than other research
topics (Dresser 1996). There were no direct benefits to the
subjects in this study as their information was the focus
not the subjects themselves. Yet, the findings may inform
practitioners’  understandings about this sample of youth
on probation. For example, highlighting the unmet needs
of youth on probation that are associated with their risk
factors could provide practitioners with indicators for ser-
vice provision to reduce their delinquent behavior (Abram,
Teplin, McClelland, and Dulcan 2003; Lipsey and Cullen
2007; Lipsey, Wilson, and Cothern 2000; Nissen 2006;
Teplin et al. 2002). 
Justice
The concept of justice in research rests on the duty of the
researcher to fairly distribute the benefits. In addition, re-
search burdens should not be disproportionately imposed
on historically disadvantaged persons, a category that in-
cludes juvenile offenders (Dresser 1996). Specifically, the
selection of “human subjects needs to be scrutinized to
ensure that certain classes of people are not being system-
atically selected because of their availability, their compro-
mised position, or their manipulability, rather than for
reasons directly related to the problem being studied”
(Public Health Service 1979).
Lesson 6: Remember the “so what” factor about your study
It is helpful to have a prepared “elevator speech” about
your study and it should include: who, what, why and
how. This is especially important when vulnerable popu-
lations are the subjects in the study as this information
will have to be communicated often and to multiple
stakeholders. The more succinct your description of the
study is, the better; in particular, the “why” part should
be solid, given the potential scrutiny associated with re-
search on vulnerable populations. For example, research
has often focused on the risks associated with juvenile
delinquency and recidivism and this study focused on
both risk and protective factors that youth possess. In
addition, the study addressed a major gap as the major-
ity of research has been conducted on boys and detained
and incarcerated youth, so the focus on probation and
girls was unique. Also, having discussions with probation
administrators in which they described the need for this
investigation reinforced the author’s ability to convey the
importance of the study to others.
Lesson 7: Bring stakeholders to the table to obtain buy-in
For research to contribute to addressing major social
issues, collaborations between researchers and practi-
tioners (including government staff, administrators
and policy makers, and community advocates) are in-
creasingly being seen as vital. Even in the case of this
study that used juvenile offenders’  information, their
selection was directly related to the problem but gov-
ernment agencies still scrutinized the research study
given the compromised position of the youth. Academic-
practitioner collaborations may be the best approach to
assuage some of the challenges associated with research
on vulnerable populations. Specific examples include
framing research questions in a way that will be meaning-
ful to practitioners, gaining access to field research sites or
information needed for the study, and interpreting results
accurately within their professional context. Given the
potential benefit of academic-practitioner collabora-
tions as well as potential difficulties involved in joint
work between individuals with different perspectives
Page 5
Quinn Health and Justice (2015) 3:1  Page 5 of 7
and priorities (Bartunek and Louis 1996; Nyden, and
Wiewel 1992),  it is important to note what makes
collaborations successful.
Collecting data from government agencies can be chal-
lenging, so having relationships with appropriate contacts
can also make a difference in the approval process. Identi-
fying key people early on and throughout the process will
enhance the researcher’s ability to think about the nuances
of the study. The author started with an administrator in
juvenile probation and he eventually joined the research
team. He directed the author to the state courts and a
state subcontractor that houses the data needed for
the study.
Some research notes some important collaborative
team requirements, which concern attitudes and motiv-
ation including the creation of trust, the absence of hid-
den agendas, as well as the presence of mutual respect
among group members (Easterby-Smith and Malina
1999; Jassawalla, and Sashittal 1998). Furthermore, trust
has been found to come from the belief that the collab-
oration will be long-lasting (Jassawalla, and Sashittal
1998).  The author’s experience building collaborations
with representatives from government entities to secure
information for the study was built on trust and trans-
parency. First, the author developed an awareness of the
complex web of interconnections: university, probation,
courts, and a private entity affiliated with the courts,
etc.,  and the need to attend to each one in a unique
manner. The importance of knowing the key players at
each organization cannot be overemphasized, especially
building and nurturing relationships with them. It took
many months of discussions with county, state and
other representatives before gaining a clearer idea of
what was needed to proceed with the study. Having a
relationship with one or more of these individuals is
critical because government employees understand the
bureaucracy that surrounds their work, and their intim-
ate knowledge of “how things are done” could make or
break the IRB approval process, as well as the success of
the study. Also, government employees must follow reg-
ulations that operate regardless of the research needs
and/or expectations. For example, it took the author
nearly two years to develop a relationship with a key
contact at the state courts. Ultimately, the best course
of action was to be persistent, identify the best way to
communicate with them (e-mail, phone or fax),  and
follow up with them relentlessly. Staying mindful of this
increased the likelihood of their assistance.
Lesson 8: Bear in mind the significance of the population
you’re studying
The significance of the study is based upon the re-
searcher’s ability to demonstrate that the study is mean-
ingful academically and practically, which will make it 
easier to secure support for the study and the data. So
the researcher must remain clear about why this popu-
lation is needed to investigate this specific research
question. This clarity will serve the researcher well es-
pecially during the IRB approval process. One colleague
even suggested securing a public dataset given the
lengthy approval process. However, the author was clear
about the focus on youth on probation, and the special
focus on girls. Specifically, research on female offenders
has been overshadowed by research on male offenders
even though girls are the fastest growing group of of-
fenders (American Bar Association [ABA] National Bar
Association [NBA], 2001). This is the case even though
most adolescent female offenders are not arrested and/
or detained because of violent offenses (Chesney-Lind,
and Jones 2010).  Also, girls have been recipients of a
special and discriminatory form of justice since the incep-
tion of a separate system of justice for youth (Chesney-
Lind 1973; Schlossman, and Wallach 1987). “With some
exceptions, extensive recent scholarship focusing on gen-
der and crime has tended to concentrate on women, not
on girls” (Zahn et al. 2009). Consequently, there has been
a growing recognition that a significant number of young
women and girls engage in aggressive and antisocial be-
haviors including traditionally male anti-social behaviors
like truancy, delinquency and substance abuse (Kann et al.
1997; Poe-Yamagata and Butts 1996; Schaffner 1998).
Scholars have begun to note that girls have negative inter-
personal relationships (Ehrensaft 2005), histories of abuse,
mental disorders, and trauma (Teplin et al. 2002).  Re-
search that highlights the needs of vulnerable populations
and directly relates to the problem of juvenile recidivism
could further efforts to reduce the risk of recidivism by
addressing their underlying needs (Farrell et al. 2011).
Consequently, the selection of this vulnerable popula-
tion was prudent and directly related to the problem of
juvenile delinquency.
Lesson 9: Do exceptional work and share it with
stakeholders/constituents
Completing a research project from start to finish is a
daunting task and there is really no room for error.
Moreover, errors can be costly in terms of time and ef-
fort and this could have dramatic effects on a study with
vulnerable subjects as participants. For example, the
process of securing IRB approval was not only lengthy,
but there were many unknowns because no study had
been conducted with this information from juvenile pro-
bation before. Numerous tasks had to be completed
prior to submitting the final IRB application, including
multiple data use agreements, IRB approval from the
county bureau of health services (which required add-
itional human subjects training certification for all parties
involved with the study), and the creation of data security
Page 6
Quinn Health and Justice (2015) 3:1  Page 6 of 7
procedures. The author provided regular updates via
meetings (as needed), e-mail with written communication
and phone conferences to the research team and all the
constituents so everyone was informed of the study’s
status.
The status updates continued throughout the project,
including when the data files were received, analyses
completed, and once all the results were compiled. Part
of the agreement with probation and the state court
(and their subcontractor) was that the author would pro-
vide each entity with a final report about the study, which
was submitted in May, 2014. It was also understood that
the author would not conduct any presentations on the
findings from the study until the report was disseminated
to the constituents.
Lesson 10: Persistence and principled: knowing your work
matters
Securing and using government data on vulnerable pop-
ulations can be a complex process, so establish a solid
research plan and commit to it. This can be tricky be-
cause it may not be easy to anticipate all that is involved
in a study like this, especially when the subjects, or in-
formation about the subjects, are court involved. That is
why it is so important to spend time in the beginning
brainstorming the significance of including this population
and the steps needed to secure the data. This process will
be important to the researcher throughout the study, espe-
cially if the need to entertain other data options arises.
Aside from the actual IRB review process, there will be
procedures that must be followed to receive the data, as
well as procedures required to handle the data once it has
been received. Each step will require a portion of time, so
try to map it all out and include extra time to meet these
deadlines. The author’s IRB approval process took nine
months, which did not include the countless conversations
with government staff, onsite meetings, or visits to hand
deliver or pick up time sensitive materials. The time spent
obtaining this information and building relationships
added up quickly, so there should always be identified
tasks to focus on if and when lulls in the process arise.
Despite the best plans, issues arose that seemed im-
possible to address, but energy must always be redir-
ected to the purpose and intent of the study. For
example, the author’s data analysis plan was set back by
two months because of delays in getting the data from
the private subcontractor. Once the data files were re-
ceived the initial plan to create and code variables was
also protracted based on the need to gain familiarity
with the data files. The author had a statistics and data-
base consultant to create the database and analytical
datafile, as well as strip the identifiers from the dataset.
A major issue with the recidivism data was that the
timeframe was much shorter than desired due to the 
timeframe in which the probation department started
collecting this data. Specifically, YASI data was collected
from 2001 to 2013 and the recidivism data was collected
from 2009 to 2013, so the study dataset only comprised
youth matched to YASI files from 2009 to 2013 as well
(n = 5831). This yielded a much smaller sample of youth
including those that recidivated (7%) and the local recid-
ivism rate in this county is 17%.
Discussion
This study was not undertaken without proper consider-
ation for all the factors involved, especially time. Clearly,
it would have taken much less time to complete this
study if the author had secured a publicly available data-set, but this convenience did not outweigh the practical
significance associated with the government issued data
about youth on probation. The time investment was
worth it as the author has completed the study and final
report, which has been disseminated to all the constitu-
ents. Also, the author was invited to present the study
findings to a state council meeting where continued
interest was expressed in the project, which could result
in favorable changes for justice involved youth in that
county.
Competing interests
The author declared no conflicts of interest with respect to the authorship
and/or publication of this article.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank members of the interpersonal Laboratory of
Interpersonal Violence and Victimization (LIVV): Catherine Cerulli, Corey
Nichols-Hadeed, and Jennifer Thompson-Stone for their thoughtful
consideration and editorial work on this paper.
Received: 30 July 2014 Accepted: 23 November 2014
References
Abram, KM, Teplin, LA, McClelland, GM, & Dulcan, MK. (2003). Comorbid
psychiatric disorders in youth in juvenile detention. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 60, 1097–1108.
American Bar Association and National Bar Association. (2001). Justice by Gender:
The lack of appropriate prevention, diversion and treatment alternatives for girls
in the justice system. Washington, DC: American Bar Association.
Bartunek, JM, & Louis, MR. (1996). Insider/outsider team research. Thousand Oaks:
Sage.
Campbell, H. (1991). Black’s law dictionary (6th ed.). St. Paul: West.
Chesney-Lind, M. (1973). Judicial enforcement of the female sex role: the family
court and the female delinquent. Issues in Criminology, 8(2), 51–69.
Chesney-Lind, M, & Jones, N. (2010). Fighting for girls. New perspectives on gender
and violence. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Coleman, CH, Menikoff, JA, Goldner, JA, & Dubler, NN. (2005). The ethics and
regulation of research with human subjects. Newark: LexisNexis.
Dresser, R. (1996). Mentally disabled research subjects: the enduring policy issues.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 276(1), 67–72.
Easterby-Smith, M, & Malina, D. (1999). Cross-cultural collaborative research:
Toward reflexivity. Academy of Management Journal, 42, 76–86.
Ehrensaft, MK. (2005). Interpersonal relationships and sex differences in the
development of conduct problems. Clinical Child and Family Psychology
Review, 8, 39–63.
Farrell, JL, Young, DW, & Taxman, FS. (2011). Effects of organizational factors on
use of juvenile supervisions practices. Criminal Justice and Behavior,
38(6), 565–583.
Page 7
Quinn Health and Justice (2015) 3:1  Page 7 of 7
Foster, EM, Flanagan, C, Osgood, DW, & Ruth, GR. (2005). The transition to
adulthood for vulnerable youth and families: Common themes and future
directions. In S Osgood (Ed.), On your own without a net: The transition to
adulthood for vulnerable populations, (375-390). Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Fraser, MW, Richman, JM, & Galinksy, MJ. (1999). Risk, protection, and resilience:
toward a conceptual framework for social work practice. Social Work
Research, 23, 131–142.
Gostin, LO, Vanchieri, C, & Pope, A. (2007). Institute of Medicine (US). Committee
on Ethical Considerations for Revisions to DHHS Regulations for Protection of
Prisoners Involved in Research. In Ethical Considerations for Research Involving
Prisoners. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US). Available from:
 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK19881/.
Hornblum, AM. (1997). They were cheap and available: prisoners as research
subjects in twentieth century America. British Medical Journal,
315, 1437–1441.
Hornblum, AM. (1998). Acres of skin: Human experiments in Holmesberg Prison.
New York: Routledge.
Jassawalla, AR, & Sashittal, HC. (1998). An examination of collaboration in
high-technology new product development processes. Journal of Product
Innovation Management, 15, 237–254.
Kann, L, Kinchen, SA, Williams, BI, Lowry, R, Ross, JG, Hill, CV, Grunbaum, J,
Blumson, PS, Collins, JL, & Kolbe, LJ. (1997). Youth risk behavior surveillance –
United States. Journal of School Health, 68(9), 355–369.
Lipsey, MW, & Cullen, FT. (2007). The effectiveness of correctional rehabilitation: a
review of systematic reviews. Annual Review of Law and Social Science,
3, 297–320.
Lipsey, MW, Wilson, DB, & Cothern, L. (2000). Effective intervention for serious
juvenile offenders. Washington, DC: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention.
McCauley-Elson, K, Gurvich, C, Lee, S, Elsom, S, O’Connor, M, & Kulkarni, J. (2009).
Vulnerable populations and multicentered research. International Journal of
Mental Health Nursing, 18, 108–115.
Mitford, J. (1974). Kind and usual punishment. New York: Vintage.
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and
Behavioral Research. The Belmont Report: ethical principles and guidelines for
the protection of human subjects of research. Washington, DC: US Department
of Health, Education, and Welfare. April 18, 1979.
Nissen, L. (2006). Effective adolescent substance abuse treatment in juvenile
justice settings: practice and policy recommendations. Child and Adolescent
Social Work Journal, 23, 298–315.
Nyden, P, & Wiewel, W. (1992). Collaborative research: harnessing the tensions
between researcher and practitioner. American Sociologist, 23, 43–55.
Orbis Partners, Inc. (2007). Long-term validation of the Youth Assessment and
Screening Instrument (YASI) in New York State juvenile probation. Retrieved
June 18, 2012, from [URL: "http://YASI-Long-Term-Validation-Report.pdf"] http://YASI-Long-Term-Validation-Report.pdf.
Poe-Yamagata, E, & Butts, JA. (1996). Female offenders in the juvenile justice system:
Statistics summary. Darby, PA: DIANE Publishing.
Rose, SL, & Pietri, CE. (2002). Workers as research subjects: a vulnerable
population. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine,
44(9), 801–805.
Schaffner, L. (1998). Searching for connection: a new look at teenaged runaways.
Adolescence, 33(131), 619–628.
Schlossman, S, & Wallach, S. (1987). The crime of precocious sexuality: female
juvenile delinquency in the progressive era. Harvard Educational Review,
48, 65–94.
Schwenzer, KJ. (2008). Practical tips for working effectively with your institutional
review board. Respiratory Care, 53(10), 1354–1361.
Snyder, HN, & Sickmund, M. (2006). Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 2006 National
Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. Retrieved
October 1, 2008 from: [URL: "http://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/nr2006/"] http://www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/nr2006/.
Teplin, LA, Abram, KM, McLelland, GM, Dulcan, MK, & Mericle, AA. (2002).
Psychiatric disorders in youth in juvenile detention. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 59, 1133–1143. 
Vartanian, TP. (2010). Secondary data analysis. Oxford University Press.
Werner, E. (2000). Protective factors and individual resilience. In J Shonkoff & S
Meisels (Eds.), Handbook of early childhood intervention (2nd ed., pp. 115–132).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Zahn, M, Agnew, R, & Boone, A. (2009). Introduction. In MA Zahn (Ed.), The
Delinquent Girl (pp. 1–6). Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁ t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
