Keywords: Injury,Epidemiology,Sport,Trauma
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
ModDate: 2020/04/09 16:37:49+02'00'
CreationDate: 2020/04/09 06:28:01+08'00'
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
Subject: Injury Epidemiology, 2020, doi:10.1186/s40621-020-00243-4
Author: Madeleine A. M. Davies
Title: Serious sports-related injury in England and Wales from 2012-2017: a study protocol
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Injury,Epidemiology,Sport,Trauma
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s40621-020-00243-4
xmp:dc:publisher: Injury Epidemiology
xmp:dc:description: Injury Epidemiology, 2020, doi:10.1186/s40621-020-00243-4
xmp:dc:subject: Injury; Epidemiology; Sport; Trauma
xmp:dc:title: Serious sports-related injury in England and Wales from 2012-2017: a study protocol
xmp:dc:creator: Madeleine A. M. Davies; Tom Lawrence; Antoinette Edwards; Fiona Lecky; Carly D. McKay; Keith A. Stokes; Sean Williams
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2020-04-09T16:37:49+02:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2020-04-09T16:37:49+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2020-04-09T06:28:01+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:bbe1c6d8-60fe-4f50-af90-e74d63177cdf
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:088d4aad-6eff-4465-8b27-7b997a7c99d3
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:bbe1c6d8-60fe-4f50-af90-e74d63177cdf
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2020-04-09T12:55:15+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods
  Discussion
Background
Objectives
Methods
  Study design
  Case definition
  Exposure estimation
  Ethical considerations and permissions
  Data management and oversight
  Data cleaning and validation
  Statistical methods
  Power calculation
Dissemination and knowledge translation
Discussion
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Authors’ contributions
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Author details
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Davies et al. Injury Epidemiology (2020) 7:14
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40621-020-00243-4
STUDY PROTOCOL  Open Access
Serious sports-related injury in England and
Wales from 2012-2017: a study protocol
Madeleine A. M. Davies1*, Tom Lawrence2, Antoinette Edwards2, Fiona Lecky2,3, Carly D. McKay1,4,
Keith A. Stokes1,5 and Sean Williams1
Abstract
Background: Physical activity is an important component of healthy lifestyles, with a central role in morbidity
prevention. However, sporting and physical activity also involve an inherent injury risk. Some sports and activities
have a higher injury risk, and may involve more severe injuries. Furthermore, injuries of a severe nature have
substantial individual and societal consequences, including the burden of assessment, treatment, and potential on-
going care costs. There are limited data on severe sports injury risk in England and Wales, and no national data
describing risk across sports. The aims of this study are to identify the cases and incidence of: i) paediatric and ii)
adult severe sports injury from 2012 to 2017; and to describe injury incidence in individual sports.
Methods: This study is an analysis of prospectively collected sport-related injuries, treated from January 2012 to
December 2017. Incidents involving a severe injury (in-patient trauma care) in England and Wales, will be identified
from the Trauma Audit Research Network registry. Data for patients who were: transfers or direct hospital
admissions, with inpatient stays of ≥3 days, admissions to High Dependency areas, or in-hospital mortality after
admission; and whose injury mechanism was sport, or incident description included one of 62 sporting activities,
will be extracted. Data will be categorised by sport, and sports participation data will be derived from Sport
England participation surveys. Descriptive statistics will be estimated for all demographic, incident, treatment and
sport fields, and crude serious annual injury incidence proportions estimated. Poisson confidence intervals will be
estimated for each sport and used to describe injury risk (incidence) across sporting activities.
Discussion: This study will be the first to describe the number of, and trends in severe sport-related injuries in
England and Wales. These data are useful to monitor the number and burden of severe sports injury, and inform
injury prevention efforts. The monitoring and mitigation of sports injury risk is essential for individuals, health
services and policy, and to encourage physically active lifestyles and safer participation for adults and children.
Keywords: Injury, Epidemiology, Sport, Trauma
Background
Sport and physical activity are associated with many
health benefits. (Eime et al.,  2013; The Department of
Health, 2011; Warburton et al., 2006) However, partici-
pation also involves an inherent risk of injury. Injuries
vary in severity from those which may involve pain but
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:m.davies@bath.ac.uk"] m.davies@bath.ac.uk
1Department for Health, University of Bath, Bath, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
no treatment, to medical attention injuries not requiring
removal from participation, to those requiring removal
from participation and some time without sporting ac-
tivity (i.e., time-loss injuries). Some injuries may involve
surgical intervention and sustained functional limitation.
Furthermore, some sports injuries may be career-ending,
disabling, and potentially life-changing, such as those
with spinal and cerebral involvement, often termed ‘cata-
strophic injuries’, (Bahr et al., 2020) and sport-related fa-
talities. As well as the symptomatic and functional
© The Author(s). 2020 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the
data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
Page 2
Davies et al. Injury Epidemiology (2020) 7:14  Page 2 of 10
consequences of injury for the individual, a greater sever-
ity of injury may be of greater societal consequence, with
economic effects of injury, such as time lost from employ-
ment, potential time losst from employment for relatives
and support providers, and an economic burden of injury
assessment and treatment for health service providers.
(Cumps et al., 2003; Kaplan et al., 2014; Ozturk & Kilic,
2013; Finch et al., 2015) In one American state over a 5-
year period, youth sports injuries cost $24 million for in-
patient care, $87 million for Emergency Department care,
and an average of $6039 per inpatient visit. (Ryan et al.,
2019) Meanwhile in the Netherlands, sports injuries had
the third highest total (healthcare and productivity) costs,
after home and leisure injuries, and traffic-related injuries.
(Polinder et al., 2016)
The Trauma Audit Research Network (TARN) is a regis-
try of traumatic injuries treated in hospitals in England and
Wales, hosted at the University of Manchester with the co-
ordination centre at Salford Royal NHS Trust. TARN
coverage is national in England and Wales, and data are
submitted by data collectors at hospitals, and approved for
submission by coders at TARN. Case ascertainment within
and between NHS trusts is monitored in comparison with
eligible submissions according to Hospital Episode Statis-
tics. TARN submissions are required as part of the Major
Trauma Best Practice Tariff, and need to be met in order
for payment to be approved. Inclusion criteria for an inci-
dent onto the TARN registry are: direct admissions or indi-
viduals transferred into hospitals for trauma-related care: of
any age, who: i) stay in hospital for 3 days or more, ii) die
after admission, or iii) are admitted to a high dependency
area, High dependency facilities in British hospitals are
those which provide more extensive care than a regular
ward (such as higher staffing),  and are equipped for an
intermediate level of care, as often required after discharge
from intensive care provision units. (Crosby, 2001) Add-
itionally, potential cases need to meet isolated injury inclu-
sion criteria, according to body region or injury, as outlined
elsewhere. (Edwards et al.) Examples of isolated injury in-
clusion criteria (Table 1) are: head injuries (all brain or skull
injuries, excluding injuries which are solely loss of con-
sciousness, or injuries to the scalp).  Data recorded for
TARN-eligible incidents includes: date of admission, date
of incident, geographic location of incident, incident loca-
tion type (such as farm, public area, home, institution etc),
time of admission, patient sex, patient date of birth, injury
detail such as length, depth or grade of lacerations, fracture
detail, blood loss, Abbreviate Injury Score, Injury Severity
Score, diagnostic and treatment information, such as the
use of CT scans and radiographs, Emergency Department
observations and interventions, Operation details, outcome
at discharge (alive, discharged to, readmission, Glasgow
Outcome Scale),  and rehabilitation prescription if applic-
able. These TARN-recorded injuries are by definition 
severe, representing those that require medical intervention
and inpatient treatment, specialist treatment or high-
dependency facilities.
There are tools to assist the classification of injury,
such as the Abbreviated Injury Score, and Injury Severity
Score, which indicate overall severity of injury for an in-
dividual. (Baker et al.,  2002) In sport, there is inter-
national consensus on defining injury severity for a
specific injury, and comparatively severe sports injuries
are recognised to be those involving more than 28 days’
time-loss from sporting and physical activity (Bahr et al.,
2020; Fuller et al., 2007; Hodgson et al., 2006), with no
treatment parameters applied. This severity definition
was derived from occupational injury time loss criteria.
(Drawer & Fuller, 2002) However, despite this existing
definition, and recognition of the important burden of
comparably severe sporting injuries, there is no existing
national routine severe injury monitoring in many coun-
tries, which would facilitate the identification of severe
injury incidence, risk and mechanism in sport.
There is currently no national data on severe sports
injury, severe sports injury risk, or sport-related cata-
strophic and fatal injuries in England and Wales. This
data is needed to prioritise and develop adequate injury
reduction strategies of injuries that occur during sport
participation. (van Mechelen et al.,  1992) Furthermore,
an understanding of sport and physical activity injury
permits informed physical activity decision-making for
participants, can help support treating services and clini-
cians, and facilitate sports governing bodies in monitoring
and mitigating injury risk. Therefore, this study aims to es-
tablish the number, type, and risk (cumulative incidence)
of severe and catastrophic sports injuries presenting to
English and Welsh healthcare services, for adults and chil-
dren. Severity is being defined as an incident involving in-
patient trauma care, and TARN-registry inclusion. This
project will be the first to nationally estimate the incidence
of severe and catastrophic sports injuries for i) adults and
ii) children, and in identifying the burden and potential
risk factors for severe injury, begin to work towards na-
tional safety promotion (Hanson et al., 2012) in sport.
Objectives
The specific objectives of the first phase of this project
will be:
1. To identify all NHS-treated severe sport-related
injuries in England and Wales between 2012 and
2017.
2. To determine the cumulative incidence of severe
injury across British highest participation (Active
Lives Survey) sporting activities.
3. To describe the cumulative incidence and
characteristics of severe injury per year from 2012
Page 3
Davies et al. Injury Epidemiology (2020) 7:14  Page 3 of 10
Table 1 Isolated injury criteria for inclusion into the Trauma Audit Research Network (TARN) Registry. Reproduced with permission
from Edwards et al. (b)
Body Region or Specific Injury Included – in isolationa  Excluded – in isolationa
Head  All brain or skull injuries  Loss of consciousness or injuries to scalp
Thorax  All internal injuries
Abdomen  All internal injuries
Spine  Cord injury, fracture, dislocation or nerve root injury.
Face  Fractures documented as: significantly displaced, open, Fractures documented as closed and simple or stable
compound or comminuted. All Le Fort fractures. All
panfacial fractures. All orbital blowout fractures
Neck  Any organ injury, injury to the carotid artery, vertebral
artery or jugular veins, hyoid fracture 
Nerve injuries
Skin injuries
Femoral fracture  All shaft, distal, head or subtrochanteric fractures,
regardless of age. 
Isolated neck of femur, inter or greater trochanteric
fractures if > = 65 years.
Isolated neck of femur, inter or greater trochanteric
fractures if < 65 years old
Foot or hand: joint or bone Crush or amputation only.  Any fractures and/or dislocations, even if open and/or
multiple.
Finger or toe  None  All injuries to digits, even if open
Limb – upper (except
hands/fingers) 
Any open injury.
Any 2 limb fractures &/or dislocations. 
Any closed unilateral injury (including multiple closed
fractures and/or dislocations or the same limb)
Limb – below knee
(except feet/toes) 
Any open injury.
Any 2 limb fractures and/or dislocations. 
including multiple closed fractures and/or dislocations
or the same limb)
Pelvis  All isolated fractures to ischium, sacrum, coccyx, ileum,
acetabulum. 
Single pubic rami fracture ≥65 years old.
Single pubic rami fracture < 65 years old.
Multiple pubic rami fractures. Any fracture involving
sacroiliac joint or symphysis pubis.
Nerve  Any injury to sciatic, facial, femoral, cranial nerve or
brachial plexus. 
All other nerve injuries, single or multiple.
Vessel  All injuries to femoral, neck, facial, cranial, thoracic or
abdominal vessels. Transection or major disruption of
any other vessel (excluding vessels in the hands, feet
and digits). 
Intimal tear or superficial laceration or perforation to
any limb vessel.
Skin  Laceration or penetrating skin injuries with blood loss Simple skin lacerations or penetrating injuries with
> 20% (1000 ml).  blood loss <=20% (1000 ml); single or multiple.
Major degloving injury (> = 50% body region). 
Contusions or abrasions: single or multiple.
Minor degloving injury (< 50% body region).
Burn  Any full thickness burn or partial/superficial burn  Partial or superficial burn < 10% body surface area.
> = 10% body surface area not referred to a  Or any burn referred to a burns unit.
burns unit.
Inhalation  All included - if not referred to burns unit  If referred to burns unit.
Frostbite  Severe frostbite  Superficial frostbite
Asphyxia  All  None
Drowning  All  None
Explosion  All  None
Hypothermia Accompanied by another TARN- eligible injury  Hypothermia in isolation
Electrical
a Except where specified 
All  None
Page 4
Davies et al. Injury Epidemiology (2020) 7:14  Page 4 of 10
to 2017, in the highest national participation
sporting activities (Active Lives Surveys), for i)
Adults and ii) Children
4. To determine the proportion of all sports injuries
that are classified as catastrophic (Injury Severity
Score > 15), and the proportion of incidents which
are fatal
Methods
Study design
This study will be a population-based cohort study of
prospectively collected severe sporting trauma incidents,
treated in the NHS and recorded in the TARN registry.
The primary outcome will be any TARN-eligible sport-
related injury. Every TARN submission is reviewed and
approved by TARN coders, in addition to hospital-level
performance comparisons, which are published by
TARN every 4 months, and show data accreditation
(complete fields), and case ascertainment of eligible inci-
dents in each hospital and Trust compared to those po-
tentially eligible, as indicated by Hospital Episode
Statistics. (Edwards et al., 2018b) The case ascertainment
for the study period between January 2012 and Decem-
ber 2017 was 79.5%.
Case definition
Data for any sports injury qualifying for inclusion within
the TARN registry, (Edwards et al.) occurring between
January 2012 and December 2017 will be extracted. Eli-
gible incidents will be those qualifying as TARN cases,
(Edwards et al.) and indicated as occurring in sport or
featuring one of 62 sporting activities in the free-text in-
cident description field (Table 2). There will be no ex-
clusion criteria based on age, or any other
characteristics.
Exposure estimation
The Sport England Active People, and Active Lives Sur-
veys provide an annual estimate of sporting and physical
activity in England. The Active People Survey was re-
placed by the Active Lives Surveys from 2015. There are
different surveys for adults (≥16 years), and children and
young people. (Sport England, 2017a) The Active Lives
Adult Survey selects a random sample of households in
England from the Royal Mail’s Postal Address File, and
invites individuals at those addresses to complete a ques-
tionnaire regarding their sporting activities, habits and
spectatorship. (Sport England, 2017b) The Active Lives
Adult Survey is bi-annual, and participation data for the
denominator will be from the composite activity group-
ings (Table 2), of the Adult Active Lives Adult Survey.
Data collection years 2 and 3, covering the period from
November 2016 until November 2018 will be used. This
denominator data period does not encompass the entire 
study period, however the variables of interest which
provide the best estimate of national sports participation
to date were collected from Year 2 onwards. Discussions
with Sport England and the study’s oversight committee
have established that using Years 2 and 3 together as an
estimate of annual sports participation will provide the
best available estimate of national sports participation.
In Year 2, there was a 18.9% response rate to the ques-
tionnaire, and 198,911 participants. (Mori, 2018a; Sport
England, 2019) Twice-monthly participation (has taken
part at least twice in the last 28 days, for selected activity
groups) for sport will be used to indicate sports partici-
pation, and be used as denominator data.
The Active Lives Children and Young People Survey is
annual and schools-based, with schools randomly se-
lected from the Edubase register of educational estab-
lishments in England. Up to 3 year groups are randomly
selected for a participating school, and within these year
groups, a single mixed-ability class is randomly selected,
therefore contributing up to three classes per school.
The Active Lives Children and Young Peoples Survey
started in this format in September 2017, and includes a
sample of children from school Year 1 (ages 5 and 6),
through to Year 11 (ages 15 and 16),  across the aca-
demic year, from the autumn, spring or summer terms.
(Mori, 2018b) Due to these differences in exposure data
collection between adult and paediatric sports partici-
pants, and the comparatively more difficult identification
of in-game sport for paediatric participants (i.e. ‘running
around’, ‘kicking football in park’), it is envisaged the re-
sults for each of these populations will be presented
separately.
Ethical considerations and permissions
University of Bath Research Ethics Approval Committee
for Health (REACH) favourable opinion has been granted
for this project (REACH: EP 17/18 08), and a Research Re-
quest Form detailing the study’s title, research question
and hypothesis has been approved by TARN’s Research
Committee (170703).  A Data Transfer Agreement has
been established between the Universities of Bath and
Manchester (hosting TARN data, with the coordination
centre at Salford Royal hospital), to ensure acceptable data
management and security processes.
Data management and oversight
Anonymised data will be securely transferred by Data
Management staff at TARN using ZendTo software and
stored on password-protected and managed research
storage at the University of Bath. All received data will
be checked for accuracy and outliers, in addition to the
routine data monitoring of TARN data undertaken by
TARN, for both data accreditation, and case ascertain-
ment. (Edwards et al.)
Page 5
Davies et al. Injury Epidemiology (2020) 7:14  Page 5 of 10
Table 2 Search terms for the free-text search of the incident description field of the Trauma Audit Research Network registry and
their corresponding categorisation within the Active Lives Survey (November 2015 onwards)
Search term  Included as specific activity  Broad activity group Composite activity groupings
American football  Sporting Activities Team sports (other)
Athletics Track and field athletics  Sporting Activities Running, athletics or multi-sports
Badminton Yes  Sporting Activities Racket sports
Basketball Yes (excluding wheelchair basketball) Sporting Activities Team sports
Bouldering Climbing  Sporting Activities Adventure sports
Boxing  Yes  Sporting Activities Combat sports, Martial Arts or Target Sports
Canoe  Sporting Activities Water sports
Cheerleading  Sporting Activities Gymnastics, trampolining or cheerleading
Class  –  –  –
Climbing Yes – hillwalking, hiking, rock climbing and bouldering Sporting Activities Adventure sports
Competition –  –  –
Cricket  Yes  Sporting Activities Team sports
Equestrian Yes  Sporting Activities Horse riding
Exercise  –  –  –
Fencing  Sporting Activities Leisure games and activities
Field hockey  Sporting Activities Team sports
Football  Yes  Sporting Activities Team sports
Gaelic  Not unless reported as football  Sporting Activities Team sports
Gokarting  Sporting Activities Motorsports
Golf  Yes  Sporting Activities Golf
Gym  Fitness Activities Weights session or interval session
Gymnastics Yes  Sporting Activities Gymnastics, trampolining or cheerleading
Horse racing  Equestrian  Sporting Activities Horseriding
Horse riding  Equestrian  Sporting Activities Horseriding
Ice hockey  No  Sporting Activities Winter sports
Ice skating  No  Sporting Activities Winter sports
Jockey  Equestrian  Sporting Activities Horseriding
Judo  Sporting Activities Combat sports, Martial Arts or Target Sports
Karate  Sporting Activities Combat sports, Martial Arts or Target Sports
Karting  Sporting Activities Motorsports
Kayak  Sporting Activities Water sports
Lacrosse  Sporting Activities Team sports
Martial arts  Sporting Activities Combat sports, Martial Arts or Target Sports
Motocross  Sporting Activities Motorsports
Netball  Yes  Sporting Activities Team sports
Obstacle course  Sporting Activities Running, athletics or multi-sports
Olympic lifting  Fitness Activities Weights session
Rat Race  Sporting Activities Running, athletics or multi-sports
Roller derby  ?  ? Roller or skating sports
Roller skating  Sporting Activities Roller or skating sports
Rowing  Yes  Sporting Activities Water sports
Rugby  Sporting Activities Team sports
Rugby league  Sporting Activities Team sports
Page 6
Davies et al. Injury Epidemiology (2020) 7:14  Page 6 of 10
Table 2 Search terms for the free-text search of the incident description field of the Trauma Audit Research Network registry and
their corresponding categorisation within the Active Lives Survey (November 2015 onwards) (Continued)
Search term  Included as specific activity  Broad activity group Composite activity groupings
Rugby union  Yes  Sporting Activities Team sports
Running Yes  Sporting Activities Running, athletics or multi-sports
Sailing  Sporting Activities Water sports
Skate boarding  Sporting Activities Roller or skating sports
Skating  Sporting Activities Roller or skating sports
Skiing  Snowsports  Sporting Activities Winter sports
Snowsports Yes  Sporting Activities Winter sports
Spartan Run  Sporting Activities Running, athletics or multi-sports
Squash  Yes  Sporting Activities Racket sports
Swimming Yes  Sporting Activities Swimming, diving or water polo
Taekwando  Sporting Activities Combat sports, Martial Arts or Target Sports
Tennis  Yes  Sporting Activities Racket sports
Tough Mudder  Sporting Activities Running, athletics or multi-sports
Tournament  –  –
Training  –  –
Trampoline  Sporting Activities Gymnastics, trampolining or cheerleading
Trampolining  Sporting Activities Gymnastics, trampolining or cheerleading
Triathlon  Sporting Activities Running, athletics or multi-sports
Weight  Fitness Activities Weights session
Weight lifting  Fitness Activities Weights session
Weight training  Fitness Activities Weights session
Wheelchair basketball  Sporting Activities Team sports
Wheelchair rugby  Sporting Activities Team sports
Wrestling  Sporting Activities Combat sports, Martial Arts or Target Sports
An independently-chaired project steering group
(membership n = 13), has been established involving key
project stakeholders across injury and trauma manage-
ment, sport and exercise medicine, members of the pub-
lic with experience of severe traumatic sporting injuries,
TARN registry experts, policy experts, sports injury re-
searchers, and other project stakeholders. The purpose
of this group is to help direct the project, inform its
plans, progress and accountabilities, and to ensure the
project remains to schedule, is widely disseminated to
appropriate audiences, and is accountable to patients
and people with severe sporting injuries. Any conflicts of
interest in the steering group have been declared at ini-
tial meetings, and are re-stated and documented at sub-
sequent meetings. A quorum has been identified and
agreed for consensus decisions within this steering group
(minimum of 8 members present).
Data cleaning and validation
Data will be categorised according to sport and physical
activity undertaken at the time of the incident, and any
non-sporting or physical activity injuries will be 
excluded. Using Stata 13.1 (StataCorp, Texas), a sporting
indicator variable will be generated by one coder, for
each of the 67 key phrases representing 62 sport or
physical activities (Table 2), searched in the free-text in-
cident description field, using the ‘foreach’ command to
extract a potential case. Case extraction will be under-
taken by searching for key words and their synonyms in
the incident description field.
Each potential case will be flagged, and the incident
description field then manually reviewed by the same
coder, to detect any non-cases, which will be recoded.
The confirmed cases and suspected non-cases will each
then be manually reviewed a second time to ensure cor-
rect classification. This will be undertaken for each sport
individually, and then the logic consistency checked be-
tween sporting activity categories.
Incidents remaining unclassified when all a priori
sports are categorised will be individually reviewed, and
either listed as a non-sporting incident or added to a
data-driven list of new sporting categories activities. If
an unclassified incident should be included within an
existing category, search criteria for flagging the sport
Page 7
Davies et al. Injury Epidemiology (2020) 7:14  Page 7 of 10
will be modified where appropriate to ensure inclusion.
This will also be applicable for frequent misspellings,
which will be identified from those incidents remaining
unclassified, and then the search terms revised, and code
re-ran. Incidents classified as non-sporting will be ex-
cluded on an individual basis using the entirety of their
incident description field. New categories will then be
generated for the data-driven list of sporting activities
recorded in TARN data. To validate the categorisation
process, a second researcher (SW) will independently
classify a randomly generated subgroup of 10% of inci-
dents to sporting groups or non-sporting activity, and
the agreement between researchers will be assessed. If
there are low counts of any individual sport, it is
planned that these will be presented descriptively, but
not carried forwards for incidence analysis. There is also
the potential to group sports by Sport England’s
Composite Activity Grouping of activities (Table 2),  if
there are low counts across sports. Patient anonymity
will also need to be considered where there are fewer
counts, in order to avoid presenting data on a rare sce-
nario, which may therefore become identifiable. The
study’s independently-chaired project steering group will
additionally review all project decision-making and dis-
cuss any queries on inclusion of incidents identified dur-
ing data cleaning.
Statistical methods
Descriptive statistics (mean ± standard deviation for con-
tinuous variables, and number [percentage] for categor-
ical variables) will be estimated for all demographic,
incident, location type, treatment, and derived sporting
activity fields. Crude cumulative serious injury incidence
(proportions) will be estimated by dividing the mean an-
nual number of serious injuries per year over the 6 year
period, by the number of people participating in overall
sporting activity per year, for 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015,
2016 and 2017 These data will be reported as i) the rate
of severe injury per 100,000 participants per year, and ii)
the rate of severe injury per 100,000 participants for
each sporting activity.
Poisson confidence intervals will be estimated for each
sport and physical activity, and used to describe severe
injury rate in sporting activities. The proportion of cata-
strophic injuries (Injury Severity Score > 15) (Baker et al.,
1974), and fatalities once reaching hospital, relative to all
injuries, will be reported. Poisson confidence intervals
will be used to assess the influence of injury risk factors
(such as age and sex), on severe injury incidence. 
18.3% (n = 63,877) of attendances to Emergency Depart-
ments in one English county were sport-related, and
using regional TARN data from one county in 0–19 year
olds, 324 sport or recreational activity related admissions
were recorded during this 36-month period. (Kirkwood
et al.,  2019) Bahr et al. (2003) have suggested that in
order to detect moderate to strong associations of a risk
factor on injury risk, 20–50 injury cases would be re-
quired. (Bahr & Holme, 2003) During a 36-month period
in one county, there were 91 sport and recreational
injury-related incidents in one county, in 0–19 year olds.
If this 3 year period (January 2012 to January 2015) were
to be typical of our 5-year period, there would be 151.6
injuries per county in a 5-year period, and for across the
48 counties in England would provide 7276 cases in 0–
19 year olds. If there were to be injury cases for each of
the 62 sports used as search terms for this study, accord-
ing to Bahr et al., we would require between 1240 and
3100 injured cases for our 62 sports to demonstrate
moderate to strong associations of a risk factor on injury
risk. Small to moderate associations would require ap-
proximately 200 injured cases, which would be 12,400
cases for our 62 sports. As there are approximately 7276
cases in 0–19 year olds, across England and Wales, and
in all age groups, we should be adequately powered to
describe the injured samples in each sport, and compare
the incidence proportion between sports.
Dissemination and knowledge translation
It is envisaged that study findings will be presented at
academic and non-academic conferences and meetings
to sports medicine, sports science, and healthcare pro-
fessional and governmental audiences. Study findings
will be formally reported to the project steering group
and made available to interested parties. The project’s
steering group has sought to be inclusive, independently
chaired, and involve researchers alongside individuals
with a history of severe sports injuries who can bring
their experiences and knowledge to the project, (Davies
et al., 2017; INVOLVE, 2012) in addition to knowledge
users and stakeholders who may have the capacity to
affect change, given the study’s findings. This is, to our
knowledge, the first time that integrated knowledge
translation (IKT),  (Kothari et al.,  2017) has been re-
ported from the outset of sport-related research in
England. Study findings will also be disseminated in
scientific journal articles, through the University of Bath,
and in community knowledge exchange and outreach
activities.
Power calculation
Due to the lack of published data for severe sports injur-
ies nationally, it is difficult to provide accurate sample
size justifications. However, a recent study identified that 
Discussion
There has been a move to identify the burden of sport
and exercise injuries, with a view to promoting safer par-
ticipation in physical activity for participants of all ages.
Page 8
Davies et al. Injury Epidemiology (2020) 7:14  Page 8 of 10
Furthermore, where physical and sporting activities are
encouraged as a public health intervention to decrease
obesity and comorbidity, it is important to have an un-
derstanding of potential associated risks, and identify
those at risk, with a view to injury prevention and health
protection. This study will be the first to identify the
number and type of severe sport and physical activity
injuries treated in the NHS in England and Wales. It will
also be the first to estimate the proportion and charac-
teristics of severe sport injury, using national datasets.
Furthermore, the risk of severe injury will be identified
for both adult and child participants. Undertaking this
novel national project of sport and physical activity
injury risk begins to identify the health service burden
associated with participation and sport and physical
activity.
Strengths of this study including using a national data-
set which is reflective of the clinical burden of severe
sports injury, with good data completeness and case as-
certainment. The study will also identify injuries from 62
prominent sporting activities, alongside those indicated
as occurring during sport. This will enable many sport-
ing activities to be captured and will not rely on all inci-
dents being coded by TARN as occurring in sport, nor
dictate which sports are exclusively featured in analysis.
Potential weaknesses of this study include that not all
sport-related mortality will be accounted for, as patients
will need to reach and be admitted to hospital in order
to be eligible for TARN registry inclusion. To address
this, alternative data sources will be sought to identify
cases of sport-related mortality. Additionally, requiring
incidents to reach hospital will mandate that these injur-
ies are particularly severe in nature, as they require pa-
tient care and observation or intervention over several
days in hospital, as opposed to the routine definition of
> 28 days timeloss from sport or physical activity, used
in many other sport-related surveillance studies. (Bahr
et al., 2020) We will not be able to determine the length
of absence from sporting any physical activity as a meas-
ure of severity in this study, but will have data on the
length of stay, and length of stay in critical care facilities,
if applicable.
It is acknowledged that the study period for the de-
nominator data does not encompass the entire period of
TARN data extraction. However, Active Lives Adults
Survey collects sports participation with the level of
granularity required in terms of individual and team
sports for this analysis, and specific variables required
were only collected from Year 2 onwards. There is also
caution exercised by Sport England on the interpretation
of any year-on-year increases or decreases in participa-
tion, which may be resultant of survey’s sampling strat-
egy more so than a true increase or decrease in
participation. Therefore 2 years of Active Lives Adult 
Survey data were used, to lower the effect of denomin-
ator data sampling strategy on sports injury risk esti-
mates. There may be a limitation in the TARN registry
satisfactorily capturing paediatric injury, as the phrase-
ology of childrens’  behaviours (i.e. was running when
fell; kicking football and tripped over),  may not be as
reflective of coordinated sporting activity as for adult
participants. Until this data has been retrieved and
reviewed, this cannot be confirmed, and therefore it is
planned that these groups will both be analysed, and
analysed separately. However, our confidence in this
paediatric data for identifying true in-sport injury, will
be reviewed when the free-text injuries are categorised,
and not presented in the main manuscript if it is not felt
to be reflective of true in-sport activity.
Despite there being surveillance systems for sport-
related severe injuries and fatalities, and research in this
area in other countries such as the United States and
Australia, (Endres et al., 2019; Kucera et al., 2019; For-
tington et al., 2017; Dompier et al., 2019; Ekegren et al.,
2018) there are currently no national estimates of sports
injury risk in England and Wales. This endeavour will
therefore greatly strengthen the literature in this field in
England and Wales, and identify similarities and differ-
ences in severe injury incidence globally. Furthermore,
in examining sports injury risk over 6 years from 2012 to
17, this study will be able to elucidate changes in sport
and physical activity participation, and changes in sport
and physical activity injury risk, over time. Recent stud-
ies in Australia have reported that the incidence of sport
and recreation related hospital admissions are stable na-
tionally with an annual incidence of 281.0 per 100,000
population between 2002 and 2012, (Lystad et al., 2019)
however non-fatal major trauma may be increasing in
individual states, with an increase in Victoria from 7.5
cases per 100,000 participants in 2005–6, to 14.01 injur-
ies per 100,000 participants in 2014–15. (Ekegren et al.,
2018; Andrew et al., 2012) In the US, sport-related trau-
matic brain injuries treated in Emergency Departments
have also increased. (Coronado et al., 2015)
Undertaking a national study from a dataset such as
TARN and using all data suggested as occurring during
sporting activity will also support the identification of se-
vere injury cases that may be occurring in sports with less
resource and central coordination. These may also be
sports that have historically not been able to participate or
engage in medical and health-related research, due to lim-
ited resource. Some of these sports, which are not profes-
sional in the UK or have lower levels of participation, such
as roller derby, American football or motorsports, may
additionally present with unique trauma scenarios, and
identifying these cases in one resource will facilitate fur-
ther research around clinical management education,
event management strategies, or adverse events.
Page 9
Davies et al. Injury Epidemiology (2020) 7:14  Page 9 of 10
This study aims to elucidate the number, type, and risk
of severe sport and physical activity injuries in England
and Wales. It is hoped that this data will identify inter-
vention opportunities, and begin to identify the treat-
ment pathways, characteristics, and burden of these
injuries. This data will be relevant to clinicians, health-
care professionals, sports governing bodies, parents and
organisations associated with sport and physical activity
participation nationally in England and Wales. By en-
gaging national stakeholders in the project, it is hoped
that this project will be the start of a concerted effort to
collaboratively monitor, evaluate and reduce severe sport
and physical activity injury nationally.
Abbreviations
TARN: The Trauma Audit Research Network; NHS: The National Health
Service; REACH: Research Ethics Committee for Health
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Project’s Steering Group for their
commitment to and on-going appraisal of this study. The authors addition-
ally acknowledge the British Medical Association’s Scholarship Grant, which
has supported undertaking this project.
Authors’ contributions
MD drafted the protocol which was read, critically reviewed and approved
by all authors. SW, CM and KS have formed a project group, responsible for
decision-making and reporting to the project’s steering group.
Funding
All funding for the current project was received from the British Medical
Association Research Foundation. The funding body had no role in study
design, data collection, analysis, or the development of this protocol.
Availability of data and materials
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated
or analysed during the current (protocol) process.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Institutional research ethics approval was granted for this study (University of
Bath Research Ethics Approval Committee for Health EP 17/18 08). Patient
consent was not specifically sought, as the study was an audit of
anonymised data.
Consent for publication
Not applicable: No data from any individual person included in manuscript.
Competing interests
There are no financial or non-financial competing interests to declare related
to the publication of this protocol or project.
MD receives part-funding from the British Medical Association, Rugby Foot-
ball Union and the Rugby Football Union’s Injured Players’ Foundation.
TL has previously been funded by TARN.
AE receives funding from TARN.
FL is part-funded by TARN.
CM received funding from the British Medical Association (BMA) Scholarship
Grant to initiate this work. CM also receives funding for other research
projects from the Rugby Football Union, Rugby Football Union’s Injured
Players’ Foundation and World Rugby.
KS receives project funding from Premiership Rugby, the Rugby Football
Union, Rugby Football Union’s Injured Players Foundation, England and
Wales Cricket Board, and the Racing Foundation. KS is employed by the
Rugby Football Union.
SW received funding from the British Medical Association (BMA) Scholarship
Grant to initiate this work. SW also receives funding for other research
projects from the Rugby Football Union and Premiership Rugby. 
Author details
1Department for Health, University of Bath, Bath, UK. 2Trauma Audit Research
Network, Division of Population Health, Health Services Research and Primary
Care, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 3Centre for Urgent and
Emergency Care Research, School of Health and Related Research, University
of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. 4Centre for Sport, Exercise and Osteoarthritis
Research Versus Arthritis, Nottingham, UK. 5Rugby Football Union,
Twickenham, UK.
Received: 17 December 2019 Accepted: 31 March 2020
References
Andrew NE, Gabbe BJ, Wolfe R, Cameron PA. Trends in sport and active
recreation injuries resulting in major trauma or death in adults in Victoria,
Australia, 2001-2007. Injury. 2012:1527–33.
Bahr R, Clarsen B, Derman W, Dvorak J, Emery CA, Finch CF, et al. International
Olympic Committee consensus statement : methods for recording and
reporting of epidemiological data on injury and illness in sport 2020 (
including STROBE extension for sport Injury and illness surveillance ( STROBE-
SIIS )). Br J Sports Med. 2020:1–18.
Bahr R, Holme I. Risk factors for sports injuries--a methodological approach. Br J
Sports Med. 2003;37:384–92.
Baker P, Coggon D, Reading I, Barrett D, McLaren M, Cooper C. Sports injury,
occupational physical activity, joint laxity, and meniscal damage. J
Rheumatol. 2002;29(3):557–63 Available from: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11908573"] http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
 pubmed/11908573.
Baker SP, O’Neill B, Haddon W, Long WB. The injury severity score: a method for
describing patients with multiple injuries and evaluating emergency care. J
Trauma. 1974;14(3):187–96.
Coronado VG, Haileyesus T, Cheng TA, Bell JM, Haarbauer-Krupa J, Lionbarger MR,
et al. Trends in Sports- and Recreation-Related Traumatic Brain Injuries
Treated in US Emergency Departments. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2015;30(3):
185–97.
Crosby DL. The role of high dependency unit care. BMJ. 2001;322(7297):1274
[cited 2020 Feb 24] Available from: [URL: "http://www.bmj.com/cgi/doi/10.1136/bmj.322.7297.1274"] http://www.bmj.com/cgi/doi/10.1136/
 bmj.322.7297.1274.
Cumps E, Verhagen E, Annemans L, Meeusen R. Injury rate and socioeconomic
costs resulting from sports injuries in Flanders: data derived from sports
insurance statistics 2003. 2008;42(9):767–72.
Davies MAM, Balai E, Adams J, Carter J-H, Judge A, Newton JL, et al. The
consultation of rugby players in co-developing a player health study:
feasibility and consequences of sports participants as research partners. Res
Involv Engagem. 2017;3(1):8 Available from: [URL: "http://researchinvolvement.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40900-017-0055-1"] http://researchinvolvement.
 biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40900-017-0055-1.
Dompier TP, Kucera KL, Drezner JA, Casa DJ, Register-Mihalik JK, Guskiewicz KM.
Sudden death and catastrophic injury reporting: a call to action for athletic
trainers. J Athl Train. 2019;54(2):122–3.
Drawer S, Fuller CW. Evaluating the level of injury in English professional football
using a risk based assessment process. Br J Sports Med. 2002;36(6):446–51.
Edwards A, Hammond P, Evans E, Hammond A, Tilley C. Procedures Manual
(England and Wales) - Trauma Audit and Research Network. Manchester;
2018.
Eime RM, Young JA, Harvey JT, Charity MJ, Payne WR. A systematic review of the
psychological and social benefits of participation in sport for adults:
informing development of a conceptual model of health through sport. Int J
Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2013;10(98):1–21.
Ekegren CL, Beck B, Simpson PM, Gabbe BJ. Ten-Year Incidence of Sport and
Recreation Injuries Resulting in Major Trauma or Death in Victoria, Australia,
2005-2015. Orthop J Sport Med. 2018;6(3):1-8.
Endres BD, Kerr ZY, Stearns RL, Adams WM, Hosokawa Y, Huggins RA, et al.
Epidemiology of Sudden Death in Organized Youth Sports in the United
States, 2007–2015. J Athl Train. 2019;54(4):349–55 [cited 2020 Feb 24]
Available from: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31013114"] http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31013114.
Finch CF, Kemp JL, Clapperton AJ. The incidence and burden of hospital-treated
sports-related injury in people aged 15+ years in Victoria, Australia, 2004-
2010: a future epidemic of osteoarthritis? Osteoarthr Cartil. 2015;23(7):1138–
43. Available from:. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2015.02.165"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2015.02.165.
Fortington LV, Kucera KL, Finch CF. A call to capture fatalities in consensus
statements for sports injury/illness surveillance. Br J Sports Med. 2017;51(14):
1052–3.
Page 10
Davies et al. Injury Epidemiology (2020) 7:14
Fuller CW, Molloy MG, Bagate C, Bahr R, Brooks JHM, Donson H, et al. Consensus
statement on injury definitions and data collection procedures for studies of
injuries in rugby union. Br J Sports Med. 2007;41(5):328–31.
Hanson DW, Finch CF, Allegrante JP, Sleet D. Closing the gap between injury
prevention research and community safety promotion practice: revisiting the
public health model. Public Health Rep. 2012;127(2):147–55.
Hodgson L, Standen PJ, Batt ME. An analysis of injury rates after the seasonal
change in rugby league. Clin J Sport Med. 2006;16(4):305–10.
INVOLVE. Briefing notes for researchers: involving the public in the NHS, public
health and social care research. Eastleigh: INVOLVE; 2012.
Kaplan RM, Herrmann AK, Morrison JT, DeFina LF, Morrow JR. Costs Associated
With Women’s Physical Activity Musculoskeletal Injuries: The Women’s Injury
Study. J Phys Act Health. 2014;11(6):1149–55.
Kirkwood G, Hughes TC, Pollock AM. Results on sports-related injuries in children
from NHS emergency care dataset Oxfordshire pilot: an ecological study. J R
Soc Med. 2019;112(3):109–18.
Kothari A, McCutcheon C, Graham ID. Defining integrated knowledge translation
and moving forward: a response to recent commentaries. Int J Health Policy
Manag. 2017;6(5):299–300.
Kucera KL, Fortington LV, Wolff CS, Marshall SW, Finch CF. Estimating the
international burden of sport-related death: a review of data sources. Inj
Prev. 2019;25(2):83–9.
Lystad RP, Curtis K, Browne GJ, Mitchell RJ. Incidence, costs, and temporal trends
of sports injury-related hospitalisations in Australian children over a 10-year
period: A nationwide population-based cohort study. J Sci Med Sport. 2019;
22(2):175–80.
Mori I. Year 2 technical report Ipsos MORI [Internet]. 2018a. Available from: [URL: "http://www.ipsos-mori.com/terms"] http://
 www.ipsos-mori.com/terms.
Mori I. Active Lives Children and Young People Survey 2017 / 2018 Year 1
Technical Note; 2018b. p. 1–19.
Ozturk S, Kilic D. What is the economic burden of sports injuries? Jt Dis Relat
Surg. 2013;24(2):108–11.
Polinder S, Haagsma J, Panneman M, Scholten A, Brugmans M, Van Beeck E. The
economic burden of injury: Health care and productivity costs of injuries in
the Netherlands. Accid Anal Prev. 2016;93:92–100.
Ryan JL, Pracht EE, Orban BL. Inpatient and emergency department costs from
sports injuries among youth aged 5-18 years. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med.
2019;5(e000491).
Sport England From Active People to Active Lives Adult 2017a[Internet]. [cited
2019 Jul 16]. Available from: [URL: "https://www.sportengland.org/research/active-lives-survey/from-active-people-to-active-lives-adult/"] https://www.sportengland.org/research/active-
 lives-survey/from-active-people-to-active-lives-adult/.
Sport England. Active Lives Adult Survey: May16/17; 2017b. p. 1–18.
Sport England. Active Lives Adult Survey 17/18 Report. Sport Engl; 2019. p. 1–24.
The Department of Health. Start Active , Stay Active. A report on physical activity for
health from the four home countries’ Chief Medical Officers. Strategy. 2011.
van Mechelen W, Hlobil H, Kemper HCG. Incidence, severity, Aetiology and
prevention of Sports Injuries: a review of concepts. Sports Med. 1992;14:82–99.
Warburton DER, Nicol CW, Bredin SSD. Prescribing exercise as preventive therapy.
CMAJ. 2006;174(7):961–74.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations. 
Page 10 of 10
