Article IX:  Town Fees
3.6  Restrictions on Tape Dialers and Similar Automatic Telephone Devices 
No fire alarm system shall be equipped with a tape dialer or similar automatic telephone device which will
transmit an alarm message to any telephone lines of the FFD. If at the passage of this bylaw a fire alarm
system is equipped with such a tape dialer or similar automatic telephone device, the fire alarm system
owner shall have sixty (60) days from the passage of this bylaw to disconnect such tape dialer or similar
automatic telephone device. If a fire alarm system owner fails to comply with this section, the Fire Chief
may assess a fine of fifty dollars ($50).
3.7  Appeal Procedure
Any fire alarm system owner who is aggrieved by an action taken by the Fire Chief under this bylaw may, 
within ten (10) days of such action, file an appeal in writing, to the Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Framingham (the Board).  After notice the Board shall hold a hearing, after which it shall issue a decision in
which it affirms, annuls or modifies the action taken by the Fire Chief giving its reasons thereof. The Board
shall send its decision to the owner by first class mail within ten (10) days after the hearing. The decision of
the Board shall be a final administrative decision. The owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of
the written decision to seek judicial review in the Middlesex County Superior Court. 
3.8  Regulations and Enforcement 
The Fire Chief may promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to implement this bylaw. The Fire
Chief is authorized to pursue such legal action as may be necessary to enforce this bylaw. 
Section 4.  Automatic Amusement Device 
The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to set the annual fee for any automatic amusement device licensed
under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 140, Section 177a, or any renewal thereof, at an amount not to exceed
one hundred dollars ($100) per device. 
Section 5.  Board of Health License Fees 
Motel and Recreational Camps
Pasteurization of Milk 
$50
$40 
Sale of Milk
Sale of Methyl Alcohol 
$10
$ 5
Section 6.  Revocation of Licenses for Failure to Pay Taxes 
The tax collector shall annually furnish to each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as
the licensing authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, 
corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local
taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve month period, and that
such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before
the appellate tax board. 
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfers of any
party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the tax collector, provided, however, 
that written notice is given to the party and the tax collector, as required by applicable provisions of law, and the
party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie
IX - 4 
