o
~ ,~~-.-
FRAy~ lei-~~~ _~_~ -~'"_~ ~ ~.~  IAM
M~SS/\CHUSETTS 
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
Ph: 508-532-5655
Fax:508-532-5409
www.framinghamr~a.gov/CityCouncil
FRAMI~IGHA~V1 CITY COUNCIL
ORDER N0. 2019-005-001
REQUEST OF THE EDUCATION SUBCOMMITTEE
UPON THE REQUEST OF THE EDUCATION SUBCOMMITTEE, THE CITY OF FRAMINGHAM, THROUGH THE
FRAMING HAM CITY COUNCIL, IT IS SO ORDERED:
That the City Council adopt an ordinance creating a Youth Council; the full text of the ordinance follows
at the end of this Order. Incumbent in this vote is the adoption of an amendment to Article I, Section
2.3 of the Framingham General Bylaws as follows:
2.3 All meetings of all boards and committees elected or appointed, except the Framingham
Retirement Board, Council on Aging, Registrars of Voters, Cemetery Trustees, Veterans
Council, Board of Assessors, Disability Commission, Elderly and Disabled Tax Relief
Committee, Youth Council, and any School Council, shall commence no earlier than 7:00
p.m., except in emergency situations and for executive sessions, and for such emergency
meetings and executive sessions the first order of business shall be the recording of the
nature of the meeting. This provision shall not apply to any subcommittee, task force, or
working group of an elected or appointed board, so long as the subcommittee, task force, or
working group is not comprised of a quorum of members of the elected or appointing board.
FIRST READING
YEAS: Cannon, Giombetti, Grove, King, Rossi, Richardson, Sisitsl<y, Steiner, Torres, Tully Stoll
NAYS: None
ABSTAIN: None
ABSENT: Shepard
PASSED IN COUNCIL: JANUARY 29, 2019
SECOND READING
YEAS: Cannon, Giombetti, Grove, King, Richardson, Shepard, Sisitsky, Steiner, Tully Stoll
NAYS: None
ABSTAIN: None
ABSENT: Rossi, Torres
PASSED IN COUNCIL: FEBRUARY 19, 2019
A True Record, Attest:
~~ ~~~Q
Date Approved
Lisa .Ferguson City Clerk
Page 2
Ordinance Establishing a Youth Council
1. Intent and Purpose
An ordinance of the City Council of the City of Framingham, Massachusetts establishing the Framingham
Youth Council, setting forth the duties of the Youth Council, the selection of Youth Council members,
role, and meeting schedule of the Youth Council
2. Appointments and Membership
The City Council of the City of Framingham hereby creates the Framingham Youth Council.
It shall consist of thirteen (13) members between the ages of 13 and 22 who reside in Framingham.
3. District Appointees
The Eleven City Council nominees to the Youth Council will be appointed by a majority vote of the City
Council.
Each of the 9 District Councilors shall nominate one candidate from their respective district.
Each member appointed by the District Councilors of the City Council shall serve a term of one year.
4. At-large Appointees
The remaining 4 members of the Youth Council will be appointed for two-year terms and represent the
entire city. They shall be nominated by the At Large City Councilors and the Mayor as follows:
a. Each At Large City Council Member shall nominate a candidate for approval by a majority
vote of the City Council.
b. The Mayor shall nominate two candidates for approval by a majority vote of the City
Council.
The Framingham Youth Council will report directly to the Framingham City Council, but will advise the
Mayor and school committee on issues upon the Mayor or School Committee's request.
The Framingham City Council shall nominate and vote up to 3 City Councilors to serve as advisors to the
Youth Council. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee shall serve as ex-officio member of the Youth
Council.
The first meeting of the Youth Council shall take place within 60 days of the appointment of eight
members to the Youth Council.
The advertising for and nomination of the candidates for the Youth Council shall take place at the same
time as all of the other annual appointments to City Boards, Committees and Commissions.
5. Selection of Officers
The Youth Council shall elect its own Chair to conduct meetings and a Vice Chair to conduct meetings in
the absence of the Chair. These individuals shall serve one year terms as officers and be eligible for re-
election to an officer position in a subsequent year. Agendas shall be prepared by the Chairperson in
Page 3
response to the needs of the City's youth, upon request by fellow Youth Councilors, or upon request by
the Framingham City Council as a whole.
Elections shall be held at the first meeting after appointments are made by the City Council and the
Mayor, upon which there is a quorum.
6. Vacancies
Vacancies on the Youth Council will occur when a members) moves out of Framingham or registers to
vote in another community, resigns or fails to attend three consecutive meetings except in the case of
severe illness or injury.
Members of the Youth Council may be removed upon a vote of 9 members of the Youth Council and a
majority vote of the City Council.
7. Duties
The Framingham Youth Council shall have the responsibility of
a. Evaluating and reviewing issues facing youth in the City
b. Representing youth in the City of Framingham, and advising elected officials and other policy
makers regarding matters of interest or concern to young people
c. Providing information to and advocating before public entities including the mayor, municipal
government, state government, federal government, police, school districts, and high education
institutions, in support of young people in the City of Framingham
d. Providing a structure for all young people in Framingham to learn the value of civic participation
and thereby encouraging lifelong participatory residents
e. Offering policy recommendations on issues affecting and of interest to young people
f. Engaging with young people in Framingham to inform+~g them of opportunities and listening to
their suggestions regarding how the community can better serve its residents
8. Reports
The Youth Council shall provide an oral or written report to the 11-member Framingham City Council on
its activities in February, May, and October of each year.
9. Rules
The Youth Council will meet at least monthly in the City of Framingham and shall post notices of its
meetings in accordance with the state's Open Meeting Law and the Framingham General
Bylaws/Ordinances.
The members of the Youth Council with the exception of the Chair shall take turns recording minutes
and submit such minutes to the City Clerl<, after they are approved by a majority vote of the Youth
Council. The timing of approval and filing of minutes shall be compliant within the guidelines of the
State's Open Meeting Law and Framingham's General Bylaws/Ordinances.
The Youth Council may adopt such other rules consistent with the Uniform Rules Governing Multiple
Member Bodies set forth at Article IX, Section 7 of the Charter.
