CITY COUNCIL APPOINTMENTS SUBCOMMITTEE 
MARCH 15, 2022
BLUMER ROOM/REMOTE VIDEO CONFERENCING 
6:00 PM 
Present: Philip Ottaviani, Chair; Adam Steiner, Vice-Chair; Janet Leombruno
Others: Charlie Sisitsky
CALL TO ORDER
At 6:00 pm Philip Ottaviani called the remote meeting to order. He noted that committee members
Councilors Leombruno and Steiner were present in person, and the meeting was being broadcast live on
the Government Channel, and access was available via Zoom. Mr. Ottaviani reviewed the meeting
agenda. 
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
None. 
DISCUSSION/VOTE
(Order 2022-008-004) - Mayor’s candidate for Board of Health Positions
Mr. Ottaviani read the letter from Mayor Sisitsky to the subcommittee concerning the referral of the
appointees, Karen Beauregard from District 6, Jeri Bryant from District 7, and Darlene Connors from
District 3, to the Board of Health. He also read the appointees’ bios. 
Mayor Sisitsky further explained that the three candidates are very qualified, and their experience will
complement the two current sitting members of the Board of Health. 
Ms. Connors said that she retired two years ago and enjoys volunteering, and is looking forward to
participating in local government and helping shape policies. Ms. Connors noted that covid-19 has
increased not only mental health issues, but food insecurity, obesity, and environmental health
problems that all need to be addressed. 
Ms. Bryant explained her interest in getting involved in supporting the community’s public health. Ms. 
Bryant felt covid-19 has presented several hurdles that impact mental health, substance abuse, and
issues specific to children that she would like to help the city tackle. 
Ms. Beauregard said that she was an intern at Serenity House, and worked full-time at the prison before
retiring two years ago to begin a private practice. She felt it is a good time to get involved with the
community. Ms. Beauregard also explained how covid-19 increased the importance of dealing with
mental health issues, and she would like to help the community deal with these problems. 
Ms. Leombruno made a motion to approve Karen Beauregard from District 6, Jeri Bryant from District
7, and Darlene Connors from District 3 to the Board of Health, as presented. Mr. Steiner seconded. 
No discussion. VOTE: 3-0-0; Leombruno-yes, Steiner-yes, and Ottaviani-yes. 
STATUS/APPROVAL OF MEETING MINUTES 
1
Page 2
Ms. Leombruno made a motion to approve the minutes of February 15, 2021. Mr Steiner seconded. 
No discussion. VOTE: 3-0-0; Leombruno-yes, Steiner-yes, and Ottaviani-yes. 
NEXT STEPS AND UPCOMING MEETINGS
Mr. Ottaviani noted that the next meeting in two weeks at 6:30 pm will include an appointee to the
Loring Arena Advisory Committee. 
ADJOURN
At 6:20 pm Ms. Leombruno made a motion to adjourn. Mr. Steiner seconded. No discussion. VOTE: 
3-0-0; Leombruno-yes, Steiner-yes, and Ottaviani-yes. 
2
