CITY COUNCIL APPOINTMENTS SUBCOMMITTEE 
APRIL 5, 2022
BLUMER ROOM/REMOTE VIDEO CONFERENCING 
6:00 PM 
Present: Philip Ottaviani, Chair; Adam Steiner, Vice-Chair; Janet Leombruno
Others: Mayor Charlie Sisitsky
CALL TO ORDER
At 6:00 pm Philip Ottaviani called the remote meeting to order. He noted that committee
members Councilors Leombruno and Steiner were present in person, the meeting was being
broadcast live on the Government Channel, and access was available via Zoom. Mr. Ottaviani
reviewed the meeting agenda. 
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
None. 
DISCUSSION/VOTE
(Order 2022-008-008) - Mayor’s nomination of Robert A. Lewis to serve as the Director of the 
Department of Public Works
Mayor Sisitsky introduced Robert Lewis, his nominee to fill the Director of the Dept. of Public
Works position. Mayor Sisitsky mentioned that Mr. Lewis is a long-time well-known resident of
Framingham, has extensive public works experience, specifically in water and sewer, and also
has two sons that serve on the Framingham Police Dept. 
Mr. Lewis explained that he has over 20 years of experience in public works, and is currently
employed by the town of Needham. He expressed his interest in making this change and said
that he is looking forward to working for Framingham and addressing the city’s challenges.
Mr. Lewis reviewed his water and sewer experience in Needham, and his efforts towards
completing their master infrastructure plan, something that he looks forward to repeating for
Framingham. He also mentioned Needham’s financial efficiencies and the stormwater plan the
town addressed without enterprise funding. 
Ms. Leombruno made a motion to approve Robert Lewis, as presented. Mr. Steiner
seconded. No discussion. VOTE: 3-0-0; Leombruno-yes, Steiner-yes, and Ottaviani-yes. 
1
Page 2
(Order 2022-008-012) - Mayor’s nomination of Thomas Grove (District 8) to serve on the
Council on Aging Board 
Mr. Ottaviani read the letter from Mayor Sisitsky to the subcommittee concerning the referral
of Thomas Grove to serve on the Council on Aging Board. 
Dr. Grove introduced himself and explained his past experience in the town government, and
his interest in volunteering and advocating for the aging. 
Judy Grove commented that she agreed that Dr. Grove is a perfect candidate to fill the position
on the board. 
Ms. Leombruno made a motion to approve Thomas Grove, as presented. Mr. Steiner
seconded. No discussion. VOTE: 3-0-0; Leombruno-yes, Steiner-yes, and Ottaviani-yes. 
(Order 2022- 008-013) - Mayor’s nomination of Robert Merusi (District 3) and Steven Joyce
(District 1) to serve on the Housing Authority Board 
Mr. Ottaviani read the letter from Mayor Sisitsky to the subcommittee concerning the referral
of Robert Merusi (District 3) to serve on the Housing Authority Board. 
Mr. Merusi introduced himself and shared his long-time association and employment in the
city’s public administration. He shared his thoughts about housing issues and Framingham’s
balance of affordable housing, as he explained it is a regional issue. 
Because Ms. Leombruno served with Mr. Merusi and Mr. Joyce, she recused herself from the
discussion and the vote. 
Mr. Ottaviani made a motion to approve Robert Merusi, as presented. Mr. Steiner seconded. 
No discussion. VOTE: 2-0-1; Leombruno-abstained, Steiner-yes, and Ottaviani-yes. 
Mr. Ottaviani read the letter from Mayor Sisitsky to the subcommittee concerning the referral
of Steven Joyce (District 1) to serve on the Housing Authority Board. 
Mr. Joyce introduced himself and reviewed his experience in the carpentry business and his
association with the Carpentry Union. He mentioned the training and apprenticeship
opportunities the union offers that he supports. He also talked about his interest in helping the
under advantaged. 
Mr. Steiner made a motion to approve Steven Joyce, as presented. Mr. Ottaviani seconded. 
No discussion. VOTE: 2-0-1; Leombruno-abstained, Steiner-yes, and Ottaviani-yes. 
NEXT STEPS AND UPCOMING MEETINGS 
2
Page 3
Mr. Ottaviani mentioned that the next subcommittee meeting will begin at 6:00 pm prior to the
City Council meeting. 
Mr. Steiner commented on the need to ensure diversity when recommending candidates for
open positions. 
ADJOURN
At 6:36 pm Ms. Leombruno made a motion to adjourn. Mr. Steiner seconded. No discussion. 
VOTE: 3-0-0; Leombruno-yes, Steiner-yes, and Ottaviani-yes. 
3
