CITY COUNCIL 
PHILIP R. OTTAVIANI, CHAIR | JANET LEOMBRUNO, VICE CHAIR 
NOVAL ALEXANDER | TRACEY BRYANT | MICHAEL P. CANNON 
GEORGE P. KING, JR. | CHRISTINE A. LONG |
LEORA MALLACH | ADAM C. STEINER |JOHN A. STEFANINI
CESAR G. STEWART-MORALES 
MEMORIAL BUILDING – ROOM 113
150 CONCORD STREET, FRAMINGHAM, MA 01702
508.532.5400 – CITYCOUNCIL@FRAMINGHAMMA.GOV 
MINUTES: MARCH 29, 2022
BLUMER COMMUNITY ROOM 
REMOTE 
7:00PM
APPROVED 4/26/2022
Council Members Participating: 
Philip R. Ottaviani, Chair
Noval Alexander
Tracey Bryant- REMOTE 
Michael P. Cannon
George P. King, Jr. 
Janet Leombruno, Vice Chair
Christine A. Long
Leora Mallach
Adam C. Steiner
John A. Stefanini
Cesar G. Stewart-Morales- REMOTE
Staff Participating: 
Lincoln Lynch, Director of Finance & Operations, Framingham Public Schools
Louise Miller, Chief Financial Officer
Charlie Sisitsky, Mayor
Dr. Robert Tremblay, Superintendent, Framingham Public Schools
Michael Tusino, Chief Operating Officer
School Committee Participating: 
Jessica Barnhill, District 8 School Committee, Vice-Chair
Ricky Finlay, District 2 School Committee
Adam Freudberg, District 4 School Committee
Beverly Hugo, District 1 School Committee
William LaBarge, District 9 School Committee
Tiffanie Maskell, District 7 School Committee- REMOTE
Jennifer Moshe, District 3 School Committee- REMOTE
Valarie Ottaviani, District 6 School Committee
Priscila Sousa, District 5 School Committee, Chair
Others Participating: 
Carmine Gentile, 13th Middlesex District, MA House of Representatives
Dennis Giombetti, Senate President Spilka’s Office 
Danielle Gregoire, 4th Middlesex District, MA House of Representatives
Jack Patrick Lewis, 7th Middlesex District, MA House of Representatives
Maria Robinson, 6th Middlesex District, MA House of Representatives
******************************************************
City of Framingham  Page 1 of 12  Updated 4/1/22
Page 2
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
CALL TO ORDER 
7:00 PM Chairman Ottaviani called the meeting to order. He notified listeners that discussion would
take place on the topic of projected revenues and he welcomed members of the School Committee, 
School Department, and Legislatures of the State to the conversation. He read the entire agenda as
posted and called for items out of order in an effort to allow for ample time to discuss the topic of
revenues. 
Upon opening the School Committee’s portion of the meeting, Ms. Priscilla Sousa, District 5 School
Committee, Chair, noted the members of the School Committee and School Department in attendance
either in person or remotely. 
PUBLIC HEARINGS/DISCUSSION
Order 2022-008-007 – Upon request of the Appointments Subcommittee, a report and
recommendation with regard to the Mayor’s nominee, Fred Stratmann, to serve on the Loring Arena
Advisory Committee
Moved by Councilor Stefanini. Seconded by Councilor Leombruno. Chairman Ottaviani shared that the
Appointments Subcommittee had met with Mr. Stratmann earlier and they voted 3-0 in approval of the
Mayor’s nomination of Mr. Stratmann to the Loring Arena Advisory Committee. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: 
Bryant, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; 
Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye. Mr. Stratmann’s appointment to the
Loring Arena Advisory Committee was accepted. 
Order 2022-038 - Upon Request of the Mayor, a request for approval of the City Property Naming
Application with regard to naming the Village Hall Ballroom in honor of the late Karen Foran Dempsey
Chairman Ottaviani invited Mayor Sisitsky or Chief Operating Officer Tusino to speak. Mr. Sisitsky shared
that the Charter provided the Mayor make recommendations regarding naming of city property. Any
recommendation to name property after a person must be made to the Mayor. After consideration, the
Mayor forwards the request to the Council for approval. 
The previous Administration, he said, had set a policy of the creation of a committee, made up of
various members of the community, to make a recommendation to the Mayor. In this case, he felt the
decision was a “no-brainer” and he did not need a committee to help him decide to name the Village
Hall Ballroom in honor of Karen. The recommendation was clear and to be made directly to the Council, 
he said. 
Chairman Ottaviani expressed his appreciation for the Mayor’s comments and asked for a motion. 
Councilor Leombruno thanked the Mayor and others that supported the naming. She said for those that
did know her sister, Karen Foran Dempsey, formed the Disability Commission when she graduated from
college. The goal was to lessen barriers in the community for people with disabilities. She fought for and
worked with former Selectmen/Council members Giombetti and Sisitsky for over 20 years on these
challenges. She mentioned the tireless work that Councilor’s Long, Cannon and others had done with
Karen. 
Because of her work, the Village Hall was made accessible to everyone by the addition of an elevator. 
Ms. Leombruno shared that unfortunately, Karen passed away a year ago Christmastime and it was
about that time that a group of people suggested the naming of the Ballroom in her honor. One of
Karen’s sons and her husband, Mark Dempsey, were in attendance. Ms. Leombruno shared that Karen’s
other son had said he was never allowed to go upstairs with his mother due to the only access of stairs. 
City of Framingham  Page 2 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
Page 3
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
When events were held at the hall, she was never able to be a part of them with her children. She
always sent them up with someone else and said, “that’s ok, someday it will be changed.” Ms. 
Leombruno expressed her family’s appreciation for the efforts and support given to honor Karen. Karen, 
she said, always changed others perspectives. 
Motion to approve the naming of the Village Hall Ballroom in honor of Karen Foran Dempsey was made
by Councilor Leombruno. Seconded by Councilor Long. Councilor Bryant said that those who did not
know Ms. Dempsey, knew her through her work. The work, she said, was what mattered. She said
numerous times it was heard that Karen was a positive light in the community. She shared the famous
quote, “And still she persisted”. Karen, she said, helped this community through her persistence and the
community was grateful. 
Councilor Cannon echoed the enthusiasm and gratitude expressed by the previous speakers. He said
that accessibility was now in the forefront of all our community efforts. He said Karen taught him so
much about the ADA and the disability community. He said he was privileged to have known her and all
were privileged to walk in her light and legacy. 
Upon no further comments, Chairman Ottaviani called for a vote. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Bryant, aye; 
Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; 
Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye. The request of the Mayor for approval of the City
Property Naming Application with regard to naming the Village Hall ballroom in honor of the late Karen
Foran Dempsey was approved. 
Ms. Leombruno thanked Mayor Sisitsky on behalf of the entire family. A round of applause was heard. 
Order 2022-008-008 - Upon Request of the Mayor, a request for a referral to the Appointments
Subcommittee to discuss the Mayor’s recommendation of Robert A. Lewis to serve as DPW
(Department of Public Works) Director
By Authority of Council Chair Without Objection, the matter regarding the Mayor’s recommendation of
Robert A. Lewis to serve as the DPW Director, was referred to the Appointment’s Subcommittee for
review and recommendation to City Council. 
Order 2022-008-009 - Upon Request of the Mayor, a request for a referral to the Appointments
Subcommittee to discuss the Mayor’s recommendation for Thomas Grove (District 8) to serve on the
Council on Aging Board
By Authority of Council Chair Without Objection, the matter regarding the Mayor’s recommendation of
Thomas Grove to serve on the Council on Aging, was referred to the Appointment’s Subcommittee for
review and recommendation to City Council. 
Order 2022-008-010 - Upon Request of the Mayor, a request for a referral to the Appointments
Subcommittee to discuss the Mayor’s recommendation for Robert Merusi (District 3) and Steven Joyce
(District 1) to serve on the Housing Authority Board
By Authority of Council Chair Without Objection, the matter regarding the Mayor’s recommendation of
Robert Merusi and Steven Joyce to serve on the Housing Authority Board, was referred to the
Appointment’s Subcommittee for review and recommendation to City Council. Chairman Ottaviani
announced the next Appointment’s Subcommittee meeting was to be held on Tuesday April 5th at 6PM
in the Blumer Room. 
City of Framingham  Page 3 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
Page 4
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
Councilor Bryant asked for a point of information. She said that these applications were not attached
and asked when they would be shared with the Council. Chairman Ottaviani explained that the two had
not been included yet as they were just brought to the Council this evening. Their applications would be
accessible shortly now that they were referred to the Appointments Subcommittee. 
Joint Meeting with Framingham Public School Committee & Honorable Legislative Delegation
Order 2022-037 - Upon Request of the Mayor, a public discussion of FY-2023 revenues with the
Council, School Committee and Honorable Legislative Delegation. 
Chairman Ottaviani gave the floor to Mayor Sisitsky. The Mayor thanked the Council for scheduling this
special meeting. At first, he was leery of four special agenda meetings as suggested by Councilor
Stefanini. The more he thought about it, he felt it was a great idea because it would allow opportunity to
delve into important issues outside of day-to-day business. 
He said that from the outset, his Administration had been focused upon open and transparent
government. First, determining what the revenues would be in FY23 was necessary. This, he said was an
important step in deciding upon budget recommendations for the upcoming fiscal year. He
acknowledged and thanked the members of the School Committee, School Administration, and the
Legislative Delegation for their attendance and participation. He felt this was a team approach to solve
issues in the City. He noted he had spent the afternoon with the School Administration to view the
Bethany Hill proposed school site to determine how and if the City should move forward with it’s
purchase. 
Mayor Sisitsky said that Ms. Louise Miller, Chief Financial Officer, would share the process in which they
followed to identify the estimated revenues of FY23. He noted that per the Charter, the budget was to
be presented by May 1st, however, it was their intention to do so before May 1st, perhaps in mid-April, 
allowing for extra time to review and ask questions. 
Chairman Ottaviani remarked the spirit of cooperation in Framingham was nice. 
Ms. Miller began by noting that they were so transparent, five drafts of her presentation had been
shared with the Council. The final draft was marked as such and it would be sent to the Council. The
focus of the presentation was on revenue projections and how the City developed them and the overall
budget, she said. The concept was simple, she said; balancing revenues and expenditures. In order to do
that, it must first start with revenue projections. 
At the same time, she said, the Administration would receive expenditure requests. The revenue
projections would be refined and then recommendations would be developed for expenditures based
upon the revenues expected to come in. After that, a presentation of balanced revenues and
expenditures would be made to the Council. After review, the Council would vote upon the final
expenditures. 
She began discussing the financial indicators. Her presentation could be found in the background
materials. Framingham, she said, was a Moody’s Aa2 stable community based upon the healthy growth
in tax base, diverse economy, and unused tax levy. 
City of Framingham  Page 4 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
Page 5
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
Chairman Ottaviani invited members of the School Committee and Administration to move into the
open Council desks if wanted. Ms. Miller noted they had paper copies of the presentation if anyone
wanted a copy for ease of viewing. 
The Moody’s rating was important, she explained, because investors look to that rating when purchasing
bonds and that determined the interest rate the City paid. It also allowed for a comparison among other
communities. She explained the importance of Moody’s upgrade and downgrades. This meant the focus
must be on economic development over the next few years. The tax-levy also must be stabilized. 
For FY23 significant budget drivers included high inflation, which would drive cost for various
departments; fuel, electricity, and tipping fees for solid waste processing. Collective bargaining and
salary adjustments were to be implemented, some of which were multi-year based. She said she
became aware that non-union employees had not received increases in two or three years. When
looking at collective bargaining agreements, the look is that of two years at a time she explained. 
There were several regulatory changes that affected specific departments and resulted in some revenue
increases. A look would be made at the delivery of services in those departments to see how it could be
managed. She then explained the unclassified budget drivers; it was anticipated that the health
insurance premiums would rapidly and drastically increase. She said a consultant was working with the
City on how to manage these changes. One carrier, Fallon, was no longer providing municipality health
care options. In addition, a tax increase will occur due to excluded debt service. 
In looking at trends in FY2023 Projected Revenue overtime, the percent of the tax levy contribution to
revenue had decreased while state aid had increased. Local receipts, she said, tended to be uneven, 
although it had increased over time. All others were non-recurring revenue and would not be relied
upon when putting together the recurring expenses budget. They planned to identify revenue sources as
recurring or non-recurring. 
A slide was shared outlining estimated dollar amounts in the FY2023 Projected Revenue as of March 29, 
2022. Ms. Miller’s points made on this slide including the continued refinement of the numbers. She
said they were seeking advice from the Department of Revenue (DOR) for what could be assumed from
cannabis excise tax. They had considered the Governor’s proposed increase in support from the State. It
was their intent to try and return the Enterprise Fund to financial viability and to begin a multi-year
decrease in reliance on Free-cash and other non-recurring sources of funding. Local receipts would be
projected more realistically, and an increase in the tax-levy would be necessary to make up for the
reduction in Free-Cash in FY2023. 
City of Framingham  Page 5 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
Page 6
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
The CPA (Community Preservation Act) Allocation would be determined by the tax-levy and a final
number would be determined with the final revenue budget. The CPA would be incorporated as a
potential source of funding for capital projects. 
The Enterprise Fund, she described as a problem in and of itself. It needed to be made financially stable
or viable first. This year a $10M increase in the budgeted revenue rate was required or an approximate
16% of the combined Water & Sewer budgets. She described efforts made with the DPW for capitally
funded positions and determining if they were needed in the operating budget. They intended to level
fund the debt service and slow down on capital in order to allow the fund expenditures to catch up with
revenues. The MassDOR required a full payment of $3.3M in fund deficit creating a $3.3M gap “right off
the bat”. That in addition to the $6.35M in one-time ARPA funding brought the number needed to
almost $10M needed. Further discussion and information on this subject would be had at a later date. 
She briefly described the other items in the All Other category. They included projected revenue from
Cable Access fees and Health Insurance Trust monies (approximately $1.1M). The Health Insurance Trust
monies would be exhausted at the end of FY23 and would be gone and not available in FY24. In looking
at these projections, Ms. Miller said she was looking ahead to FY24 & FY25 a bit. 
Next, Free Cash was described. She explained that it lagged the budget by one fiscal year. It was
determined by whatever was in the City’s fund balance and was not designated for any other purpose at
the end of the fiscal year. It is certified for expenditure in the following fiscal year. It is used in the
following fiscal year, she explained. Since FY20, there had been a sharp decline in the Undesignated
Fund balance and Free-Cash. There was no anticipation of a significant surplus in expenditures or
revenues. A replenishment of the Undesignated Fund balance to a great extent was not anticipated. 
Looking ahead to next year, she requested, a drastic cut back on the use of this fund. That amount she
said would go from $6M to $3M in FY23. 
Historical Data of Local Receipts caused Ms. Miller some difficulty, she said. The projections for the past
few years were not even and did not relate to where we were with actuals for receipts. She shared a
graph depicting the actuals and projections budgeted. The problem with over estimating the revenues
was it created a deficit. She said they were a little concerned about FY22. A slide was provided noting
the averages of FY17-21 actuals. 
State Aid was also described. The Governor’s proposal increased aid to Framingham by $12M. Upon
analysis, it was determined the proposed aid was a good estimate. However, in looking at State Aid
historically, there had been a level of unpredictability that cautions against use of the full increase to
support Operating Budget increases. That meant if Framingham took the $12M and placed it entirely
into the Operating Budget, and if the Operating Budget were to grow next year by 2.5%, an area of
deficit would be created unless State Aid were to also grow by 2.5%. That deficit would need to be made
up through another revenue source, she said. 
FY23, she went on, showed a Chapter 70 Allocation. She described it as a challenge noting that
Framingham spends more than the allocation on education. Whatever the earmark or line item may
have been in the cherry sheet, the City absorbed that amount as part of the entire budget and
expenditures would be developed based upon complete revenue. 
In the FY23 Tax Levy, Excluded Debt would increase by about $1M for the Fuller Middle School project. A
conservative new growth projection was made of about $3.5M. A 2.5% increase in the Tax Levy. She
reminded the participants that there was a one-time ARPA revenue of $2.4M (nonrecurring) and the
reduction of Free Cash to support operations to $3M. 
City of Framingham  Page 6 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
Page 7
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
She briefly described the sustainability of the tax levy in a chart. She explained that where the gray bar
was less than zero, it meant the City was raising less in taxes on the value of properties in Framingham
than had been in the prior year. There were tax reductions in three years; FY19, FY21, & FY22. The
reduction in FY19 was made up by State Aid resulting in overall revenue to be stable, but the tax levy
fell. The same happened in FY22 except with the tax levy falling, it was backfilled with one-time ARPA
money. She felt the cause in FY21 was in part by COVID and there was a significant reduction in the
amount collected due to the tax levy even when considering new growth and excluded debt. That was
where a lack of matching cuts and revenues lead to an unbalanced budget, she explained. There would
be a carry forward into the following year, and again the budget would be behind. 
The total FY23 Projected Increase in Available General Fund Budget Revenue as of March 29, 2022 was
$15.6M of which, $12M was from State Aid. She spoke to the Legislatures in attendance and explained
that this identified how important State Aid was for the financial health of Framingham. 
Ms. Miller reiterated the themes of a balanced revenues and expenditures; a focus on economic
development, stabilization of the tax-levy, and stabilization of debt and long-term liabilities. The lack of
predictable tax increases made it difficult to project and plan. She mentioned working projects into a
financing plan. It was early to tell, but the City may not be able to contribute to Other Post-Employment
Opportunities (OPEB).
She shared that the Administration was currently looking at the Capital Improvement Plan, Operating
Budget (both General & Enterprise Funds), Other Budgets with Recurring Grants that do not necessarily
go before the Council, Non-Recurring Grants, and Special Revenue Funds. In addition, Revenue
Development for both the General and Enterprise Funds. 
The CFO then outlined the next steps. They would be reviewing Expense Budget Requests, Review the
Capital Plan, Develop Expense Budget including work with the School Committee and School
Department, prepare a Balanced Budget, and they would set the Water & Sewer Rates. 
Chairman Ottaviani thanked Ms. Miller for the excellent presentation. He recognized the State
Delegation in attendance and emphasized how important State Aid was to communities. He expressed
appreciation for their time and all they do for Framingham. He said the Council and the Mayor’s Office
were cooperating to make Framingham more viable with their support. 
Mayor Sisitsky said that they had just heard a lot of information to digest. This was a learning session for
everyone and that was why they had waited until yesterday to provide the documentation, as it was
being updated with the most recent data and no vote was being asked of the Council at that time. He
acknowledged that Social Media had taken the presentation and posted it without explanation or
proper context. He said the staff was there and were open to any initial questions the Councilors or
others may have had. Chairman Ottaviani noted that the Treasurer, Chief Assessor, and various
members of the School Department were in attendance for the discussion. He opened the floor to the
Council for questions and comments first. 
Councilor Long thanked the Administration for the presentation. She asked where was the City in
determining an increase in the Water & Sewer rates. Upon her review of the presentation, it was
obvious to her that focus should be made on the increase of Economic Development with a focus on
Commercial which she had been saying for years. This highlighted, illustrated, and exemplified
everything the City needed to do. She was concerned last year about the continued lower tax rate and
higher property value, but at this juncture, there were not many alternatives. She noted increases in
various budgets and hated the reliance upon State Aid, even though the City was fortunate to receive it. 
City of Framingham  Page 7 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
Page 8
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
She noted that there were many long-term employees within the City that had not gotten an increase in
years while the School Department and unionized employees had. She felt that disparity must be
addressed. 
Councilor Steiner asked that they dig in more into local receipts. It appeared to him that the projection
for FY23 was a significant drop verse the trend over the past several years. He asked that they say a little
more about that. In relation to that, he said, there may have been mention of a Meals Tax. He wondered
how that would factor in. Ms. Miller said there was a decrease in receipts from FY22 to FY23 that was
reflective of the ARPA funding. The other decrease, she explained, was the guidance received from the
DOR. She was told that last year, the DOR requested the City amend certain local receipt lines. The
result of that was an imbalance with projections used in the preparation of the budget. That was why
she was a little concerned. They would be back at the end of the year with adjustments as necessary
and that was where some Free-Cash may need to be used. 
She mentioned the meals tax was her error and that Mr. Steiner’s statement that it was a regulated rate
was correct. He made mention that there was hope people would return to eating locally after COVID
and the tax collected would generate more revenue. He mentioned a new hotel that was built and
hoped its marketing would bring more revenue to the City. He was pleased to hear that the additional
upcoming ARPA distribution was not going to be used for revenue replacement. He asked what
decisions had been made about those upcoming funds. No decisions had been made yet, she shared. 
The Mayor and she were looking at potential projects to use approximately $3M remaining of the first
allocation. They hoped to receive the rest closer to July than December. Once the money was received
they would look at expenditures for those funds. 
Mayor Sisitsky said that the overarching goal was to not use the ARPA money for the one-time use to
bail-out the operating budget. He described the goal for its use of long-term benefits to the community. 
He added that they had just been notified by Congresswoman Clark’s office that another round of
Federal Funding was coming to communities and Framingham would be submitting applications and
requests for certain long-term benefit projects. The same was said about State level programs with the
help of our Legislatures. 
Chairman Ottaviani truly thanked the Mayor, CFO and team stating that it made more sense to put the
ARPA money into long term community benefit projects. When the money was used to bail-out the
Enterprise Fund he said it was, “truly flushing it down the toilet”. It was a one shot, and it was a
mistake, he went on. 
Councilor Stefanini thanked the Mayor for the open and transparent sharing of revenues. This was
timely, he said, and it had never been done. He offered kudos to him for accepting the Council’s
invitation to take part in these meetings and thanked Ms. Miller for the concise package. The new
direction in upgrading the City’s bond rating, the limitation of use of non-recurring revenues for
operating positions, transferring positions from capital budgets, making the Enterprise Fund self- 
sufficient, focus on economic development and establishing long range planning were all new goals and
much needed in his opinion to become a well-run community. 
He thanked the legislative delegation and Ms. Spilka through Mr. Giombetti. He said it was not lost that
the Chapter 70 Funds and local aid were significant. He asked them how comfortable they were with
the estimated projections the Governor had put into his budget and did they feel like the House and
Senate would hold to them. He asked if they were numbers the City could count on. His second
question was that there were new revenue coming with potential for Capital Programs, ARPA Funding
City of Framingham  Page 8 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
Page 9
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
and more. He asked if there were additional revenue streams. He then asked Ms. Miller what the areas
were that were being looked at for new revenue sources. He appreciated that the local receipts were
conservative. 
Chairman Ottaviani welcomed the legislative delegation to speak either at the podium or from their
seats. Mr. Jack Patrick Lewis, 7th Middlesex District, MA House of Representatives, said that the only
numbers the Council had were the Governor’s. It made sense, he said, to insert them into the
projections for now. The House and Senate’s numbers would be available in a couple of weeks. A lot
more would be known then. He said he believed the nearly 20% increase in Chapter 70 funding was the
result of the Student Opportunity Act. A new formula was used to take several new factors into
consideration. These considerations included the number of English Language Learners and Low-Income
Students. While the money was celebrated, he said it was important to note that the 20% was tied
directly to the new funding formula. Ms. Maria Robinson, 6th Middlesex District, MA House of
Representatives, added that it may not be replicated at a 20% level going forward and it should not be
expected as such. 
Ms. Danielle Gregoire, 4th Middlesex District, MA House of Representatives, thanked everyone for the
opportunity to be a part of the evening. She introduced herself to those watching from home. She was
looking forward to working with the City in the coming months as the result of redistricting that added
her area to include parts of Framingham. In her current seat as House Chair of the Bonding Committee
on State Assets, she was tasked with monitoring the receipt of the Federal money received for
communities. She was currently working with her co-chair on a Government Bond bill totaling $5B that
specifically followed the Capital Improvement Plan. She was heartened to hear that Framingham was
planning in advance because that helped them advocate for the City moving forward. 
The Governor, she said, filed an additional Bond bill that included close to $10B which included some of
the Federal Infrastructure money. It had yet to be determined who would hear that bill. Framingham, 
she said, would have a seat at the table as far as Capital Planning was concerned. She was pleased the
City was looking forward on investing those funds in projects for the community. 
Mr. Dennis Giombetti, Senate President Spilka’s Office, said it was great being back in the Blumer
Community Room with everyone. He echoed Mr. Lewis’s comments about the Governors numbers being
the best to use at this point. One change, he suggested, was that there had been some discussion
around unrestricted government. Discussion with the Governor budget at 2.7% and a talk about a
different metric. That account, he said, may be altered over the course of the next few months. He
noted the ARPA funds were applicable to water & sewer infrastructure, air quality in schools, and
highways. It would be distributed primarily through the normal grant process. Access of those dollars
would be critical in funding special projects. 
Councilor Cannon stated that most of the questions he had, were answered this evening and it was
remarkable that it took place in March. He liked that a dialog was had to address challenges and solve
problems. Chairman Ottaviani said he would continue down the Council table, would call upon the two
members participating remotely, and then the School Committee would speak as it was a joint meeting. 
After that, he would call upon the public on the ZOOM meeting. 
Councilor Alexander asked for himself and others what the highest Moody’s rating Framingham could
obtain was. Ms. Miller said it was “Aaa”. He asked how far away from that was the City at the moment. 
She said two rungs down from that. He thanked her for the succinct and digestible presentation. He
asked if “new growth” meant the establishment of new businesses and new construction. She said new
growth was not the result of revaluation, but the result of additions to the tax base. 
City of Framingham  Page 9 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
Page 10
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
Councilor Leombruno felt the first gathering of all parties was very good for residents to see the
movement forward with this Administration. It was long overdue. She said all were aware there would
be troubles ahead, but this was a good way to collectively work toward solving them. 
Councilor King said the detailed, timely presentation was very helpful. He asked if it was going to be
referred to the Finance Subcommittee and what was the Administrations thought on what they wanted
to see. They half-jokingly asked how much input did the Administration want from the Finance
Subcommittee. Councilor King noted that there was a lot of detail to be discussed and that was
challenging in a room of 40 or so people. Mayor Sisitsky said it was the Councils choice. His
Administration was willing to meet with the Finance Subcommittee. Mr. King said that the revenue side
was always left out of the discussion and it was important in setting the budget. His comments
continued about past efforts of the Council in regard to the budget. 
Chairman Ottaviani stated he could not call upon Councilor Bryant as she was not on the screen. He
called upon Councilor Stewart-Morales and would return to her. Councilor Stewart-Morales thanked
everyone for the presentation. He commented on the utilization of the CPA funds to cover Capital
Expenditure needs. He requested more information be shared at a future date. It felt it important to
preserve the intention of the CPA funds going forward. He felt not enough was invested through Capital
Expenditures in that area. He felt the investment in DPW and roadway work to be one of the most
important part of local government. He wanted investment in the City’s miles of roads and pipework to
establish a good position in the future. 
Mayor Sisitsky said that Councilor Stewart-Morales made a good point about the CPA Funds. He said
that often times the Administration and Council used letters but not everyone was aware of what CPA
meant. He explained it was the Community Preservation Act. The voters of Framingham voted on it to
put a 1% surcharge on the tax bills. Monies were placed into a special fund that was supplemented by
the State and they could only be used for specific activities such as Open Space acquisition, Affordable
Housing, Recreation and Historic Preservations. The would only be used for allowable uses per the CPA. 
It would not be just put toward Capital projects, he explained. 
Councilor Bryant asked if it was preferred and recommended to have level fund debt service as noted
for FY23. Ms. Miller said it was generally the best way to handle debt service. However, it was necessary
to determine the correct level as the City was currently at 5% debt service. From a budgeting
perspective, it was difficult when a debt service increased and decreased throughout the year. She
would have a few suggestions to flatten that line item. She gave an example. With respect to Water &
Sewer, she would not generally recommend that debt service be level funded. In FY23, the City had to
make up a $10M gap in revenue. Once bridged, the City would be able to reestablish the proper level for
that debt service for that Enterprise Fund. 
With that, Chairman Ottaviani turned the meting over to School Committee Chair Priscilla Sousa. She
thanked the Delegation for the substantial increase in Chapter 70 Funding. She noted that it was
welcomed and necessary. Ms. Sousa thanked the Mayor and the CFO’s team for the presentation and
said that since the beginning of the year, Mr. Lincoln Lynch, Director of Finance & Operations, 
Framingham Public Schools, had heard the School Committee’s candor wondering how collaborative the
process would be. Speaking for herself, she said that her unease in regard to collaboration starting in
January had changed and she did not feel that way currently. 
When it was suggested that the School Department not take full control of the Chapter 70 Funding, she
was not as apprehensive as in the past. In the past, the School Department Budget was used as the
City of Framingham  Page 10 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
Page 11
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
City’s “piggy-bank” and that was disheartening, she went on. This collaboration had allowed for the
School Committee to take bolder steps and have bolder visions for equity here in Framingham. She
stated advocating for a south side school as a means for correcting the root cause of bussing issues. 
Renewed efforts and enthusiasm for equal access to quality pre-K programs were made. She thanked
the Mayor for not making it about bureaucracy and procedure and making it about changing lives, a
mission of many on the School Committee. 
Mr. Adam Freudberg, District 4, School Committee member, said that there were many other joint-
meetings that would be appropriate to have. Tomorrow evening, he said, the School Committee would
vote upon a budget request to be submitted to the Mayor. The planning process was easier due to the
Governor’s H1 Planning process and the Legislative commitment to exceed that goal in Chapter 70
Funding. The year to year increase discussed was substantial in comparison to last year. This year, he
said, the increase was 20% at $11.8M. The economic impacts of the pandemic and the Water & Sewer
Enterprise Fund matched with what to do with the Chapter 70 money. 
He noted Mayor Sisitsky and Ms. Miller had been very helpful even before their first 100 days in office. 
He explained that the support of the Legislation in securing the Chapter 70 Funds decreased the amount
City share of the budget needed for the School Department by $4.4M. The reliance was 5.8% less than
last year for local tax payers on the school district line items. Increased State Aid also helped to meet
the legislated mandate as required by the Student Opportunity Act. That helped to invest in students
most in need, invest in staff, fulfill contractual obligations, address inequities such as Title IX compliance, 
additional pre-K student slots, and more. He said that it was all outlined in the 217-page budget book
that was available online. 
He recognized the efforts of the Mayor and CFO for attending their meetings and working with them. 
Tomorrow’s budget he said, was at their proposed number due to the collaboration and discussion that
took place in those meetings prior to the submission. An agreed upon number for the budget had not
been in place since the transition from town to city. 
He said that he felt there was large gap for youth to participate in recreation throughout the City. He
noted that the Parks & Recreation Department previously released a plan to build a recreation center. 
He asked of the Mayor that as ways to support the FY23 Operating Budget were made, he suggested the
use of one-time ARPA money to be applied toward this idea. It would be a good way to keep people in
Framingham and for example he noted that the Framingham Baseball League would be sending the
entire group of participants to a facility in Marlborough for indoor practices. Framingham had no such
facilities he said, and those type of community-based additions he wished to see. He asked if the
recreation center was still on the table and was that something the School Department/Committee
could assist with given it would benefit many students. 
Mayor Sisitsky said the short answer was yes. It would be considered among other needs. He expected
to task the new Economic Development Director, when hired, with finding ways to create a recreational
center. He noted this was important in light of the recent loss of the swimming pool at Keefe Tech and
input was welcome from the School Committee, Department and other members of the community. 
Tiffanie Maskell, District 7 School Committee, reiterated the importance that the increase in Chapter 70
money received was based upon English Language Learners and Low-Income students. In addition to still
being in the pandemic, she said that in order to meet the 5% goal, a nurse position was cut and 2 or 3
critical social/emotional behavioral coaches were cut. She felt that was difficult given the needs today. It
was important she said, that children and families were still supported as they recover. She felt the $3M
being given back to the Legislatures could fund these cut positions. 
City of Framingham  Page 11 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
Page 12
Minutes  City Council  3/29/2022
William LaBarge, District 9 School Committee, thanked the Chair of the Council, School Committee, and
Delegation for making this work. Bussing he said was a cost for the City. Costs incurred some times were
important in creating an excellent community for the kids either in or outside of schools, he said. He
recognized that it took many people to collaborate and make it work and everyone would benefit. 
Chairman Ottaviani asked Ms. Margareth Shepard, former Council Member via ZOOM, if she had a
question. She said that Councilor Stewart-Morales had asked the question about the CPA fund and she
understood the answer. She appreciated the Mayor’s response. The presentation was great, she said. 
Upon seeing no others wishing to participate, Chairman Ottaviani began to adjourn the meeting. 
Councilor Steiner amplified Ms. Maskell’s comments that it was important to recognize that the school
system was incredibly important to the residents. In his opinion, it had been chronically underfunded
for decades. Growing up in Framingham, he remembered Prop 2 ½ and the impact it had. He
remembered layoffs at the high school with most every teacher receiving a pink-slip. He said that the
recent challenges had been difficult. He said it was important to recognize there was work to be done in
the school system. He noted that the Superintendent would be staying after a succession of many who
left. The teaching staff was amazing, he said. He felt it was important to keep the collaborative spirit in
working together but to remember the school system was playing catch-up and it was the City’s
responsibility to make sure they had the resources they needed. 
Councilor Stefanini moved this matter be referred to the Finance Subcommittee. Seconded by Councilor
Cannon. Councilor Cannon asked for clarification. He said that a School Committee member had
previously referenced a School Nurse position that was cut. Dr. Tremblay, Superintendent of Schools, 
clarified that the word “cut” was a little misleading. It was not a cut from the budget, but a cut from
new position proposals. There was no reduction of staff and that was vetted with the Director of Health
and Wellness. There were positions like this that had not been able to be filled. The positions for Social/ 
Emotional support and English Language support had not been able to be filled. The way in which they
met the proposed reduction, they eliminated new proposed positions that had not been filled. No
reduction of staff, he said again, was made. 
Chairman Ottaviani noted that Councilor Stefanini moved to refer this to the Finance Subcommittee and
it was seconded by Councilor Cannon. A vote was called. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, 
aye; Mallach, aye; Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Leombruno, aye; King, aye; Alexander, 
aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Bryant, aye. The matter of the budget was referred to the Finance
Subcommittee. 
ADJOURNMENT
8:31PM Motion to adjourn made by Councilor Leombruno. Seconded by Councilor Bryant. ROLL CALL
VOTE 11-0-0: ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, aye; Mallach, aye; Steiner, aye; Stefanini, 
aye; Ottaviani, aye; Leombruno, aye; King, aye; Alexander, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Bryant, aye. 
Motion to adjourn the School Committee portion of the meeting by Mr. LaBarge. Seconded by Mr. 
Freudberg. ROLL CALL VOTE 9-0-0: Hugo, aye; Finlay, aye; Moshe, aye; Freudberg, aye; V. Ottaviani, 
aye; Maskell, aye; LaBarge, aye; Sousa, aye; Barnhill, aye. 
The joint meeting adjourned. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Marion Kelly
City of Framingham  Page 12 of 12  Updated 4/1/22 
