CITY COUNCIL 
GEORGE P. KING, JR., CHAIR | ADAM C. STEINER, VICE CHAIR 
NOVAL ALEXANDER | TRACEY BRYANT | MICHAEL P. CANNON |
JANET LEOMBRUNO | CHRISTINE A. LONG | LEORA MALLACH |
PHILIP R. OTTAVIANI, JR.| JOHN A. STEFANINI 
CESAR G. STEWART-MORALES 
Council Members Participating: 
George P. King, Jr., Chair 
Noval Alexander-REMOTE 
Michael P. Cannon, Vice-Chair 
MEMORIAL BUILDING – ROOM 113
150 CONCORD STREET, FRAMINGHAM, MA 01702
508.532.5400 – CITYCOUNCIL@FRAMINGHAMMA.GOV 
FINANCE SUBCOMMITTEE
MINUTES: MARCH 8, 2022
BLUMER COMMUNITY ROOM/REMOTE 
7:00PM
APPROVED 4/12/22
Adam C. Steiner 
John A. Stefanini
Staff Participating: 
Louise Miller, Chief Financial Officer 
Michael Tusino, Chief Operating Officer
For all meeting background material please visit: 
 https://www.framinghamma.gov/ccbackground
******************************************************
CALL TO ORDER 
7:00PM Councilor George P. King, Jr., Chair of the Finance Subcommittee, called the meeting to order. 
He indicated that the meeting was being broadcast live on the Government Channel and streamed
through the Council Facebook page. 
He read the agenda as posted. 
There was a small technical delay that was addressed in getting the meeting streamed live on Facebook. 
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Ms. Leslie White Harvey and Ms. Winett wished to speak on the agenda item pertaining to the library
ramp. Chairman King asked them to wait to speak on that item until it was discussed. He again invited
the public to speak on items not on the agenda. Upon seeing none, he moved to the first agenda item. 
DISCUSSION/VOTE
Order 2022-021 – Upon request of the Mayor and the CFO, a referral to Finance Subcommittee, for a
report and recommendation with regard to a request for funds (free cash) for voting tabulation
machines and voting booths and rescission of previously authorized borrowing Ms. Louise Miller, Chief
Financial Officer, shared that new voting machines were included in the FY23 Capital Improvement Plan
for the City Clerk. Upon her meeting with the City Clerk, it became apparent that this request be
accelerated for two reasons; there was insufficient number of voting equipment for the upcoming
election in September of 2022 and some existing equipment needed upgrading. The Clerk, she said, 
City of Framingham  Page 1 of 4  3/14/2022
Page 2
Minutes  City Council  3/14/2022
indicated that if the City waited to order the booths in 2023, a problem would occur during the
upcoming September election. 
Ms. Miller went on to state that she had begun to go through Capital projects to try and clean-up old
projects, outstanding bonds, and outstanding debt authorizations. In doing so, she found that there was
unused balance of already borrowed debt that could be used toward this request and the remainder
could be borrowed from Free-Cash. She did not recommend borrowing again for this item, as there was
sufficient Free-Cash to do so. Ms. Miller also said she was not comfortable yet with where debt service
levels were, and the requested machines needed to be purchased immediately. She went on to state
that she wanted the Council to rescind debt on the books for $1,780 as part of this transaction. 
Chairman King asked a clarifying question about Free-Cash. He said that of the $7.8M in certified Free-
Cash, $6M was approved during the FY22 operating budget last June. He asked if that was already
incumbered in Free-Cash certification and did it really amount to $7.8M? Ms. Miller said it did and it
was a very small certification for the City. 
Chairman King went on to express that it was his understanding that when the City expends certified
Free-Cash in the budget as was done last spring, and was then recalculated July 1, 2021, the $6M voted
upon previously could not be recertified. He said, otherwise, it would be double certified. Ms. Miller
said she did not believe that was correct and looked up the amount in Free-Cash certified. She
explained that there was an excess of collection on a number of different items and that was where the
Free-Cash was certified this year and it was a FY22 certification. She stated that it was a Free-Cash
Certification in FY21 for use in FY22. Chairman King thanked her for her comments, and they decided to
talk about the process at another time. 
Councilor Stefanini thanked Ms. Miller for her presentation tonight. He appreciated her efforts to clean-
up the debts and it would help the City with its credit rating. He said it had been a long time since a
check had been made on outstanding debt that was not used, and continued asking for more when
those funds could be repurposed. He also said he appreciated the motions put forth by her department. 
He then asked the Chair if there was a need to have a 2/3rds vote to decertify debt? Chairman King said
he did not believe so. 
Councilor Steiner asked Ms. Miller about using Free-Cash instead of bonding to purchase voting
equipment versus other equipment, and what was the reasoning behind that. She responded that it
was due to the fact that this equipment would probably not last more than 10 years. In the aggregate, 
she said, its cost was about $120K, but some of it was software and each piece of equipment did not
qualify as capital. He asked if 10 years was the standard mark. She said no, that this type of discussion
would continue to be had over the next several months in terms of definitions of capital and capital
financing of what to bond and not. She offered that if the Council preferred, these items could be
bonded, it just was not her recommendation. 
Councilor Cannon shared that he appreciated the explanation and the practice. He then made the
motion that $120,068.00 be appropriated from Free Cash for the purpose of purchasing voting machines
and voting booths; And further that the unborrowed balance of $4,780.00 authorized and voted as
project 32802 Voting Machines by the City Council Order 2018-062 be rescinded. Seconded by Mr. 
Stefanini. Upon no further discussion, Chairman King called a ROLL CALL VOTE 5-0: Alexander, aye; 
Cannon, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; King, aye. The request of the Mayor and the CFO, a referral to
Finance Subcommittee, for a report and recommendation with regard to a request for funds (free cash) 
for voting tabulation machines and voting booths and rescission of previously authorized borrowing was
approved for recommendation to the Council. 
City of Framingham  Page 2 of 4  3/14/2022 
Page 3
Minutes  City Council  3/14/2022
Order 2022-022 – Upon request of the Mayor and the CFO, a referral to Finance Subcommittee, for a
report and recommendation with regard a request for additional funds (authorization for additional
borrowing) for the Library Ramp project and rescission of previously authorized borrowing
Ms. Miller said that at this time, construction bids were being received over budget. Her department
was working with other departments to adjust on projects to meet the needs. She said that her
department may need to revisit the Council on some projects. This project received 4 bids, and this was
the lowest bid, she said. Three of the four bids were very close in likeness. The bids, they felt, were
good but a $282K short-fall was there, she said. She mentioned a time-constraint in respect to this
project in order to be able to take advantage of an ADA Accessibility grant. Funds from this grant must
be spend by June 30th of this year, she said. This project did not lend itself to doing in phases. The
library, she said, had a lot of outstanding capital items and old bond items could be repurposed as well
as a rescinding could result in a reauthorization to a new purpose. There would be more capital projects
after this project, she said that would be cleaned-up and appropriated for FY23. 
Councilor Cannon understood the challenges in getting this project underway and approved. He
recognized the quickness in which the department came back to the Council with a solution. He said he
would enthusiastically support approving it when the time came. He motioned to approve the request
as outlined in the document. Seconded by Councilor Stefanini. Upon no further discussion, the
subcommittee voted. ROLL CALL VOTE 5-0: Alexander, aye; Cannon, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; 
King, aye. The report and recommendation with regard a request for additional funds (authorization for
additional borrowing) for the Library Ramp project and rescission of previously authorized borrowing
was agreed upon for recommendation to the Council. 
Chairman King clarified that Ms. White Harvey and Ms. Winett did not have anything to add to the
discussion about the library ramp project. They did not indicate they wanted to speak further. 
Order 2022-023 – Upon request of the Mayor and the Community Development Department, a
referral to the Finance Subcommittee, for a report and recommendation with regard to approval of
acceptance of FY23 HUD (Housing & Urban Development) and DHCD (Department of Housing and
Community Development) funds Chairman King recognized Mr. Tusino, Chief Operating Officer, to
present on the matter of the CDBG funds. He said that he would be able to answer questions about the
breakdown of the numbers shared in the background materials. Chairman King asked Mr. Tusino to talk
about the process. He explained there were a few public hearings after a notice was given to
departments and stakeholders. The application process was lengthy, he shared. All was collected by the
Planning and Economic Development Office. The Community Development Committee (CDC) then
closed the hearings after applicants made their cases and made recommendations for disbursement of
the funds. Mayor Sisitsky, he said, would have the final say as to how funds would be allocated. He
asked for the Subcommittee to recommend to the Council it be approved. 
Chairman King asked if this was for the program beginning July 1, 2022. Mr. Tusino said yes. Councilor
Stefanini asked what $100K for a project at Carlson Crossing West was. Mr. Tusino said it was home
funds for housing rehab on property off of Carlson Road, near Second Street. Mr. Stefanini said he did
not recognize the name and just wanted clarification. This property had funding from other sources as
well, and this request would go toward new buildings, reconfiguring the road and gas lines and more, he
said. Carlson, Mr. Stefanini inquired, was a Housing Authority property. Mr. Tusino confirmed for him it
was. 
Chairman King asked for more information on a CDC recommendation for $20K for a door replacement
at BRACE in Public Facilities. Mr. Tusoni said he believed the front door to the BRACE facility needed
City of Framingham  Page 3 of 4  3/14/2022 
Page 4
Minutes  City Council  3/14/2022
replacement. The mayor felt $6K would help toward that cost, he said. Councilor Cannon expressed
that in years past it had come up that the administrative cost was allowed to be 20% of the total
entitlement. He hoped that in the years to come, more of the funds would be spend on the projects
themselves and not on administrative costs. Mr. Tusino said that the Administration struggled a bit with
that, but due to time constraints and being new to the process, they did the most they could and look to
reach that in years to come. Mr. Cannon said he understood. 
Chairman King reminded members of the public in attendance via ZOOM, to please leave cameras off
unless speaking. 
Ms. Miller added that this was for FY23 Budget and that it would not be possible to fold in a reduction of
administrative costs, but perhaps it would happen for FY24. Councilor Steiner asked if each of the
recipients completed applications and if so, could those be shared with the Subcommittee to share with
the full Council. Mr. Tusino said yes, the CDBG office had them and he would get them to the
Subcommittee in PDF form. Mr. Steiner then asked about the project at Framingham Housing Authority
at Carlson Road, a CDBG request for $34K and the CDC recommendation for $70K, and then returning
back to the Mayor’s suggestion of $34K? Mr. Tusino explained that in this item, gas mains needed to be
removed and replaced because Eversource considered it private property. An ADA compliant
playground was part of the large project, he said. 
Chairman King clarified that the Subcommittee was being asked to vote upon the Mayor’s
recommendations for allocation of funds. Mr. Tusino confirmed yes. ROLL CALL VOTE 5-0: Alexander, 
aye; Cannon, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; King, aye. The Subcommittee agreed to recommend an
acceptance of the Mayor’s recommendation for allocation of funds applied for through the CDBG. 
MEMBER PREROGATIVES
Councilor Stefanini mentioned that at a previous meeting with the Mayor, it was agreed upon an
additional meeting between the Mayor and the Council would be held on March 29th and the topic
would be revenues. Ms. Miller, he said, put together an agenda for the meeting and she had met with
the Rules Committee. The School Committee and Legislative Delegation had also been invited to the
meeting. 
APPROVAL OF MINUTES 
Councilor Cannon made motion to approve the minutes of 5/15/21, 5/17/21 and 2/22/22 as submitted. 
Seconded by Councilor Steiner. ROLL CALL VOTE 5-0-0: Steiner, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; 
Stefanini, aye; Cannon, aye. The minutes, as submitted, were approved. 
ADJOURNMENT
7:29PM Motion to adjourn made by Councilor Cannon. Seconded by Councilor Stefanini. ROLL CALL
VOTE 5-0-0: Steiner, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Stefanini, aye; Cannon, aye. The meeting
adjourned. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Marion Kelly
City of Framingham  Page 4 of 4  3/14/2022 
