CITY COUNCIL 
PHILIP R. OTTAVIANI, CHAIR | JANET LEOMBRUNO, VICE CHAIR 
NOVAL ALEXANDER | TRACEY BRYANT | MICHAEL P. CANNON 
GEORGE P. KING, JR. | CHRISTINE A. LONG |
LEORA MALLACH | ADAM C. STEINER |JOHN A. STEFANINI
CESAR G. STEWART-MORALES
Council Members Participating: 
Philip R. Ottaviani, Chair
Noval Alexander-REMOTE
Tracey Bryant- REMOTE 
Michael P. Cannon
George P. King, Jr. 
MEMORIAL BUILDING – ROOM 113
150 CONCORD STREET, FRAMINGHAM, MA 01702
508.532.5400 – CITYCOUNCIL@FRAMINGHAMMA.GOV 
MINUTES: APRIL 5, 2022
BLUMER COMMUNITY ROOM 
REMOTE 
7:00PM
AMENDED & APPROVED 
4/26/2022
Janet Leombruno, Vice Chair
Christine A. Long
Leora Mallach-REMOTE 
Adam C. Steiner
John A. Stefanini
Cesar G. Stewart-Morales 
Staff Participating: 
William Sedewitz, Acting Director, Department of Public Works
Charlie Sisitsky, Mayor
Matthew Torti, Director Buildings and Grounds, Framingham Public Schools
Michael Tusino, Chief Operating Officer
Diane Willoughby, Licensing Coordinator
Others Participating: 
Carol Boise, Boise Consulting
James Cullhane, SIFOC
Mary Kate Feeney, Vice-Chair, SIFOC 
David Mawhinney, Chair, SIFOC
******************************************************
CALL TO ORDER 
7:00 PM Chairman Ottaviani called the meeting to order. He read the entire agenda as posted and said
he would call the Mayor’s appointee items out of order to allow them to go home. 
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
The Chair called for participation from those interested via ZOOM or in person to speak on items not on
the agenda. None were seen. 
PUBLIC HEARINGS/DISCUSSION
Order 2022-008-011 - Upon Request of the Appointments Subcommittee, a report and
recommendation with regard to the Mayor’s recommendation of Robert A. Lewis to serve as
DPW (Department of Public Works) Director Mr. Ottaviani, Chair of the Appointments
Subcommittee, said that they had voted 3-0 to support this nomination earlier this evening. He
City of Framingham  Page 1 of 16  Updated 5/3/22
Page 2
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
invited Mayor Sisitsky to introduce Mr. Lewis to the full Council. Mayor Sisitsky said that Mr. 
Lewis came to Framingham from the DPW of Needham and he had close to 28 years of service
most recently as the Assistant Director of the Needham Public Works. He had a least a decade
related to the water and sewer field. Mr. Lewis had been a 41-year resident of Framingham and
was very active in Town and City events including most recent participation in hockey programs
at Loring Arena. 
Mr. Lewis appreciated the opportunity to be nominated for this position and said it was a dream-
job opportunity and he had to do it. 
Chairman Ottaviani welcomed the Council to ask questions or make comments. Councilor
Cannon welcomed Mr. Lewis and said that he was eager to congratulate him once the formalities
were done. He asked that he keep in mind the importance of collaboration and communication
with our persons of the disability community. He asked that his department consult with the
Disability Commission on projects going forward. 
Councilor Bryant was recognized next. She said that Mr. Lewis seemed like an ideal applicant. 
She asked if he completed an application in addition to submitting his resume. She said she did
not see it in the background materials. Mr. Lewis said he did complete an application. She asked
the Mayor or the Chair for the applications received for this position. Chairman Ottaviani said he
had an issue accessing the background materials for the Appointments Subcommittee meeting. 
Ms. McKeon, Executive Administrative Assistant to the Council, said that she posted the
background information received. Mr. Ottaviani said that he’d reach out to Mr. Tusino, Chief
Operating Officer, and would be sure that did not happen again. Ms. Bryant thanked the Chair. 
Upon seeing no other requests to speak, Chairman Ottaviani asked for a motion. Councilor
Leombruno motioned to approve and seconded by Councilor Long. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: 
Long, aye; Cannon, aye; Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Leombruno, aye; King, aye; 
Stewart-Morales, aye; Mallach, aye; Alexander, aye; Bryant, aye. Mr. Lewis was accepted to
serve as the Department of Public Works Director and a round of applause was heard. 
Order 2022-008-012 - Upon Request Appointments Subcommittee, a report and
recommendation with regard to the Mayor’s recommendation for Thomas Grove (District 8) to
serve on the Council on Aging Board Chairman Ottaviani informed the Council that southside
resident, Mr. Grove, met with the Appointments Subcommittee earlier and they had voted 3-0 in
favor of accepting the Mayor’s recommendation. He asked the Mayor if he had more to add, and
said that Councilor Leombruno noted they’d get “two for the price of one” as Mr. Grove’s wife
was a former Councilor and they were both very active in the community. Mr. Sisitsky believed
Mr. Grove did a good job sharing his strengths and how they would benefit the Council on Aging
and he was an ideal candidate. 
Councilor Bryant was recognized and she asked Mr. Grove if he felt his additional duties as a
member of the Council on Aging would interfere with his and her wonderful discussions that
they had from time to time. Chairman Ottaviani pointed out to Ms. Bryant that Mr. Grove had
left the meeting because of a prior commitment and did not hear her question. She went on to
say that he served the community as an English professor, retired and whatever else. They had
spoken about numerous things including community issues and he had attended meetings late
City of Framingham  Page 2 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 3
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
into the night. She recommended Mr. Grove to serve. Chairman Ottaviani made note that Dr. 
Grove had not retired from Framingham State University and had been there 41 years. 
Motion to approve made by Councilor Bryant, seconded by Councilor Leombruno. ROLL CALL
VOTE 11-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, aye; Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Leombruno, 
aye; King, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Mallach, aye; Alexander, aye; Bryant, aye. Mr. Grove
was approved to serve on the Council on Aging. 
Chairman Ottaviani made note that Mr. Grove and the next two gentlemen were to be
appointed to three-year terms. Councilor King asked for a point-of-order. He noted that the
Director of Public Works position was a three-year position by the Charter as well. Mr. Ottaviani
said that he stood corrected. 
Order 2022-008-013 - Upon Request of the Appointments Subcommittee, a report and
recommendation with regard to the Mayor’s recommendation for Robert Merusi (District 3) 
and Steven Joyce (District 1) to serve on the Housing Authority Board Chairman Ottaviani said
these gentlemen came before the Appointments Subcommittee for review. Councilor
Leombruno recused herself as she was a member of the Housing Authority Board, appointed by
the Governor. The vote, he said, was 2-0-1, in favor of recommending Mr. Robert Merusi and Mr. 
Steven Joyce to serve on the Housing Authority Board as recommended by the Mayor. 
He went on to share the Mr. Merusi had served on the Housing Authority Board for several
years. Since 2001, he had brought extensive experience in public budgeting and finance policy
development, capital planning development, and oversight. He had also served as the Executive
Director of the Framingham Division of Parks and Recreation from 1989-2014. He was appointed
to the expired term. 
Mr. Joyce, he said, was a 44-year member of the Carpenter’s Union and a 30-year resident of
Framingham. He was currently the Director of the North Atlantic State Laborer’s Program. He
was previously the Outreach Coordinator for the Fair Labor and Practice Division of the Office of
the Attorney General. He reiterated that the Appointments Subcommittee voted 2-0-1 to
favorably recommend Mr. Joyce to Serve on the Housing Authority Board. 
Councilor Long noted that she was on another Housing Authority and there was no conflict. She
asked who Mr. Joyce was replacing. The Chair explained that Steve Starr, member of the Board, 
chose to not continue for another term. Mr. Merusi, he explained, was technically taking Mr. 
Starr’s seat which was not a union seat. Mr. Joyce was taking Mr. Merusi’s former seat that was
a union/laborers seat. Mr. Starr felt that after 20 years, his time had been given. 
Councilor Long made a motion to approve both recommendations, seconded by Councilor
Cannon. Chairman Ottaviani called upon Councilor Mallach as her hand was raised. Ms. Mallach
said that Councilor Long had asked her question. Councilor Leombruno noted again she would
recuse herself. ROLL CALL VOTE 10-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, aye; Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; 
Ottaviani, aye; King, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Mallach, aye; Alexander, aye; Bryant, aye. Mr. 
Merusi and Mr. Joyce were approved to serve on the Housing Authority Board for three-year
terms. A subtle round of applause was heard and the Chair congratulated all who were
appointed. He reminded the public that there were many opportunities for volunteerism on
City of Framingham  Page 3 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 4
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
various boards and committees. Those interested could reach out to Ms. Kez Franca, the
Citizen’s Participation Officer or Ms. Susan Nichols, Chief of Staff to the Mayor. 
Chairman Ottaviani began to call the next item of business, but was reminded that the Update of
the Mayor was to be heard next. He apologized, and opened the floor the Mayor and or the
Chief Operating Officer. 
UPDATE FROM THE MAYOR
Mr. Tusino, Chief Operating Officer, shared that the City’s Chief Financial Officer had procured
and entered into a new natural gas supply contract with Freedom Energy which would save the
City $206K over its 3-year term. 
Mayor Sisitsky had toured the Bethany property and he was preparing to enter into negotiations
(for its possible purchase for the site of a school) as directed by the Council. 
He also signed a Host Community Agreement (HCA) for Union Twist at 630 Worcester Road. 
Mr. Tusino said that today the Mayor joined the first walk of the Code Enforcement Task Force. 
They walked the Taylor, Alexander, and Irving Street area. 
He shared that they may be prepared to make a full presentation in June on the Chris Walsh
walking trail. They were working with state delegation partners and others in the City. Discussion
had been had with President Spilka’s Office to identify funding. All of the details were not ready
to be released yet. 
Councilor Stefanini thanked Mr. Tusino for the updates and especially for the connection of the
down-town area through the Chris Walsh walking trail as it was a dream of Mr. Walsh’s. He
asked if the Mayor’s Office could provide a future report of outstanding TIF (Tax Increment
Financing) agreements in the City. He was specifically interested in compliance in relation to
apartment buildings and he wanted to note that there had been some questions about
compliance around that. He noted that it was not urgent, and if they wanted to wait until an
Economic Development Director was in place that would be acceptable as well. 
Councilor Steiner asked about the savings of $210K and for more details. Mr. Tusino said he
would get that to Mr. Steiner. The Councilor said that he had heard from a constituent today
that there had been an RFP (request for proposal) for license plate readers. He asked if Mr. 
Tusino had an opportunity to look into that. The question was why was the City spending so
much money on the readers and was it initiated by the Police Department. Mr. Tusino said that
he’d get some answers to Mr. Steiner on that as he had not seen the email. 
Councilor Cannon gave a note of thanks for assistance in solving the ongoing years-long recurring
smell of natural gas on Quinlan Drive. Residents had gotten no where with the previous
administration and he was embarrassed to say he did not know anything about it. It January it
was brought to him and he brought it to the attention of the Mayor and COO. Within a short
amount of time, people from the Fire Department, Public Works, the Mayor and COO, the issue
was finally solved. He thanked them all for their communication and problem solving. 
City of Framingham  Page 4 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 5
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
Councilor King said he too was interested in the license plate reader issue. He suggested that a
presentation by the Police Department on how this technology was being used would be helpful. 
Mr. King said he was not personally in favor of some of the “smart technology” and if the City
was paying for a project that looked at who, what and where people were coming and going to
was worthy of a presentation. Mr. Tusino said that he would speak with Chief Baker and ask for
a quick presentation with question and answers after. 
Councilor Mallach was allowed to speak next. She wished to clarify about the Chris Walsh trail. 
She had received some questions about it and said that Congresswoman Clark had also
earmarked Federal Funds for this project’s planning process. Mayor Sisitsky responded that the
Senate President was instrumental in getting $250K earmarked for the Chris Walsh Trail a
number of months ago. In the meantime, Congresswoman Clark accepted the request for
Federal Funds and allocated from her Federal source $220K. That was the latest information they
had received. Those were just earmarking, and they were waiting to see if they were actually
going to get the money, and when they’d get it and what it could be used for. There were many
questions to be answered and a full presentation would be made in June as they noted earlier. In
the meantime, he shared, Fred Lasky of the MWRA, reached out to the City of the status of the
“pump-house” that sits at the middle of the aqueduct. He indicated that they still use that
occasionally and they had water running through it a month or so ago. It would be important to
protect it in the planning. They would provide more information in the coming months, he
concluded. 
Councilor Mallach used this opportunity to encourage people to apply for the Bicycle, 
Pedestrian, and Trails Committee if they were interested in continuing that conversation. The
Mayor said it was the perfect segway and the positions were posted and the City was eagerly
awaiting application for those seats. 
Upon no other interest, the Chair moved to the first action item. 
ACTION ITEMS/DISCUSSION/VOTE
Order 2022-039 - Upon Request of the Licensing Coordinator approval of Annual License
Renewals for Second Hand Articles, Junk & Old Metals Ms. Diane Willoughby, Licensing
Coordinator, pointed out that EZ Mobil Tel was not renewing and a few wished to amend their
hours of operation within their approved hours. These notes were reflected on their draft
licenses, she shared. Councilor Mallach asked if the business that was not renewing its license
was closing. Ms. Willoughby said that she was not aware, as her department just licensed that
part of their business. She explained that they could still be operating, just not taking the
exchanges. Councilor Mallach thanked her. 
Motion to approve as presented made by Councilor Leombruno, seconded by Councilor Cannon. 
ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, aye; Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; 
Leombruno, aye; King, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Mallach, aye; Alexander, aye; Bryant, aye. 
The approval of Annual License Renewals for Second Hand Articles, Junk & Old Metals was
approved. 
City of Framingham  Page 5 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 6
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
Chairman Ottaviani thanked Ms. Willoughby for the work she did and he had watched the Liquor
Licensing meeting the other night and said she did a great job. 
Order 2022-040 - Upon request of Framingham Public Schools, the City Council authorizes the
Mayor to execute the Activity and Use Limitation (AUL) and to cause the same to be filed with
the Middlesex South Registry District of the Land Court for notation on Land Court Certificates
of Title Nos. 80334 and 95150 with regard to former underground tanks at Framingham High
School Mr. Matthew Torti, Director of Buildings and Grounds, Framingham Public Schools, 
thanked the members of the Council and said they had come to gain approval for the deed filing
for the AUL. He introduced Ms. Carol Boise, of Boise Consulting, to explain the filing. Ms. Boise, 
he said, had great familiarity with the site and would answer any technical and legal questions in
regard. Last week, the School Committee voted to submit the request to the Council, he said. 
Councilor Steiner said that he had read the background materials and did not understand what
they were asked to do. He asked for a brief overview. She introduced herself as a Licensed Site
Professional by the Commonwealth since 1993. Her job as “clean-up lady” included oversight of
testing and all remediation work in the Commonwealth for releases of oil and hazardous
materials. She noted she lived and worked in District 2 and had been consulting for the
Town/City for the last 10 or so years. 
The School Department, she explained, had brought this to the Council because there was a
removal and replacement of underground oil tanks at the school (High School on A Street) in
1988. At that time, the school was heated with heavy #6 or #4 fuel oil and a leak was found when
the tanks were replaced. It was reported to the State and replacement of about 1000 cubic yards
of contaminated soil was done. In addition, contaminated ground water was pumped out and
the tanks were replaced. Because of the release, an extensive amount of monitoring over the
years had been conducted by multiple consultants. The remaining oil in the ground, until very
recently, the regulations did not allow closure of the site. A temporary closure of the site was
done in 2007. 
Regulations had changed and now some residual oil could remain in the ground as long as there
was; no exposure to human health, no environmental issues, continued ground water and soil
testing be run through risk assessment that determined the health impacts if they existed. This
would protect the City from liability in the future. For example; if someone were to demolish the
school in 50 years, the deed notice would say that they were to properly manage and dispose of
the soil in that area, appropriate monitoring would be conducted for the health and safety of the
workers, monitoring for the neighbors, students/staff and more. This made the property owner, 
the City, document that they were aware, and they stated as such in the corresponding land
court. 
The reason the soil could not be reached at this time, was that it was underneath the building
and HVAC system at the back, very edge of the building. She shared photos of the area in the
background materials. The impact was about 9-14ft down under the ground, pavement and J-
wing of the building before the upper athletic fields. 
Councilor Stefanini asked if there were any additional use limitations other than required by the
DEP (Department of Environmental Protection) and for opening and the notice that must be
City of Framingham  Page 6 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 7
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
given. Ms. Boise said that the two actions not allowed without notice were excavation without
an LSP and without having a soil management plan and a health and safety plan. The second, 
was new building construction or changes that would create disturbance. She used the example
of the addition of an elevator as a potential way in which the opening could cause contamination
or exposure to the people in the building. That too, would require an LSP, she said. 
Mr. Stefanini asked if this applied to the entire property or just the back portion of the school as
identified. Ms. Boise said that it was localized to 4500 square feet under the pavement and
HVAC equipment that was there currently. 
Councilor Cannon said that there was a legal ad and asked if it had been run yet. Regulations
required the City to place an ad within 7 days in the local newspaper. The wording was
prescribed and would be exactly as written, she explained. He said he asked because the first
line began the notice with “A release of oil and or hazardous materials has occurred at this
location” and many knew that 115 A Street was the address of the High School. He noted that
concerned residents would call knowing it was the high school. He asked if there were a way to
make it clear that this happened in 1988 and it was not something new. She suggested some
kind of explanation be provided. She referenced a 2-page documentation in the background
materials that be a simple description of what happened to one page. It could be posted or
provided in some manor at the discretion of the Mayor or Council. 
While Councilor Cannon was locating some background material, Councilor Bryant was
recognized and she offered to make a motion to accept. Councilor Cannon said he did not
believe the item Ms. Boise referred to was in the background material. Motion to approve was
repeated by Ms. Bryant. Seconded by Councilor Long. Councilor Cannon said that these were
complicated issues and that the documentation had not reached the Council in time and future
submissions were appreciated to be more-timely in order for the Council to be best prepared. 
He said he supported the motion. Chairman Ottaviani noted that although it was not a conflict, 
his wife served as the School Committee Member representing District 6 and he would
participate on this vote. 
Upon no further discussion a vote was called. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, aye; 
Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Leombruno, aye; King, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; 
Mallach, aye; Alexander, aye; Bryant, aye. The request of Framingham Public Schools, the City
Council authorizes the Mayor to execute the Activity and Use Limitation (AUL) and to cause the
same to be filed with the Middlesex South Registry District of the Land Court for notation on
Land Court Certificates of Title Nos. 80334 and 95150 with regard to former underground tanks
at Framingham High School, was approved by the Council. 
Order 2022-041 - Upon Request of the School Committee, a request to authorize the
Superintendent to submit to the Massachusetts School Building Authority the Statement of
Interest dated April 29, 2022 for the Hemenway Elementary School due to the deficiencies and
priorities described in the Statement of Interest Form Before discussion of this item, Chairman
Ottaviani again disclosed that his wife was the District 6 School Committee representative and
that he would be participating in the vote on this item as there was no conflict. He invited Mr. 
Torti back to the podium to speak. Mr. Torti stated that the School Committee had voted in favor
of this Statement of Interest dated April 29, 2022 for application to the Massachusetts School
City of Framingham  Page 7 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 8
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
Building Authority due to the deficiencies and priorities described at Hemenway Elementary
School. Time was of the essence, he said, and that Hemenway was identified as the next
appropriate school for renovation or replacement. This vote was required to go to the next step
in the MSBA feasibility study. 
Councilor Long said that this school was literally in her back yard and that it needed this plan. 
She motioned to approve this item. Seconded by Councilor Stefanini. Councilor Stewart-Morales
was recognized for comment. He asked Mr. Torti to elaborate upon what the study would
provide. Mr. Torti said that the Mayor and other State Officials had met on site and toured the
building and grounds. The MSBA identified that the statement of interest and their feasibility
study would make the determinations as to if the building should be renovated, replaced, or
done elsewhere, but the process must be followed, he said. Mr. Stewart-Morales asked what the
cost of the study was. Two years ago, based upon the square footage of the building and the cost
of the feasibility study done for the Fuller building, it was estimated to be about $600K. Those
funds were made available by the Council previously, he said. The MSBA might have come back
to say that it was enough or more was needed. That was not determined yet. 
Councilor Bryant said that Hemenway school had been used and used to the full capacity and
had done a lot of work. She said that whatever Framingham could do, they should. She said that
Mr. Torti and his team were constantly checking. In her time on the School Committee and now, 
she never knew Mr. Torti’s team to ask for frivolous things. She supported the motion. 
Councilor Alexander said he read in the background material that they could not go vertical on
that site and asked that Mr. Torti elaborate as to why. Mr. Torti explained that was the result of
a structural report, that said levels or floors could not be added to the existing building. A multi-
level building could be built on the site, just not in addition to the existing building. 
Upon no other interest, a vote was taken. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, aye; 
Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Leombruno, aye; King, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; 
Mallach, aye; Alexander, aye; Bryant, aye. The Request of the School Committee, a request to
authorize the Superintendent to submit to the Massachusetts School Building Authority the
Statement of Interest dated April 29, 2022 for the Hemenway Elementary School due to the
deficiencies and priorities described in the Statement of Interest Form was approved. 
Order 2022-042 - Upon Request of the Traffic Commission, a request for discussion and
possible vote to establish a disabled parking space on Pine Street Mr. Sedewitz, Acting Director, 
Department of Public Works, explained that they brought this to the Council in response to an
email from a resident. The Traffic Commission voted unanimously, with 7 members present, to
establish a disabled parking spot on the south side of Pine Street in front of #40. Councilor
Stefanini said that the neighborhood group in the area considered and supported this. He
thanked Mr. Sedewitz. Councilor Bryant motioned to approve the request. Seconded by
Councilor Cannon. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, aye; Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; 
Ottaviani, aye; Leombruno, aye; King, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Mallach, aye; Alexander, aye; 
Bryant, aye. The establishment of a disabled parking space on Pine Street was approved. 
City of Framingham  Page 8 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 9
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
Order 2022-043 - Upon request of the SIFOC (Strategic Initiatives and Financial Oversight) 
Chair, a request to present SIFOC’s Annual Report Mary Kate Feeney, Vice-Chair of SIFOC, 
introduced herself and the other Council appointee James Culhane. She shared that the group
was established by the Charter and that they were required to submit an annual report including
what they had done in the last year. They identified they had worked with the Spicer
Administration on a Long-Range Strategic Master Plan, elected official compensation review, 
capital improvement projects and ARPA funding. 
The group held two summits last year with some members of the Council, Mayor’s Office, and
the School Committee to discuss last years federal funding. The conversation was fruitful and
productive, she said. Included in the report was an analysis of water and sewer issues. 
SIFIC developed some recommendations. It was their belief that when it came to long-term
capital needs, the Mayor and the City should form a Capital Improvements Committee. It had not
been formed as of yet and would go a long way in carrying out improvements, she said. The
group also felt it important that the City and the School Department confer with one another on
multi-year planning including; new school buildings, building maintenance, and implementation
of green infrastructure. And to ensure capital was sufficiently allocated year over year to non-
school related municipal buildings and other infrastructure. 
The City, she went on should consider the adoption of multi-year budgets, and make a
comprehensive analysis of the Enterprise Fund including modification of the tiered water &
sewer rate structure. In addition, the City should look for cost savings and strategies, changes in
debt-service approaches, and changes in the water & sewer usage for a multi-year period
inclusive of residential and commercial customers. 
The Mayor’s Office should strive to achieve a transparent and collaborative budget process for
FY2023 and review the Strategic Long-Term Plans submitted in December 2020 and begin the
process of updating it. They recommend the Mayor’s Office update the five pillars of the goals
section of the plan as necessary and to take the steps to create a more detailed plan of
implementation and prepare to report to SIFOC and the public by the end of 2022 on the
progress made. 
Lastly, the SIFOC felt that the Mayor’s Office, the Council, and the Framingham Public Schools
should discuss appropriate uses for the unallocated and yet to be received ARPA funds through
transparent and participatory processes. SIFOC recommended that the Council consider ways to
reach out to residents and solicit community feedback on potential uses of the ARPA funds. 
Ms. Feeney added that the Mayor, Council and School Committee had three representatives on
the SIFOC and that just two of them were in attendance. She said that she had been working
with Ms. McKeon, Executive Administrative Assistant to the Council, to find an “at-large” 
member of the SIFOC and that it would be helpful for quorum and robust conversation. She
then asked the Councilors to think of things that SIFOC could do as they were able to collaborate
with different bodies, take on projects and more. She invited them to their meetings or to email
them. 
City of Framingham  Page 9 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 10
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
Chairman Ottaviani clarified that the “at-large” appointment was the responsibility of the
Council. He said he would speak with Ms. McKeon and get it advertised. He recognized that the
SIFOC Chair, Mr. Mawhinney, was a part of the meeting via ZOOM and said that if he wished to
speak, he should raise his electronic hand. Upon no others wishing to speak, the Chairman
called upon Councilor Bryant. She asked either the Chair of Vice-Chair, what dates did SIFOC
meet. Ms. Feeney indicted that they attempt to meet twice a month on a Monday and all
meetings were posted on the public portal and found on the Government Channel. Councilor
Bryant said that if the public could not locate the recordings, to reach out to the Mayor’s Office
for assistance. 
Councilor Stewart-Morales inquired as to the items the SIFOC was looking at currently. Mr. 
Culhane indicated that there was not a large amount being looked at currently. He said they
would not do things that others were already doing, nor would do they do things that others did
not want them to. Ultimately, he said, the SIFOC could not set its own agenda and needed
instruction or suggestions from the Administration and Council. 
Chair of the SIFOC, Mr. Mawhinney, said that he could not have said anything better than Ms. 
Feeney. He added one long-term goal he had was to improve upon the Long-term Strategic Plan, 
He said there was an initial plan submitted but due to COVID the process was truncated. They
wished to revisit that plan and make it something residents could read and be a meaningful
document to address how the City could operate efficiently and collaborative. He described
themselves as a group of smart volunteers who look at it from a 30K foot view, like the big
picture people, not the experts in the details. The ongoing theme of collaboration and shared
responsibility by the City and the School Department continually was raised. He reiterated that
meetings were still held via ZOOM and the public was welcome to join from their living rooms. 
Councilor Stewart-Morales asked through the Chair if the Mayor or COO could comment on if
the establishment of the Capital Improvement Committee had been considered. Mayor Sisitsky
said consideration was part of the process to fill boards and committee vacancies. 
Chairman Ottaviani expressed his appreciation for the work and presentation of all three SIFOC
members. He confirmed with the Council that there was no motion necessary to accept the
annual report. He thanked them again for coming this evening. 
Order 2022-002-002 – Upon request of the Ordinance and Rules Subcommittee, a report and
recommendation with regard to providing Adult Use Marijuana Licenses for up to two Medical
Use licensees to the Ordinances & Rules Subcommittee (second reading) Chairman Ottaviani
and Councilor Stefanini, Chair of the Ordinance & Rules Subcommittee, both indicated there was
an error in that this did not need to report to the Ordinance & Rules Subcommittee. Councilor
Stefanini indicated that this was the second reading of the Ordinance. He said the Ordinance &
Rules Subcommittee voted unanimously to support this with amendments submitted by the City
Solicitor, Amanda Zuretti. He noted it was in the portal and each Councilor had a printed version
of it for reference of the amendments submitted by Ms. Zuretti. All of the amendments were
accepted, he said. 
He explained a question came up from the last reading in relation to the zoning. That was
separate and distinct from this item, and it was referred to the Planning & Zoning subcommittee
City of Framingham  Page 10 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 11
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
and Councilor Long (Chair of the Planning & Zoning Subcommittee) may comment on that. He
added that Councilor King brought up a question relative to expanding beyond 6 -8 licensees and
if the City should expand beyond that. Mr. Stefanini said that he had two conversations with Mr. 
Tusino who indicated to him that the Mayor’s Office was comfortable with 8 licenses, but did not
have further comment as to going beyond. Mr. Stefanini said that was not negative and not
positive and left the matter to the consideration of the Council. 
Councilor Stefanini suggested that the City address the legal issues before them which is what
these two additional licenses dealt with. He suggested the larger number of licenses be left to
another day should they be necessary. He said other licenses had not been fulfilled as of yet, and
consideration may be made at such time if the Planning & Zoning Subcommittee made
significant recommendations to change current zoning. He moved to approve the Ordinance at
the second reading. Seconded by Councilor Long. 
Councilor Bryant was recognized to speak. She said that even if she was not on the (Ordinance &
Rules) Subcommittee, the background materials provided were excellent and clear. She would
have made a motion based upon the thoroughness. She supported the motion. 
Councilor King was recognized next. He asked if these two extra licenses were only available to
two specific entities who had a medical license. Councilor Stefanini indicated no. He said they
were available first and foremost to the two medical applicants. Discussion continued. Councilor
Stefanini said that the priority was to be given to them and if not, the Mayor could choose to
grant them to others. 
Mr. King asked how long the licenses were permitted to them. Mr. Stefanini said until the Mayor
felt the priority had been addressed. Mr. King pointed out it did not say in the body of the order. 
Mr. Stefanini said it did not. Mr. King said that he did not understand why two additional licenses
were being created for medical providers. He said he did not understand why the Council was
getting into regulating it. He asked why did the Council care how many were had and that the
City would not get more than the market would provide for. When the licenses were first given
out, he said, there was little transparency about how. The first license went to Union Twist, he
believed, and it was just “opening soon” four years later. He asked why it was so necessary for
them to have the first license without opening four years later and theoretically that was
preventing revenue to the City. He felt that it was given to an entity that did not act upon it for
four years. He was concerned that two more licenses were held indefinitely for two others
entities interested. At the least, notification should be put on an application to identify an
exercise date, or the license would be forfeited, said Mr. King. His comments continued. 
Councilor Stefanini appreciated the comments made by Councilor King. He shared the general
approach to let the market regulate itself. Upon some investigation, he said, the market
appeared to be beyond saturation with 6 or 7 licenses. He felt the market was normalizing and
the City had limited the location to a narrow corridor of these particular establishments. Relative
to these two instances, state law and case law were clear, that these two entities were entitled
to the licenses. They had strong claim and was why the Council took this up in December of last
year. He said the other one was a question and he guessed that if they did not exercise the right, 
it would just become another license the Mayor’s Office could grant to a party that qualified. He
City of Framingham  Page 11 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 12
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
said that if there were no limitations at all, he did not believe there would be more than 5-6
anyway. 
The Chair allowed Councilor King to respond and then a vote would be taken. Mr. King said he
did not disagree and that’s why it did not matter the number of licenses. He said the market did
appear to be saturated. He asked why not make it 10-12 licenses because that would not be
filled and in essence would make it limitless. His comments continued. He motioned to amend
the number to 10. Seconded by Councilor Stefanini. Mr. Stefanini said he seconded the motion
because he did not disagree with Mr. King at all. He said that 10 was not before the
subcommittee and that was why he said 6-8. He would vote yes to support the amendment. 
Councilor Bryant said she would vote no because it was not what they were here to discuss. She
said residents in the past had opportunity to discuss the facilities, and they may want to
participate in this discussion. Her comments elaborated upon that. 
Councilor Long agreed with the previous speakers. She said the reason these businesses did not
open right away was because the process to be licensed was multi-leveled. She felt, due to
current zoning, going to 10 was “putting the cart before the horse.” She said it was not just
about what the market could support, but what could the community support. She felt it was not
a usual use and required more thoughts. 
Councilor Cannon concurred with Councilor Long and many others. He felt it was important to
allow the community time to weigh in. 
Councilor Steiner agreed more discussion was needed. He noted that what was not being
discussed was how the City would help protect the businesses that were succeeding in a
responsible way with no negative impact. He felt the number would go down because marijuana
delivery was on its way and similar challenges were experienced by regular retail establishments
with delivery. His comments continued. 
Councilor King said he understood the issues. He did not expect a blossoming of stores. He said
marijuana could be a positive revenue source for the City. He talked about the different facets of
the marijuana market including grow facilities and more that Framingham did not take
advantage of. He felt that once again, Framingham was taking a narrow view and worrying about
the small things. 
Councilor Bryant asked if there was anything preventing brick and mortar stores from starting a
delivery service. She said that COVID prevented things from cropping up and there was nothing
for residents to be concerned about. Mr. Tusino explained that a delivery driver would have to
go to the establishment to pick up and deliver right away. They could not keep it in the car for
long or overnight. 
Chairman Ottaviani called for a vote on Mr. King’s amendment to included 10 licenses. Councilor
Steiner said he was not aware the City had disrupted the manufacturing of marijuana. He said
that private legal action prevented the grow farm at Eastleigh Farm, but that the City should be
open to other options to attract a grow facility. Councilor King clarified that non-Framingham
residents prevented the grow facility at Eastleigh Farm, not the City. 
City of Framingham  Page 12 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 13
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
Again, the Chairman called for a vote on the amendment to go from 8 to 10 licenses. ROLL CALL
VOTE 2-9-0: Stefanini, aye; King, aye; Long, nay; Cannon, nay; Steiner, nay; Ottaviani, nay; 
Leombruno, nay; Stewart-Morales, nay; Mallach, nay; Alexander, nay; Bryant, nay. The
amendment did not pass. 
Vote upon the main motion to two additional licenses. ROLL CALL VOTE 10-1-0: Long, aye; 
Cannon, aye; Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Leombruno, aye; Stewart-Morales, 
aye; Mallach, aye; Alexander, aye; Bryant, aye; King, nay. The main motion passed. 
REPORT OF COUNCIL CHAIR
Mr. Ottaviani said that everything was going smoothly and he appreciated the Council member’s
efforts and support. He could be reached by telephone or email. 
He reminded everyone to check their email for the Home Rule Petition Request from
Representative Lewis. He shared a written statement by Mr. Lewis about Bill H6440, a Right Turn
on Edgell Road to Central Street. Councilor Stefanini asked the Mayor if he supported the lights
at that intersection. Mr. Sisitsky said he did. Chairman Ottaviani made mention of another Bill
related to the EDIC but said the letter just needed to support the road. Councilor Stefanini
moved to send a joint letter as proposed. Seconded by Councilor Steiner. The Mayor said there
was a logistical issue obtaining everyone’s signatures in the time requested by Representative
Lewis. It was decided that the Mayor and the Council Chair would sign the letter. 
A vote was called. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, aye; Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; 
Ottaviani, aye; Leombruno, aye; King, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Mallach, aye; Alexander, aye; 
Bryant, aye. The Council agreed the Chair and the Mayor would send a joint letter to support a
Right Turn at Edgell Road and Central Street. 
REPORTS OF SUBCOMMITTEES
Councilor Long, Chair of the Planning & Zoning Subcommittee, shared they had met a few weeks
ago and they formed a subcommittee of the Chair and Councilor Stewart-Morales. They were
looking for anyone interested in participating in a working group focused on a zoning study of
Saxonville. The Friends of Saxonville would be assisting. Those interested could contact her or
Mr. Stewart-Morales directly. 
Councilor Cannon, Chair of the Economic Development & Housing Subcommittee, 
communicated that they would be meeting with the Mayor tomorrow evening to discuss the
proposed reorganization of the Community and Economic Development Department. He said
that it had been 4 plus years in the making and they were excited for that conversation. He
invited members of the public to tune and weigh in. Chairman Ottaviani noted that it was very
important to the Council, the Subcommittee and to the whole community. 
Next, on behalf of the Public Health, Safety, & Transportation Subcommittee, Chair Bryant
shared that they would be making a favorable recommendation and asking for a vote from the
Council at the next Council meeting on the Traffic Study regarding the development of a Traffic
Department. She went on to share that some had been concerned that nothing was happening
with the Mary Dennison clean up and the work that needed to be done before the newly
planned park could be implemented. She said she gets regular updates from Parks & Rec andCity of Framingham  Page 13 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 14
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
other entities. She contacted MassDEP and there was work happening behind the scenes to
safely carry out remediation. She thanked the Mayor for his part in staying hands on and
thanked Parks & Recreation for their part. 
Ms. Bryant said that she also looked into the General Chemical clean up. More research was
necessary for clean-up and it was not off the table. Eversource was prepared to cleanup when
the time came. They would let the community know when that was to happen. 
She then said that the COVID numbers were still excellent and the school nurses had been doing
a great job in terms of the wellness of children. Social emotional issues were being addressed, 
and she thanked Senator Spilka for her efforts pertaining to transportation of Framingham
students. 
REPORT OF COUNCILORS
Councilor Long explained that she helped organize a 76-person virtual meeting with the
developer of the Nobscot Plaza. It was held the night before and was a well-attended meeting to
update the neighborhood on the plans and work being done. She said Councilor Steiner was in
attendance, and she had helped put together the meeting with Kathy Vassar, Rick McKenna, and
the developer. The meeting was recorded and once it became available she and Councilor
Steiner would disseminate it to the public. 
Details of the next part of the development were provided and Ms. Long kidded Mr. King about
that. A few basic administrative changes were made, but they were to have a public meeting on
Thursday with the Planning Board. The virtual meeting helped the residents and the Developer
to execute better in a not-so formal meeting. She recognized Peter Spelios and Kathy Garrahan
for their efforts. Chairman Ottaviani said he had run into the Chair of the Planning Board and she
said they were all minor modifications and that it was very good. He thanked Ms. Long for her
leadership and the creativeness in accomplishing this project. 
Councilor Steiner thanked the Mayor and cited that there was now an organizational philosophy
in terms of responsiveness. He explained that over the past several weeks he had contacted Mr. 
Tusino, the Police Chief, Parks & Recreation, and Mr. Sedewitz for varying topics and issues. The
responses were delivered immediately and he greatly appreciated that. 
He went on to explain that the Parks & Recreation department, with the help of Mr. McGinty, 
worked extra hard to prepare the fields so that the softball and baseball programs could get onto
the fields. Recently, he had been to Bowditch Field for his daughters first Special Olympics
practice and he noticed the annual posting of the “stay off the grass” signs. He reached out to
Mr. Snyder, Director of Parks & Recreation, and they had now agreed to allow the community to
use the grass and remove the signs. Discussion would be had on how to responsibly use the field, 
but certainly it could be better used by the community. He thanked Mr. Snyder. 
Lastly, he shared concern for an issue regarding the Auxiliary Police that many had known about. 
The Auxiliary Police had done volunteer work for Framingham for 80 years and may possibly
disband due to rule changes. Their work at different events helped to protect the community
and helped save the City a ton of money, he said. As a byproduct of police reform law and
decisions made by the Municipal Police Training Committee, it had become difficult or
City of Framingham  Page 14 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 15
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
impossible for the Auxiliary Police to continue as they were. Discussions were ongoing, and he
encouraged those concerned to reach out to himself, Marc Spigel of the Auxiliary Police and or
Mr. Tusino in the Mayor’s Office for continued support and discussion. At the very least, the
Council and the community should recognize the outstanding efforts of the Auxiliary Police. 
Chairman Ottaviani said that he had asked Ms. McKeon to forward the letter about the Auxiliary
Police to everyone and he was working on a citation in recognition of the group. He again shared
that work was being done to hold an event in celebration of Flag Day. He explained that the
Auxiliary Police were the volunteers at events like Flag Day celebrations, Concerts on the
Common and more who donated their time to ensure enjoyable, safe events. Hopefully, he said, 
they could be involved in another way. 
Mr. Ottaviani said that the Administration was “in the solution business”. The Mayor and his
team were of that approach and he felt the relationship of communication and openness was
benefiting the community. He felt that if Councilors were on team Sisitsky at the beginning, 
middle or now, the open relationship 7 days a week was excellent. 
Councilor Stewart-Morales expressed his excitement for spring to be here. He had a lot of
gratitude for the employees of the City and the Public Schools. He expressed his appreciation for
programming for the children, preparation of the fields, cleaning of the streets and preparing the
recycle center. He noted the important event of the Framingham Earth Day celebration on
Saturday April 23rd and more could be learned at [URL: "file://localhost/2022-4-5%20DRAFT%20CC%20Minutes.doc"] framinghamearthday.org. Starting April 9th 
through April 22nd, Keep Framingham Beautiful would be holding efforts to tidy up the City by
picking up litter either in groups or in individual neighborhoods. Sunday, April 10th, there would
be a Keep Framingham Beautiful event in Saxonville at Stapleton Elementary School. He asked
that people join if they could. 
Chairman Ottaviani’s microphone was off for a moment, but he said that several Councilors had
a benefit event on May 17th and everyone agreed to move the Council meeting to May 24th. He
consulted with Councilor King and it was determined it would provide the Finance Subcommittee
ample time to review the budget that was expected by May 3rd.  Councilor Mallach pointed out
that would give the Council 3 meetings in a row and Councilor King said that actually would work
out well given the topic of the budget would be the priority. 
Councilor Mallach appreciated the donation of two soccer nets housed at Butterworth Park by
the Framingham United Soccer Club. She was looking forward to lots of soccer happening in the
park over the spring and summer. On the previous Friday, “brave souls” from Edwards Church
celebrated Lent and the start of Spring by jumping into the water at Learned Pond as a
fundraiser for those displaced by the strife in Ukraine, she said. She thanked the Parks &
Recreation, Health Department, and Fire, Water & Rescue departments for their assistance in
that event. It was her understanding that they raised $10K. Citizen initiatives like that felt good. 
She went on to say that Eversource was reaching out to those in the identified area to
participate in the geothermal study. Eversource, she said, was committed to expanding the
program when appropriate. 
City of Framingham  Page 15 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
Page 16
Minutes  City Council  4/5/2022
Councilor Alexander piggy-backed on Ms. Mallach’s comments. He added that the meeting for
qualified residents from districts 5 & 7 would be held next Wednesday at Fuller Middle School at
7PM. He said he would be in attendance. 
Councilor Bryant noted April was full of celebrations to appreciate. April, she said, was Deaf
History Month and there was much to consider in supporting the different organizations that
support the deaf community. She reminded residents that Ramadan was running through the
month and we should be aware of and sensitive to it. Saturday was Autism Awareness Day, and
we could all delve more into that. She felt Framingham was very cognizant to have a space and
pause in the Flag Day Parade for those on the Autistic Spectrum to enjoy the parade. She gave a
should out to Sandra and Daniel’s Table for their book reading at Harmony Grove Elementary
School on Saturday, which was International Children’s Book Day. The children loved it and it was
fabulous. She said that it was also National School Librarian Day on Monday and Librarian
Workers Day is April 12th. The Library was key to growth of the children and the people and that
the free library, which Benjamin Franklin was the first proponent of, and it changed lives. 
She shared that this coming Saturday was National Recognized Prisoner of War Day. On behalf of
the Veteran’s and former Prisoners of War, she thanked them all for their service and she was
reminded of them when she saw the POW flag flying along side of the Massachusetts flag. Ms. 
Bryant then recognized the “fur babies and joy” of National Pet Day on April 11th. Last but not
least, she said that Palm Sunday was upcoming as was Holy or Maundy Thursday, followed by
Good Friday and Easter. She hoped all that celebrated to have a joyous celebration and period of
growth during that time of reflection. 
Councilor Stefanini asked for a point-of-information. He asked the Chair if the Councilor
intentionally left out April Fool’s Day. The Council laughed and Ms. Bryant said she did. She then
said that there was a lot of gardening happening in Framingham and that was good for the
environment. She noted she had left off Tax Day. Chairman Ottaviani said he was happy he
would be on a plane going to Aruba on Holy Thursday. The Council’s chat continued. Councilor
Cannon thanked Councilor Bryant for the remarkably thorough report. He said that April was not
Deaf History month, but the month leading up to April 15th. It concluded on April 15th, he
explained, because the first school for the deaf opened in the United States on April 15, 1817. 
The Charter, he said, was signed by President Lincoln. He wrapped up his comments and thanked
the Chair for the time. 
APPROVAL OF MINUTES- September 2, 2021, February 15, 2022 and March 1, 2022, 
March 15, 2022, March 29, 2022 
The minutes were not discussed. They would be voted upon at the next Council meeting on April
26th.
ADJOURNMENT
8:45PM Councilor Stefanini motioned to adjourn. Seconded by Councilor Leombruno. ROLL CALL VOTE
11-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, aye; Steiner, aye; Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Leombruno, aye; King, aye; 
Stewart-Morales, aye; Mallach, aye; Alexander, aye; Bryant, aye. The meeting adjourned. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Marion Kelly
City of Framingham  Page 16 of 16  Updated 5/3/22 
