CITY COUNCIL 
PHILIP R. OTTAVIANI, CHAIR | JANET LEOMBRUNO, VICE CHAIR 
NOVAL ALEXANDER | TRACEY BRYANT | MICHAEL P. CANNON 
GEORGE P. KING, JR. | CHRISTINE A. LONG |
LEORA MALLACH | ADAM C. STEINER |JOHN A. STEFANINI
CESAR G. STEWART-MORALES 
MEMORIAL BUILDING – ROOM 113
150 CONCORD STREET, FRAMINGHAM, MA 01702
508.532.5400 – CITYCOUNCIL@FRAMINGHAMMA.GOV 
MINUTES: MARCH 15, 2022
BLUMER COMMUNITY ROOM 
REMOTE 
7:00PM
APPROVED 4/26/2022
Council Members Participating: 
Philip R. Ottaviani, Chair
Noval Alexander
Tracey Bryant- REMOTE 
Michael P. Cannon
George P. King, Jr. 
Janet Leombruno, Vice Chair
Christine A. Long
Leora Mallach
Adam C. Steiner
John A. Stefanini
Cesar G. Stewart-Morales
Staff Participating: 
Jessica Barnhill, District 8 School Committee, Vice-Chair
William LaBarge, District 9 School Committee, Member
Louise Miller, Chief Financial Officer
Charlie Sisitsky, Mayor
Priscila Sousa, District 5 School Committee, Chair
Matt Torti, Director of Buildings and Grounds, Framingham Public Schools- REMOTE 
Michael Tusino, Chief Operating Officer
Diane Willoughby, Licensing Coordinator
Others Participating: 
******************************************************
CALL TO ORDER 
7:00 PM Chairman Ottaviani called the meeting to order. He read the entire agenda as posted. 
JOINT PROCLIMATION & CITATION
2022-026 – Upon Request of the Mayor and Council Chair, a Resolution honoring the 100th 
Anniversary of Tosti’s Garage Chairman Ottaviani turned the presentation over to Councilor
Stefanini. He described the Tosti Garage as an institution here in Framingham and shared it
truly was a family run business starting with founding member Tony Tosti, his son Joe, his
grandson John, and now his great-grandson Chris. Both Tony and Joe were Veterans and served
our country. Joe Tosti was a member of the Zoning Board for many years. The Tosti family was
in attendance and Mr. Stefanini invited John Tosti to speak on behalf of the family. 
City of Fram ingham  Page 1 of 18  Updated 3/18/22
Page 2
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
John Tosti shared that this was an honor and truly appreciated. He shared that his wife, two
sisters and a brother were with them this evening and all were very proud and honored to
accept this resolution. He thanked the Council for their support and recognition. 
Mayor Sisitsky presented the joint resolution to Mr. Tosti on behalf of the Council, himself, and
the City Clerk. He congratulated the Tosti family upon the 100th anniversary of Tosti’s Garage. 
Chairman Ottaviani called for a motion to accept the resolution. Moved by Councilor Cannon, 
seconded by Councilor Leombruno. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Bryant, aye; Stewart-Morales, 
aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; 
Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye. The Council formally accepted the resolution to
recognize the 100th anniversary of Tosti’s Garage. 
Councilor Bryant thanked the Tosti’s for their business on behalf of District 9. She said they had
been a beacon of integrity. 
2022-027 –Upon request of Councilors Stefanini and Stewart-Morales, a Council citation
celebrating the Brazilian-American Center on their 10th Anniversary the Chairman gave
Councilor Stewart-Morales an opportunity to make this presentation. Councilor Stewart-
Morales allowed Councilor Stefanini to present. Mr. Stefanini recognized the Brazilian-American
Center (BRACE) for their support of all immigrants in the community of Framingham. BRACE
was started by Father Volmar Scarvelli to address the needs of those just becoming familiar
with Framingham. He described the services of BRACE as a godsend to the more than fifteen
thousand immigrants here. The organization offered many community- based services including
English as a Second Language (ESL). Ms. Christine Tibor, director of the ESL, was in attendance
tonight. 
Councilor Stefanini along with Councilor Stewart-Morales honored BRACE and he motioned to
recognize their 10th Anniversary. Seconded by Councilor Stewart-Morales. Mr. Stewart-Morales
shared that as an immigrant he understood the challenges those who move into a new country
face. He recognized the positive services offered by BRACE. He looked forward to attending
their celebration. 
Chairman Ottaviani invited Christine Tibor, BRACE Board of Directors and Father Marcio, who
took over for Father Scarvelli, to speak. They were very appreciative of the citation. She shared
that BRACE served over 15 thousand residents last year. On behalf of BRACE, she expressed
appreciation for the support from the City of Framingham. Father Marcio thanked the Council
for the welcome and support. 
ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Bryant, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; 
Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, 
aye. The Council formally accepted the citation to recognize the 10th anniversary of the
Brazilian-American Center. 
City of Framingham  Page 2 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 3
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
2022-028 –Upon request of Councilor Leombruno, a Council Resolution celebrating Women’s
History Month Chairman Ottaviani recognized Councilor Leombruno to present this resolution. 
Ms. Leombruno stated the importance of Women’s History Month and identified some
prominent women in Framingham’s history. First, she recognized self-taught poet Lydia Learned
who grew up in Colonial times by what is today Learned Pond. Next, she briefly described Mary
E. Stapleton and Carroll J. Getchell, both of Saxonville. Both were successful in their teaching
and principalship careers in the 1950’s and beyond. Ms. Getchell founded The Friends of
Saxonville, which remained in existence today. Lastly, she recognized Margaret Pearmain
Welch and Penelope Turton. These women made lasting legacy and impact upon the
environmental and agricultural landscape of Framingham. 
Councilor Leombruno made a motion to recognize Women’s History Month. Seconded by
Councilor Long. Chairman Ottaviani asked if there was further discussion. Councilor Bryant was
recognized. She thanked Councilor Leombruno for taking the time to make this resolution. She
asked for an amendment or two. She expressed concern that by citing these women, others
were left out. She said that “mothers” or women who came before, were not recognized for
their great works. Ms. Bryant said that she was asked to remove the names of specific
individuals in her resolution and the same should be applied here. She was surprised that no
women of color were included, and cited Meta Fuller and Christa McAuliffe. She suggested the
names be removed all together and offered that as a friendly amendment. Chairman Ottaviani
asked that one person talk at a time. He asked Ms. Leombruno if she accepted it. She said that
she did not understand the amendment. He asked her, yes or no. She responded no. 
Councilor Cannon was recognized by the Chairman. He clarified that the removal of names in
the resolution put forth by Ms. Bryant was that of a current municipal employee. He
encouraged members of the Council to reference these items in advance as they were provided
in the background materials prior to these meetings. It, he said, may be easier to share
suggestions on non-binding resolutions, with the author prior to the read at Council meetings. 
He said he would support this resolution as written in recognition of all women in
Framingham’s history. 
Chairman Ottaviani allowed Councilor Bryant to respond before he took comment from the
public via ZOOM. Ms. Bryant said she did not believe Mr. Cannon’s distinctions were valid. She
said there was not always time to talk with one another, and that the public needed to hear
these concerns. Her comments continued. Chairman Ottaviani allowed Councilor Leombruno
to comment. Ms. Leombruno clarified that Meta Fuller and Christa McAuliffe were on the list
last year and the women mentioned in the resolution was a different list. 
Chairman Ottaviani invited former Councilor Margareth Sheppard to speak via ZOOM. She
thanked the Chairman for the opportunity to speak on the previous item in recognition of the
10th Anniversary of BRACE. She shared that her father was a founding member of BRACE
around a kitchen table and was thrilled with what it had become. She thanked the Council. 
Citing a motion of acceptance by Ms. Leombruno and a second by Ms. Long, Chairman Ottaviani
called a roll-call vote. ROLL CALL VOTE 10-1-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, 
aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; 
City of Framingham  Page 3 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 4
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
Long, aye; Bryant, nay. The Council accepted the resolution put forth to recognize Women’s
History Month. 
The Chairman took the recommendation with regard to Mayor’s nominees for Board
of Health positions out of order without objection from the Council or the Mayor. 
Order 2022-008-005 – Upon request of the Appointments Subcommittee, a report
and recommendation with regard to the Mayor’s nominees for Board of Health
positions 
Karen Beauregard – District 6
Jeri Bryant – District 7
Darlene Connors – District 3
Chairman Ottaviani reiterated that it was a breath of fresh air to have these highly qualified
individuals participate for the first time in our government. The Appointments Subcommittee, 
he shared, voted 3-0 in favor of recommending favorable action of all three applicants. This
allowed the Board of Health to have 5 members and business could be conducted. He asked for
comments from the Council. Councilor Steiner said that he had an opportunity to talk with the
candidates as a member of the Appointments Subcommittee. He felt their responses to
discussion of COVID were very insightful. He was excited to support their appointments. He
motioned to accept them. Seconded by Councilor Cannon. 
Mayor Sisitsky announced the expiration terms for each candidate; Beauregard- 2025, Bryant- 
2024, Connors- 2023. Councilor Cannon was recognized for a point of personal privilege. He
shared that his mother was a retired operating room nurse and he was thrilled Ms. Connors, as
an OR charge nurse, was joining the board and knew things would get done by her. He thanked
her for stepping up to support the community. 
Upon no further discussion, Chairman Ottaviani took a roll-call vote. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: 
Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, 
aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The three nominees
listed above were accepted to the Board of Health and Chairman Ottaviani thanked them all for
their service. 
PUBLIC HEARINGS/DISCUSSION
2022-029 – Upon Request of the Licensing Coordinator Review of Annual Taxi Permit
Renewals Chairman Ottaviani welcomed Ms. Diane Willoughby, Licensing Coordinator, to
speak. She shared the Council had before them the application from Tommy’s Taxi and JFK
Transportation, Inc. Chairman Ottaviani asked if there were questions by the Council. Councilor
Stefanini moved the request. Seconded by Councilor Leombruno. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: 
Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, 
aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The annual taxi permit
renewals were accepted. 
2022-030 – Upon Request of the Licensing Coordinator Review of Annual Livery License
Renewals the Chairman asked Ms. Willoughby to continue with this item. She noted the
City of Framingham  Page 4 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 5
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
following applicants; Igor Limo Services, Around Town Youth Rides, and JFK Transportation, Inc. 
Councilor Stefanini moved the request pending the approval of the Framingham Police
Department’s approval. Seconded by Councilor Leombruno. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Stewart-
Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; 
Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The annual livery license
renewals were accepted. 
Councilor Bryant asked a question. She asked if the background checks were required for livery
service and not for taxi service. Through the Chair, this question was directed to Ms. 
Willoughby. She said that each taxi driver was CORIed and did not need an additional
background check. 
2022-031 – Upon Request of the Licensing Coordinator approval of Frank Sacchetti and
Robert McGonagle, Frosty Ice Cream, Hawker/Peddler Licenses Ms. Willoughby shared that
there was a late submittal by the Police Department approving Mr. Sacchetti’s application. 
Councilor Stefanini moved the request. Seconded by Councilor Long. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: 
Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, 
aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The hawker/peddler
license for Sacchetti, was accepted. 
Ms. Willoughby shared with the Council that it was made known to her that Mr. McGonagle
was not able to go to the police department for the required fingerprinting. The lieutenant was
not able to sign off on the application yet. Chairman Ottaviani asked for a motion to approve
pending police approval. Motion made by Councilor Cannon. Seconded by Councilor Stefanini. 
ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; 
Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. 
The hawker/peddler license for McGonagle was accepted, pending approval of the police
department. 
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Chairman Ottaviani apologized for skipping the Public Participation of the meeting. He asked if
there were any members of the public wishing to speak on items not on this evening’s agenda. 
Upon no participation, he moved on to the next agenda item. 
UPDATE FROM THE MAYOR
Mayor Sisitsky shared that his administration had several meetings with the public safety
departments (Fire and Police). The Chiefs and the administration were in favor of joint-dispatch
and a plan was being created. He shared that they were looking into the possibility of regional
dispatching as well and would share more as it developed. 
He said he had met with the Inspectional Services Department to discuss the expedition of the
outdoor seating requests for Framingham’s restaurants. He decided to waive the building
permit fees for those restaurants applying for outdoor seating. 
City of Framingham  Page 5 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 6
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
The ambulance contract, he said, would expire this June. Framingham was working on a request
for proposal (RFP) for bid to extend service for at least another three years. 
The City, he said, hired a consultant to review and recommend revisions to the water and sewer
rate system. He stated this had been a controversial topic, and a contractor would provide
advice on how to best create new tier rates to correct the issues related. 
The Marijuana Advisory Team recently voted to recommend a meeting with Union Twist, 630
Worcester Road, to negotiate a new host-community agreement. Although they were not open
yet, their agreement expired and needed to be renewed, he explained. 
He said that he had met with volunteers and some city officials whom wished to plan an event
for Flag Day (June 12th) and his office would support those efforts. 
Mayor Sisitsky happily shared that the seals on the doors inside City Hall had been replaced to
reflect the City of Framingham. 
His team was looking forward to meeting with the Council on March 29th in a bonus meeting to
discuss finances. 
He shared his appointments to the Welcoming Committee, and was not certain if the Council
had received notice of them. He was pleased to announce he appointed Hodari Cail and
Nayagara Viera. He shared some of Mr. Cail’s long standing history in reducing the barriers to
those new to the community. He was the Director of Community Affairs for the Baker
Administration where he designed strategies to ensure minority vote. Prior to that, he was the
Director of Diversity, Inclusion and Procurement for MassPort. 
Ms. Viera, was an employee of the Framingham Public Schools since 2019. She had extensive
experience with diversity, equity and inclusion. As a proud Brazilian immigrant, she led the
Immigrant and Refugees Affinity Group for the Framingham Public School employees. She also
implemented various affinity groups at Fuller Middle School for students such as LatinX Voices, 
Gender Sexuality Alliance, Black Student Union, Student Immigrant Alliance, and more. Prior to
her work with FPS, she was a dental surgeon in Brazil. 
Lastly, the Mayor shared an Ad-Hoc Property Naming Committee in response to the request to
name a room at the Village Hall in honor of Karen Dempsey. He appointed Cheryl Goldstein
from District 3 and Doug Lawrence from District 7 to that Ad-Hoc committee. 
Chairman Ottaviani thanked the Mayor for his updates. He asked if the Mayor would convene
the first meeting of the Welcoming Committee. Mayor Sisitsky said it had not been determined
yet, but he would probably convene the first meeting. Chairman Ottaviani expressed the
Council’s appreciation for the implementation of the Welcoming Committee. He then asked if
Council members had questions for the Mayor. 
Councilor Bryant asked where could the Council obtain the information not provided in the
background materials in relation to the Welcoming Committee and the Ad-Hoc Property
City of Framingham  Page 6 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 7
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
Naming Committee. The Mayor said that the Council’s Executive Assistant had copies to share, 
and that it was also available on the website. Chairman Ottaviani noted that these two
appointments did not need the Council’s approval in order to make them. 
He then asked one at a time to speak. He recognized Councilor King to speak. Mr. King was
interested in the comment about Union Twist. He said he found it ironic and disappointing that
this was the first establishment to receive a license and it had not opened as of yet. He
expressed hope that upon the completion of their next licensing agreement, there be
commitment to opening as holding a license and not doing so prevented the City from
generating any revenue. 
In addition, Councilor King reiterated how dangerous the intersection was at Prospect Street
and Worcester Road. Union Twist, he said, was right at that intersection and he anticipated the
traffic in the area to be worse come the opening of Union Twist. He believed lighting was most
important there and his previous discussions with State Representatives only resulted in a
change of timing for the crossing signal. He suggested lighting or traffic mitigation could be part
of the new contract with Union Twist. 
Councilor Cannon thanked the Mayor for the expedition of outdoor dining and waiving the fees. 
He said the business community was grateful. Councilor Stefanini echoed Mr. Cannon’s
thoughts, and asked the Mayor if, in the future, discussion could be had about vacancies on
boards and committees and perhaps the Council could help share that information with the
public. The Mayor said that Kez Franca, Citizen Participation Officer, was in the process of
contacting all of the boards and committees to identify areas of vacancy. Unfortunately, he
said, there were not good records kept of which boards and committees needed support and
this he felt was an important first step toward filling vacancies that the Mayor’s Office was
responsible for. 
Councilor Steiner followed up on an email exchange between he and the Mayor in relation to
allowing the Council meetings to be permanently available for live stream on Facebook. He said
prior to COVID, the School Committee was able to do so. The use of ZOOM during the
pandemic, he said, had made it easier to provide live feed online for residents. Noting that
ZOOM would no longer be in use, he would like to see ground work done ahead of time with
the Government Channel to feed directly into the City’s Facebook page so that every meeting
would be available. Mr. Steiner said he had spoken with Ron Rego, Director of Media Services, 
and he was on board with making that happen. He asked the Mayor what his thoughts on that
were. The Mayor said he had a memo from Mr. Rego indicating that it was a relatively easy
process. He said that the City would find out how and when to most efficiently pursue that. 
Councilor Steiner thanked the Mayor, and asked if there had been further discussions with the
rail-line in regards to the Bruce Freeman Rail Trail. Mayor Sisitsky said there had been some
informal discussions and they had met with the Community Relations representative from CSX. 
The representative provided contact information for the real estate people and the Mayor’s
office was attempting to reach them to move this project along. Councilor Steiner said that he
hoped Framingham could move quickly to take advantage of federal funds for projects such as
this. 
City of Framingham  Page 7 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 8
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
Chairman Ottaviani asked if there were other comments. He thanked the Mayor for the efforts
made in the last 74 days to make changes and to see the signs say “City of Framingham” was
long overdue, he said. 
ACTION ITEMS/DISCUSSION/VOTE
2022-032 – Upon request of the Mayor and Chief Financial Officer, a referral to the Finance
Subcommittee to consider a transfer of Salary funds to Operating funds for the Mayor’s
Office for contracting work for a temporary webmaster By Authority of Council Chair Without
Objection, the matter regarding the consideration of transfer of Salary funds to Operating funds
for the Mayor’s Office for contracting work for a temporary webmaster, was referred to the
Finance Subcommittee for review and recommendation to City Council. 
Order 2022-033 –Upon Request of the School Committee, a request to authorize submission
of the MSBA (Massachusetts School Building Authority) Accelerated Repair
Program Applications for Dunning & Potter Road Elementary Schools Chairman Ottaviani
recognized Mr. Matt Torti, Director of Buildings and Grounds, Framingham Public Schools, to
present on this request. Mr. Torti shared that the School Department was seeking approval for
two statements of interest to the Massachusetts School Building Authority (MSBA) for repairs
to the roofs of Dunning and Potter Road Elementary schools. The roofs were off warrantee, he
said, and needed replacement. If accepted by the MSBA, the City would be eligible for up to
50% reimbursement for construction costs related to the roofs. 
Mr. William LaBarge, District 9 School Committee Member, said that the roofs needed to be
fixed as soon as possible. They were leaking, he said, and were causing damage down below
including mold that was dangerous and asked that the Council act as they would for their own
homes. 
Chairman Ottaviani thanked Mr. LaBarge. He asked Ms. McCarthy if she wished to speak on this
item. She indicated that she had a question for the Mayor and Mr. Ottaviani could come back to
her. He apologized for not seeing her electronic hand earlier. 
Councilor Stefanini moved the request. Seconded by Councilor Cannon. Councilor Long said
that she had known Mr. Torti for years in the construction industry and agreed maintenance
was the best means to keep assets in good shape. She definitely supported this request and
knew the State had the money. Councilor Steiner shared he was partial to this project as a
graduate of Potter Road Elementary School. To that, he said five years ago, repairs were made
to get to this point. He asked Mr. Torti if this would buy the City a longer period of time. Mr. 
Torti explained this was not a warrantee extension being requested, but a request for full
replacement of the roofs. A new roof, he said, would have a warrantee of anywhere between
10 and 20 years depending upon the type of roof purchased. 
Chairman Ottaviani called for a vote. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; 
Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; 
Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The request to authorize submission of the
City of Framingham  Page 8 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 9
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
MSBA (Massachusetts School Building Authority) Accelerated Repair Program Applications for
Dunning & Potter Road Elementary Schools was approved. 
Order 2022-034 – Upon Request of the School Committee, a request that the City Council
authorize the Mayor to purchase the Bethany Property District 8 School Committee member
Jessica Barnhill, Vice-Chair Framingham School Committee, presented on this item. She stated
that there had been discussion of the inequities in the elementary schools for the past 12 years. 
She asked that tonight; one inequity be corrected. She specifically requested that the City
Council authorize the Mayor to purchase the Bethany Property to build a south side school and
pre-K facility. She shared that 2 out of 3 students live south of Route 9 and only 3 of the 9
elementary schools were located in the same area. On her drive to work past intersections
near Alexander Street, she said she saw crowds of children waiting for busses and many of
them traveled 2-3 hours per day to attend school. Financially, the District paid $500K annually
to bus just District 8 children in grades Kindergarten to 5th grade to and from school. She went
on to say that the adjustment of school inventory was normal. In the 1960’s, 4 elementary
schools were built. In the 1970’s, 4 on the southside of town were decommissioned. 
The topic and need for a new school had been discussed. The inequity, she said, was glaring. 
The District thoughtfully commissioned a feasibility study conducted by TBA Architects in
anticipation of the submission of interest to MSBA. The report identified Bethany Hill as the
best site. She noted that the report identified other site locations on the southside of the City, 
but this location was identified as optimal in areas of minimal site preparation required, space
to build, traffic flow, outdoor play space and more. She asked the Council to take the next step
in correcting the glaring inequity and work toward the multi-year process to open a new school
on the southside of the City. She asked that the Council allow the Mayor to appraise and
negotiate a price for the property. 
Chairman Ottaviani thanked Ms. Barnhill for the presentation. He again asked Ms. McCarthy if
she wished to speak on this item as her electronic hand was raised. Ms. McCarthy said that she
supported a school on the southside. She expressed concern about accessibility and traffic
safety concerns for the area near Bethany Hill. She said there was a building in the City that
may be repurposed. She said she did not know the price for the Bethany Property, but was
concerned about added costs. She also said that as long as there was school choice, there was
a chance that children’s families would still chose a school out of their home district. Her
comments continued. 
Ms. Priscila Sousa, Chair of the Framingham School Committee, shared that she had spent the
majority of her life in the southside of Framingham. Listening to Ms. Barnhill’s remarks, she
said, reminded her of her own experience arriving in Framingham. She grew up in the heart of
District 9 on Weld Street. She attended school at Potter Road Elementary across town in District
1. She spent hours of her day sitting in a school bus. As the School Committee Chair, she said
she had the privilege of speaking with parents across the district. Many of their concerns
centered around transportation, she shared. She commended parents for sharing their
children’s experiences and stated that was why she was here tonight. Not only was the bussing
practice expensive, the inequity of it should be something abhorred by the Council and School
Committee as representatives. 
City of Framingham  Page 9 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 10
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
She went on to share that nearly 100% of students from Districts 1-3 attended preschool. At
most, 50% of students from Districts 7-9 had that opportunity. Evidence, she said, reflected
that children are better off when they have access to education from a very early age. The
trajectory of their lives was directly linked to preschool education access, she stated. This was
an opportunity to change their lives. She asked the Council to vote in favor of changing the
lives of these families for generations to come. 
Chairman Ottaviani thanked Ms. Sousa for her compelling remarks. He recognized Mr. LaBarge. 
Mr. LaBarge said that all children must be considered when making these decisions. He felt that
all children were God’s children and this property being the site of a convent was meant to be
for the children and their education. Mr. Ottaviani thanked Mr. LaBerge for his comments. He
asked if the Councilors had comments or questions. 
Councilor Long pointed out that as the former Chair of the Planning Board, this parcel of land
was of critical concern to the community. She went on to point out that schools are an asset. 
She felt that the entire parcel be purchased rather than it being subdivided and developed
otherwise. The property was available four years ago, she said, but the City did not want to
purchase at that time because the price was too high. She motioned to authorize the Mayor to
purchase the Bethany Property. Seconded by Councilor Stefanini. Discussion continued. 
Councilor Cannon thanked Ms. Long for her comments and the School Committee members for
their remarks and leadership. He asked if this was allowing the Mayor to enter a negotiation, 
authorizing a purchase, and at what point would it come back to the Council for an
appropriation request? Chairman Ottaviani said that it was a similar process to that of the
Perini Building. The Mayor, he explained, would get an appraisal on the Bethany Property, 
negotiate a purchase price, sign an agreement, and then return to the Council to obtain an
authorization for the money. The Chairman asked Councilor Stefanini to clarify what the
motion would agree to. Mr. Stefanini explained that the Mayor, or his appointee, would do all
of the steps outlined by Mr. Ottaviani, and then return to the Council to ask for the money to
purchase the property. 
Councilor Steiner felt that this was a “no-brainer” and hoped it be done quickly. He happily
supported it. Councilor Stefanini said that the School Committee members said it all, but
emphasized that bussing at $500K would be $10M toward the acquisition of a new school in
this location over the course of the bonding. The process, he said, would take 5-7 years and
indicated that the City was a long way from the Mayor and the School Committee returning
with the request for the funds. This motion and vote, he said, would advance the City’s standing
in the MSBA process and improved the chances of getting into the pipeline. The sooner that
happened, the sooner reimbursement could be received and the highest amount of
reimbursement could be obtained (60% or better). He commended Dr. Tremblay, 
Superintendent of Schools and the School Committee members for their commitment in
making progress in education for 4-year old’s entering Pre-K. He reiterated that nearly 100% of
4-year old’s in Districts 1-3 attended preschool. 50%, he said, did the same in Districts 7-9. That
was not giving them the same chance to succeed at life and experience opportunities as their
peers, he said. 
City of Framingham  Page 10 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 11
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
Councilor Alexander thanked the School Committee members for their eloquent statements. 
He and his brother just recently had a discussion remembering when Memorial Middle School
was closed and those students were just transported up to Cameron Middle School that
September. His brother remembered that as a vivid, traumatic experience and these changes
do make an impact upon children all of their lives. He said he would fully support this request. 
Councilor Stewart-Morales wondered if it would be helpful to make an amendment to the
motion that any other suitable property on the southside be included in an effort to be more
attractive for the MSBA process. Chairman Ottaviani asked Councilor Stefanini to respond. Mr. 
Stefanini said that it was not a public/private exchange. In order to get into the MSBA program, 
the School Committee, he said, did their job to find an architect and a location. He was
concerned that an amendment like that would unintentionally create a delay in getting into the
MSBA pipeline. He explained that there were not many parcels that met the MSBA
requirement for acreage on the southside of the City. 
Councilor King also supported the idea of a southside school. He expressed concern that upon
negotiations, problems could occur. He said that with any parcel of land, the owner would have
one price in mind, and the City’s appraisal price probably would vary. Under the law, the City
could not purchase a parcel if the appraisal and the asking price are not close. He believed the
differential was 25% at most and the City must be aware of that. He made additional comments
about past negotiations of properties in the City. 
Councilor Bryant asked if there were any objections and concerns. She asked if the school
would be far enough away from an existing nursing home and apartment complex on the
property. Mr. Torti replied that 14 other parcels were looked at by the feasibility study and
those would require taking part of the land needed by eminent domain to assemble the
appropriate acreage. He said that on the Bethany site, there were options. One option was to
build on the lower section of the property or build at the top of the hill. The Sisters of Saint
Joseph demolished a convent that was on the property. This property did not require having to
take parcels from different owners to create one large enough to build upon as required. Ms. 
Bryant asked if neighbors had questions or concerns. Mr. Torti said he was not aware if input
was sought by neighbors at that time. Discussion continued. 
Mr. Robert Boles, District 4, said he had been talking about this issue for almost 20 years. He
said this should be done and he hoped the Mayor would find the money to do this while Mr. 
Tremblay was here. He said that this must be done to switch back to neighborhood schools in
an effort to save millions of dollars and to make it equal everywhere in the City. He expressed
his view that a 5th grade teacher from any school should be able to walk into any elementary
school and teach the same curriculum. Chairman Ottaviani thanked Mr. Boles for his continued
support of the schools. 
Mr. Ottaviani said that they did not need to vote on the friendly amendment as Councilor Long
accepted it. Christine Long moved and John Stefanini seconded the following motion, 
further amended by George King: to authorize the Mayor to acquire by purchase, gift, grant, 
eminent domain, or otherwise, the 30-plus acre Bethany Hill property from the Sisters of St. 
City of Framingham  Page 11 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 12
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
Joseph for a new elementary school and early childhood education center and the remainder
for open space preservation upon such terms and conditions as the Mayor shall determine to
be appropriate and to take any and all related actions necessary or appropriate to acquire said
property. 
The Chairman called for a vote. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; 
King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, 
aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The Council voted unanimously to authorize the Mayor to acquire
by purchase, gift, grant, eminent domain, or otherwise, the 30-plus acre Bethany Hill property
from the Sisters of St. Joseph for a new elementary school and early childhood education center
and the remainder for open space preservation upon such terms and conditions as the Mayor
shall determine to be appropriate and to take any and all related actions necessary or
appropriate to acquire said property. Mr. Ottaviani thanked Ms. Sousa, Ms. Barnhill, Dr. 
Tremblay and Mr. LaBarge for their outstanding efforts. 
Order 2022-035 – Upon request of the Mayor, discussion of the reorganization proposal for
the Department of Planning and Community Development Chairman Ottaviani welcomed the
Mayor, Mr. Tusoni, and Ms. Miller to speak on this topic. Mayor Sisitsky said that he wanted to
clarify that this was the beginning of a discussion on the ideas to reorganize the Department of
Planning and Community Development. He had always said he wanted an open and
transparent relationship with the Council and he welcomed their input on crafting the new
department. The Charter, he reminded everyone, required an elaborate procedure for making
this type of change including a public hearing. This, he said, was an outline, to share with
perhaps the Planning & Zoning Subcommittee and or the Economic Development & Housing
Subcommittee. The Acting Director of the Planning and Community Development Department
was resigning as of March 25th for another position in another community. 
The Mayor said it was important to begin the discussion and to seek an acting Planning Director
to get through the next several months as the department was reorganized. He thanked the
Council for recently funding that position. The title, he believed, would be Director of Economic
Development and Planning. A section of the department would be devoted to planning
handling permits for Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Board, the Conservation Commission, 
and provide service to developers seeking zoning advice and such. 
He went on to share that the Conservation Commission would stay under the Planning
Department but separate for the duties and statutes they must follow. He said that a Director
would have a strong background in Economic development and planning and a few positions
would be supportive of the new EDC, and support other boards and commissions involved in
economic development. He said a document was sent earlier today with a broad outline of
what potential plans for the reorganization may look like. He emphasized it was not a final
recommendation and asked that the subcommittee review and discuss it to provide feedback
to the Mayor’s team. 
Chairman Ottaviani asked if there were any objections to referring this item to the Economic
Development & Housing Subcommittee. Moved by Councilor Stefanini. Seconded by Councilor
Leombruno. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; 
City of Framingham  Page 12 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 13
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, 
aye; Bryant, aye. The discussion of the reorganization proposal for the Department of Planning
and Community Development was referred to the Economic Development & Housing
Subcommittee. 
Order 2022-021-001 – Upon request of the Finance Subcommittee, a report and
recommendation with regard to a request for funds (free cash) for voting tabulation
machines and voting booths and rescission of previously authorized borrowing Councilor King, 
Chair of the Finance Subcommittee, was given the floor to share the discussion had about this
item in the Finance Subcommittee meeting. He said the numbers were in the information
packed provided in the background materials and a different means of funding were suggested. 
Some re-appropriation of old balances was suggested along with $120K from free-cash. The
reasoning behind doing this now, was to meet the needs of the expansion of precincts prior to
the upcoming election in September. Councilor King moved this be accepted as presented by
the Mayor’s memo dated February 17th. Seconded by Councilor Cannon. Chairman Ottaviani
asked if there was any other discussion. Seeing none, he took a roll call vote. ROLL CALL VOTE
11-0-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; 
Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The request for
funds (free cash) for voting tabulation machines and voting booths and rescission of previously
authorized borrowing was approved. 
Order 2022-022-001 – Upon request of the Finance Subcommittee, a report and
recommendation with regard a request for additional funds (authorization for additional
borrowing) for the Library Ramp project and rescission of previously authorized borrowing
Councilor King explained that in FY18 $715K was approved in the Capital Improvement Plan to
redesign and construct a new ramp on the Pearl Street side of the library. As bids were
received, the City’s budget was short by $282K. The memo from the CFO identified several
different items to reappropriate and a request for an additional authorization for $289K to
cover the costs of the necessary redesign and repair. This vote, he said, required a 2/3rds
majority by the Council. He motioned to accept the request as outline in the CFO’s memo. 
Seconded by Councilor Leombruno. Upon no further discussion, Chairman Ottaviani called a
vote. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, 
aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, 
aye. The request for additional funds (authorization for additional borrowing) for the Library
Ramp project and rescission of previously authorized borrowing was approved. 
Order 2022-023-001 – Upon request of the Finance Subcommittee, a report and
recommendation with regard to approval of acceptance of FY23 HUD (Housing & Urban
Development) and DHCD (Department of Housing and Community Development) funds Mr. 
King explained that this was the distribution of the annual CDBG funds to various qualified
organizations in Framingham. Mr. Tusoni, COO, shared that meetings were held with the CDC
Committee to review applications. The Committee and staff made recommendations for the
allocation of funds based upon need. Final decision sat with the Mayor, he said, and the Mayor
made his suggested allocations as noted in the document provided in the background
materials. 
City of Framingham  Page 13 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 14
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
Councilor King explained that the subcommittee voted and agreed with the Mayor’s
suggestions as outlined in the document. Each project was described in the document and he
offered to discuss items if wanted. He moved to approve as outlined by the Mayor. Seconded
by Councilor Long. Upon no further discussion, Chairman Ottaviani called a vote. ROLL CALL
VOTE 11-0-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, 
aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The
approval of acceptance of FY23 HUD and DHCD funds was approved. 
Order 2022-002-001 – Upon request of the Ordinance and Rules Subcommittee, a report and
recommendation with regard to providing Adult Use Marijuana Licenses for up to two
Medical Use licensees to the Ordinances & Rules Subcommittee (first reading) Councilor
Stefanini, Chair of the Ordinance, Rules & Coordination Subcommittee, explained that this item
was in response to a request made by the previous Mayor to remedy an issue in the number of
adult recreational licenses distributed by her office. State law and the courts, he said, had
determined that those holding a medical use license had the right to an adult use license as
well. The Spicer Administration gave out all 6 licenses without holding back two for existing
medical use licensed businesses in Framingham, therefore they requested more licenses be
authorized by the Council. 
He moved that this be adopted in the first reading. Seconded by Ms. Bryant. Councilor Steiner
asked for further details about the relationship between medical and adult use licenses. 
Councilor Stefanini explained that the Legislature adopted medical use prior to voters adopting
adult use. The Board of Selectmen, prior to becoming a City, issued two medical use licenses to
facilities. By law, medical use facilities were guaranteed an adult use license. Mayor Spicer’s
office distributed all 6 adult use licenses without reserving two for the medical use facilities. 
Her office, came to the Council at the end of her term to ask for additional adult use licenses in
order to grant them to these medical use facilities. 
One of the medical use facilities, he continued, had made legal noises about this issue. This was
our process of recognizing they had such a right. This proposal, he said, did not touch the
zoning or locations, it would only allow the current Mayor the ability to address and correct the
error. All of the agreement requirements would still be necessary to obtain the adult use
licenses. Discussion continued. 
Councilor Stewart-Morales asked if possible mechanisms were put into place at the suggestion
of the City Solicitor so as to not find ourselves in this situation in the future. His concern was
that the Mayor not be allowed to issue a newly approved adult use license to a 3rd party other
than these two existing medical use facilities. Mr. Stefanini said the proposal in front of the
Council was drafted by the City Solicitor. It included amendments and preferences. The party
that filed a demand letter agreed with what the City Solicitor recommended. At the very least, 
if these two providers decided they did not want the adult use licenses, the Mayor’s office
would have two additional adult use licenses available to anyone who completed the
application process. Mr. Stewart-Morales followed up asking what if these two providers came
back and said that they did want the adult use license? He was concerned there was no
mechanism to prevent that. Councilor Stefanini responded that they would need to
City of Framingham  Page 14 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 15
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
demonstrate they were active, and the City Solicitor would notify them that they had a certain
amount of time to pursue the adult use licenses. Discussion continued. 
Mr. King added that he was not sure why the Mayor should be limited to 8 adult use licenses. 
He felt that there had been concern when this first came about, but it had been apparent that
these facilities were not an issue. His comments continued. Councilor Stefanini said that he did
not have a problem with that and that he felt the market had already regulated this per say. 
There were a few serious business players left, he said. He believed it was appropriate to refer
this to the Planning & Zoning Subcommittee for suggestions to make changes. Discussion
continued. It was noted that Mr. King’s suggestion was separate from the item on the agenda. 
He did not want to prevent a solution to possible litigation against the City by the existing two
medical licensees. 
Comments continued. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, 
aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; 
Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The request of the Ordinance and Rules Subcommittee, a report and
recommendation with regard to providing Adult Use Marijuana Licenses for up to two Medical
Use licensees to the Ordinances & Rules Subcommittee (first reading) was accepted. 
Mr. King’s motion to refer the item for further discussion of expansion of the number of adult
use licenses to the Planning & Zoning Subcommittee was made. Seconded by Mr. Stefanini. Mr. 
Steiner requested the subcommittee consider including in their discussion giving priority to
minority owned, locally owned, and or women owned entities. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: 
Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, 
aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The Planning & Zoning
Subcommittee would discuss the possibility of making the number of licenses unlimited in the
future and to discuss possible changes in zoning. 
Order 2022-011-001 – Upon request of the Environment and Sustainability Subcommittee, a
report and recommendation with regard to an Order authorizing the Mayor to establish a
Municipal Load Aggregation Program Councilor Leombruno, Chair of the Environment &
Sustainability Subcommittee, shared that they had met on February 16th and again on March
14th to discuss the Municipal Load Aggregation Program. She summarized that Shawn Luz, 
Sustainability Coordinator, had met with the Mayor and COO and great progress had been
made. The subcommittee voted in favor 3-0 and asked the Council approve. Councilor
Stewart-Morales said that the Council had given this approval in June 2020 and he looked
forward to further updates of progress in this area. Councilor Cannon said he too was pleased
to see the Administration taking this on after years of non-action. He made motion to approve. 
Seconded by Councilor Stefanini. Mr. Stefanini commented the challenge in this was to go
forward after talking with the Solicitor so as to create a solid legal foundation should the City
find itself in court over an energy issue. 
Upon no further comments, Chairman Ottaviani called for a vote. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: 
Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, 
aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The report and
City of Framingham  Page 15 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 16
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
recommendation with regard to an Order authorizing the Mayor to establish a Municipal Load
Aggregation Program was approved. 
REPORT OF THE COUNCIL CHAIR
Chairman Ottaviani briefly shared he had met with the Mayor, the COO and even ran into Ms. 
Nichols, the Mayor’s Chief of Staff. He expressed their office was incredibly welcoming and was
pleased that business was being accomplished. 
Topics discussed included the legal department, appointments, and the Eversource cleanup at
350 Irving Street. He said that he and Councilor Bryant had been reached by Eversource to
arrange for neighborhood discussions in regards to the cleanup. He said that transparency was
crucial and it was contributing to the success of this new administration and council. 
Some type of respectful Flag Day ceremony was to be resurrected, he enthusiastically shared. 
He expressed his appreciation for the good work being done by the Council and encouraged
others to reach out to him if there were issues. 
REPORTS OF SUBCOMMITTEES
Councilor Leombruno shared that the Environment & Sustainability Subcommittee and Shawn
Luz met last night with Eversource. They heard a brief presentation on the geo-thermal project
being offered by Eversource come this fall. A neighborhood meeting would be held in April and
again perhaps in the early summer. 
In addition, she shared, that Eversource would be participating in Earth Day on April 23rd to
discuss this program. 
Councilor Cannon shared that the Economic Development Subcommittee would be meeting to
discuss the reorganization that was referred to them this evening. A note of thanks was made
for providing a respectful draft of a reorganization plan that was intended to be worked on with
the Council and the community. He appreciated that. 
Chairman Ottaviani apologized for skipping the following item. 
Order 2022-008-006 – Upon request of the Mayor, a referral of the to the Appointments
Subcommittee of the Mayor’s nomination of Fred Stratmann to serve on the Loring Arena
Advisory Committee by Authority of Council Chair Without Objection, the matter regarding the
Mayor’s nomination of Fred Stratmann to serve on the Loring Arena Advisory Committee, was
referred to the Appointments Subcommittee for review and recommendation to City Council. 
Chairman Ottaviani asked if the Mayor agreed this appointment be discussed at the beginning
of the extra meeting with the Mayor on March 29th. Mayor Sisitsky agreed that would be
acceptable. The Chairman asked the Administrative Assistant to schedule an Appointments
Subcommittee meeting for the 29th at 6:15PM. He asked if there were other subcommittee
updates. 
City of Framingham  Page 16 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 17
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
Councilor Bryant shared quickly that the Public Health, Safety and Transportation
Subcommittee would meet Monday March 28th. Discussion, she said, would wrap-up part II of
the Traffic report and the feasibility to have a Traffic Department. She asked for citizens to
share their thoughts and concerns about this. 
Chairman Ottaviani explained that the Ordinance Review and Recodification Committee had
two councilors appointed to it. Mr. Joel Winnet was the other appointee. There had been no
others whom expressed interest in participating. Councilor Long agreed to be a member of the
committee as the Chairman’s 4th appointee. Discussion continued. Motion to appoint Ms. Long
to the ORRC made by Councilor Leombruno. Seconded by Councilor Cannon. ROLL CALL VOTE
11-0-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; 
Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye. The
acceptance of Councilor Long to the ORRC was approved. 
Councilor Cannon made a motion to adjourn. The Chairman asked that the minutes be voted
upon first. 
APPROVAL OF MINUTES- February 15, 2022 & March 1, 2022 
Motion to approve as submitted made by Councilor Cannon. Seconded by Councilor Long. 
Councilor Bryant called for a point of order or information. She requested that the vote be
taken on the dates separately. Councilor Cannon suggested to the Chairman at his discression, 
that perhaps Ms. Bryant would send her edits to the Administrative Assistant, and a vote on the
minutes would be taken at the next meeting. Chairman Ottaviani asked Ms. Bryant to do so. 
Chairman Ottaviani called a vote to postpone the approval of the minutes from February 15, 
2022 and March 1, 2022. ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Stewart-Morales, aye; Alexander, aye; King, 
aye; Leombruno, aye; Ottaviani, aye; Stefanini, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, aye; Cannon, aye; 
Long, aye; Bryant, aye. 
Councilor Cannon motioned to adjourn. He withdrew the motion to allow for the Report of the
Councilors. 
REPORT OF COUNCILORS
Councilor Cannon expressed his sympathies to the Vitali family upon the passing of Ms. Mary
Vitali. The Council had passed a resolution recognizing her 100th birthday early this past fall. 
Councilor Steiner congratulated OUT MetroWest on their successful open house on Saturday. 
He shared that they had done a beautiful job renovating the second floor of ATAC to make it a
welcoming community environment for LGBTQ youth. 
He went on to thank the Traffic Commission for approving a lighted crosswalk at Frost Street
and Edgell Road. Lastly, he made District 3 residents aware that the RCS property on Edmunds
Road would not happen and that some adjacent parcels of land had been purchased by a
developer. He asked the Mayor to reach out to the developer to determine what was
happening in that process. 
City of Framingham  Page 17 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
Page 18
Minutes  City Council  3/18/2022
Councilor Mallach thanked all involved in turning the lights at City Hall blue and yellow in
support of the Ukrainian people. A local Ukrainian business owner said it “warmed his heart”.
Councilor Alexander reminded the Council and residents that SMOC would be opening an office
at 19 Concord Street with a ribbon cutting ceremony on March 23rd. He invited others to attend
and get to know those who do wonderful work for community members. 
Mr. Ottaviani recognized Sam Burgess, a junior at FHS, for his 3rd place in the 5K Nationals Race. 
He would be offering a citation in recognition of this great accomplishment. 
On behalf of District 9, Councilor Bryant wished everyone a happy, safe Saint Patrick’s Day and
suggested to visit the wonderful pubs and bars in District 9. She urged those to stay respectful
and safe. Councilor Cannon asked for a point-of-order twice. With respect to the current
speaker, he said that it was deeply offensive to suggest and align Saint Patrick’s Day and those
that celebrate it with the consumption of alcohol. He wished she would be more respectful
with her comments. 
Councilor Bryant continued stating that many celebrate the Saint Patrick’s Day Parade, there
was beer, and many stop into a pub. She said there was also a religious celebration of Saint
Patrick’s Day and that everyone who knows her knows she made note of what was going on. 
She apologized for not stating that quickly. Her comments continued. 
ADJOURNMENT
9:03PM Motion to adjourn made by Councilor Leombruno. Seconded by Councilor Cannon. 
ROLL CALL VOTE 11-0-0: Long, aye; Cannon, aye; Mallach, aye; Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; 
Leombruno, aye; King, aye; Alexander, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Bryant, aye; Steiner, aye. 
The meeting adjourned. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Marion Kelly
City of Framingham  Page 18 of 18  Updated 3/18/22 
