CITY COUNCIL 
GEORGE P. KING,JR., CHAIR | ADAM C. STEINER, VICE CHAIR 
NOVAL ALEXANDER | TRACEY BRYANT | MICHAEL P. CANNON |
JANET LEOMBRUNO | CHRISTINE A. LONG | LEORA MALLACH |
PHILIP R. OTTAVIANI,JR.| JOHN A. STEFANINI 
CESAR G. STEWART-MORALES 
Council Members Participating: 
George P. King, Jr., Chair 
Noval Alexander
Tracey Bryant- Remote 
Michael P. Cannon
Janet Leombruno
Christine Long - Remote 
MEMORIAL BUILDING – ROOM 113
150 CONCORD STREET, FRAMINGHAM, MA 01702
508.532.5400 – CITYCOUNCIL@FRAMINGHAMMA.GOV 
MINUTES: JANUARY 4, 2022
BLUMER COMMUNITY ROOM 
REMOTE 
7:00PM
APPROVED
Leora Mallach
Philip R. Ottaviani, Jr. 
John A. Stefanini
Adam Steiner- Remote
Cesar G. Stewart-Morales-Remote
Staff Participating: Michael Tusino, Chief Operating Officer
******************************************************
CALL TO ORDER 
7:00PM Chairman King called to order this evenings meeting. He read the agenda as posted and
invited the public to participate. 
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Mr. Dhruba Sen, District 6, invited the public and the Council to attend a vigil for democracy on
Thursday January 6th at 6pm in Downtown Framingham. This event is cosponsored by the
League of Women Voters, the Unitarian Universalist Church and other organizations. The vigil
will mark the events of insurrection in the country’s capital on January 6th of last year. 
Ms. Nicole Doak notified the public that the Framingham Corona Virus Outreach Group has
launched a monetary and mask initiative to provide KN95 or KF masks for students in the
Framingham Public Schools to help block the spread of the Omicron variant. She asked that
this stop-gap effort be met with support of the City. She asked that the City and or the Schools
provide these types of masks as soon as possible for all students who are in close quarters citing
that the variant spreads quickest amongst this group. 
PUBLIC HEARINGS/DISCUSSIONS
City of Framingham  Page 1 of 5  Updated 1/5/22
Page 2
Minutes  City Council  1/5/2022
Upon Request of the Assistant CFO, a request for authorization of audit engagement
Chairman King explained that the Council was made responsible for an annual audit by the creation
of the Charter. The Finance Subcommittee reviewed this request at the FSC meeting on January 3rd 
and is asking for a reauthorization of a 3-year period. 
Mr. Stefanini moved said authorization. Seconded by Mr. Cannon. Mr. Stefanini went on to
comment that Article 10, Section 8 of the Charter recommended a performance audit. He said that
the responsibility of audit was given to the City Council and no one was hired for the Auditor
position. He suggested to Mr. Tusino, Chief Operating Officer, that this be done and that it would be
helpful for department heads going forward. 
Mr. King noted these are two separate issues. First, he said, the request of audit engagement is
required by state law. The second issue he said, is that the auditing position was funded and can be
filled, but not hired for and speculated that it necessary to look at the description and title of the
role. 
Discussion continued. VOTE 11-0-0: Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; 
Cannon, aye; Alexander, aye; Mallach, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye; Steiner, 
aye. The Council reauthorized the audit engagement for a 3-year period. 
Upon Request of the Finance Subcommittee, aReport with regard to requests of the Mayor 
Mr. Steiner, Chairman of the Finance Subcommittee, gave the Council an update on the first requests
made by Mayor Sisitsky and his administration. The Mayor participated in the Finance Subcommittee
meeting on January 3rd and shared his request for $119, 400; 
•  $55K for a Human Resource Department Head for the remainder of FY22. The annual salary for
this role is $125K. 
•  $55K for a Director of Community and Economic Development (often referred to as a Planning
Director) for the remainder of FY22. The annual salary for this role is $125K and was not
previously funded. 
•  $9,400 is for the CFO department salary increase. The salary is raised to $180K annually and is
not outside of the salary range for this position. The administration felt it is necessary to offer
this amount to obtain a highly qualified director. 
The Finance Subcommittee voted 5-0-0 to support the Mayor’s request for these positions. Mr. 
Steiner motioned to authorize the $119,400 be transferred from the Reserve Fund to: $55K
Human Resources; $55K Director of Community and Economic Development; $9,400 CFO
Department. Seconded by Mr. Ottaviani. 
Discussion followed. Ms. Bryant noted the positions were cut and are now being reinstated. She
believes the Mayor is correct in asking for these funds. Mr. Cannon noted that the intention of
the Council was to reinstate the funds upon receipt of a viable plan for the Community and
Economic Development Department and the Human Resources Department from the previous
administration. Ms. Bryant spoke over Mr. King as she was not recognized for further comment. 
She continued. Mr. King gaveled and asked her to wait to be recognized. Mr. Cannon added he
City of Framingham  Page 2 of 5  Updated 1/5/22 
Page 3
Minutes  City Council  1/5/2022
is optimistic about a detailed plan for these departments being brought forth by Mayor Sisitsky
and his administration highlighting Economic Development will be a focus. 
No further discussion. VOTE 11-0-0: Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; 
Cannon, aye; Alexander, aye; Mallach, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye; 
Steiner, aye. The Council approved the Mayor’s request of transfer of $119,400 from the
Reserve Fund to fund to Human Resources, Community and Economic Development, and the
CFO Departments. 
Order 2022-002 - Upon request of Councilor Stefanini to refer an ordinance to provide Adult
Use marijuana licenses for up to two Medical Use licensees to the Ordinances & Rules
Subcommittee 
Mr. Stefanini, Chairman of the Ordinance and Rules Subcommittee, shared that he met with
Attorney Zuretti and Mr. Kezer to compile information about Framingham’s marijuana licenses. 
According to them, there are 2, possibly 3, medical marijuana licenses that by law are entitled
to adult use retail licenses. Mr. Stefanini explained that the previous administration authorized
all 6 of the licenses and that by either litigation or by the council’sactions, there are likely to be
up to 3 more adult use/retail licenses that must grant. 
He motioned it be sent to the Ordinance and Rules subcommittee in an effort to fulfill the
request of the previous administration and avoid litigation and to solve the problem. 
Seconded by Ms. Leombruno. VOTE 11-0-0: Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; King, aye; 
Leombruno, aye; Cannon, aye; Alexander, aye; Mallach, aye; Stewart-Morales, aye; Long, aye; 
Bryant, aye; Steiner, aye. The Council approved the referral of providing Adult Use marijuana
licenses for up to two medical use licensees to the Ordinance and Rules Subcommittee. 
Approve 2022 meeting calendar
Chairman King asked the Council if they wanted to discuss now, or wait until the reorganization. 
Ms. Long suggested waiting. Upon no objections, this item will be placed on the agenda
immediately following the reorganization of the City Council. 
Mr. King explained how seats will be placed as a result of the reorganization. 
UPDATE FROM THE MAYOR
Mr. Tusino, Chief Operating Officer, delivered a brief update. 
Ms. Louise Miller has been hired as the Chief Financial Officer and will begin on January 24th.
Monday, the Mayor called a meeting with the Health Department to get the COVID test kits out. In
collaboration with the Health Department and the School Department they will be distributed quickly. 
Mayor Sisitsky is also in contact with MEMA to obtain more test kits and the Fire Chief will attend a
webinar to obtain more information. 
City of Framingham  Page 3 of 5  Updated 1/5/22 
Page 4
Minutes  City Council  1/5/2022
The Mayor held his first division head meeting to discuss policy, procedure, and protocols. He was also
briefed by the Police and Fire Chiefs on various issues within those departments. In addition, he met
with the acting DPW director to discuss the upcoming possible storm on this Friday. 
It is Mayor Sisitsky’ s intention to meet as many City employees as possible over the next few weeks. 
Today he participated in the activation of the 2021 Pierce Enforcer Fire Engine at the Nobscot Station. 
This engine replaced a 2010 engine and will service the north-east quadrant of Framingham. 
Mr. Alexander asked Mr. Tusoni if the City is being mindful to ensure that the test kits provided by the
State are not expired as had been reported in the news recently? Mr. Tusoni replied that he would
remind the Health Department to double check the expiration dates before distribution. 
Ms. Bryant asked which community agencies are receiving the test kits for distribution? Mr. Tusoni
apologized he did not have the list, but that there are 20 or so agencies helping. Ms. Bryant said she
would contact the Health Department for the names. 
Mr. Stewart- Morales asked what is the best way to communicate with the Mayor and will there be a
schedule for council members to meet with him? Mr. Tusoni indicated it is still being determined how to
best implement that, but in the short-term, council members may reach out to the Mayor via email. He
noted that the Mayor’s staff is helping monitor incoming emails and acting upon them as appropriate. 
REPORT OF THE COUNCIL CHAIR
Chairman King reiterated that the council will reorganize two weeks from tonight. 
REPORTS OF SUBCOMMITTEES
None to report. 
REPORT OF COUNCILORS
Mr. Cannon congratulated and recognized Ms. Dawn Dellasanta, the new Head of the Christa McAuliffe
Library branch. “She is a fantastic steward of our community”, said Cannon. He briefly explained that
Ms. Dellasanta’smother came here from Germany and was tutored by Christa McAuliffe in high-school. 
He commended her leadership and wished her well. 
Mr. Alexander thanked the current and past administration and council, and the community for reaching
out to him and his family upon the loss of his mother. 
Mr. Ottaviani shared with the council that he had spoken with Joey Gurtin, a District 6 constituent. Mr. 
Gurtin is involved with the Medical Reserve Corps and they have held over 150 clinics to help during the
pandemic. He highlighted one at the Brazilian Center by Saint T’sthat served more than 400 people. 
One concern to learn from is that a clinic or services were not widely available over the school winter
break. He noted the volunteers of the MRC are not paid and offered thanks to them, to nurses and
doctors as well at this time. 
Ms. Bryant also recognized Ms. Dellasanta and her qualifications. She complimented Mr. Alexander’s
mother’s work within the community. He thanked her. She thinks the Dog Park will be good and
thanked various departments, committees, and agencies for their efforts. 
City of Framingham  Page 4 of 5  Updated 1/5/22 
Page 5
Minutes  City Council  1/5/2022
APPROVAL OF MINUTES 
11/30/2021, 12/7/2021, 12/21/2021
Motion to approve as submitted made by Mr. Cannon. Seconded by Ms. Leombruno. VOTE 10-0-1: 
Stefanini, aye; Ottaviani, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Cannon, aye; Alexander, aye; 
Stewart-Morales, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye; Steiner, aye; Mallach, abstain. The council
approved minutes of meetings noted above. 
ADJOURNMENT
7:36PM Motion to adjourn by Mr. Ottaviani. Seconded by Mr. Stefanini. VOTE 11-0-0: Stefanini, aye; 
Ottaviani, aye; King, aye; Leombruno, aye; Cannon, aye; Alexander, aye; Mallach, aye; Stewart -
Morales, aye; Long, aye; Bryant, aye; Steiner, aye. Meeting adjourned. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Marion Kelly
City of Framingham  Page 5 of 5  Updated 1/5/22 
