BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
The past - a new method that changed the forensic world
The technological evolution of forensic DNA profiling
Lineage markers in forensic analysis
Benefits and risks of forensic DNA databases
The future of forensic DNA analysis
Competing interests
References
Page 1
Roewer Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:22
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/22
REVIEW  Open Access
DNA fingerprinting in forensics: past, present, future
Lutz Roewer
Abstract
DNA fingerprinting, one of the great discoveries of the late 20th century, has revolutionized forensic investigations.
This review briefly recapitulates 30 years of progress in forensic DNA analysis which helps to convict criminals,
exonerate the wrongly accused, and identify victims of crime, disasters, and war. Current standard methods based
on short tandem repeats (STRs) as well as lineage markers (Y chromosome, mitochondrial DNA) are covered and
applications are illustrated by casework examples. Benefits and risks of expanding forensic DNA databases are
discussed and we ask what the future holds for forensic DNA fingerprinting.
Keywords: DNA fingerprinting, Forensic DNA profiling, Short tandem repeat, Lineage markers, Ancestry informative
markers, Forensic DNA database, Privacy rights, Short tandem repeat
The past - a new method that changed the
forensic world
‘“I’ve found it! I’ve found it”,  he shouted, running to-
wards us with a test-tube in his hand. “I have found a
re-agent which is precipitated by hemoglobin, and by
nothing else”,’  says Sherlock Holmes to Watson in
Arthur Conan Doyle’s first novel A study in Scarlet
from1886 and later: ‘Now we have the Sherlock Holmes’
test, and there will no longer be any difficulty […]. Had
this test been invented, there are hundreds of men now
walking the earth who would long ago have paid the
penalty of their crimes’ [1].
The Eureka shout shook England again and was heard
around the world when roughly 100 years later Alec
Jeffreys at the University of Leicester, in UK, found
extraordinarily variable and heritable patterns from repeti-
tive DNA analyzed with multi-locus probes. Not being
Holmes he refrained to call the method after himself but
‘DNA fingerprinting’ [2]. Under this name his invention
opened up a new area of science. The technique proved
applicable in many biological disciplines, namely in
diversity and conservation studies among species, and in
clinical and anthropological studies. But the true polit-
ical and social dimension of genetic fingerprinting be-
came apparent far beyond academic circles when the
first applications in civil and criminal cases were pub-
lished. Forensic genetic fingerprinting can be defined as
Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:lutz.roewer@charite.de"] lutz.roewer@charite.de
Department of Forensic Genetics, Institute of Legal Medicine and Forensic
Sciences, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany 
the comparison of the DNA in a person’s nucleated cells
with that identified in biological matter found at the
scene of a crime or with the DNA of another person for
the purpose of identification or exclusion. The applica-
tion of these techniques introduces new factual evidence
to criminal investigations and court cases. However, the
first case (March 1985) was not strictly a forensic case
but one of immigration [3]. The first application of DNA
fingerprinting saved a young boy from deportation and
the method thus captured the public’s sympathy. In Alec
Jeffreys’ words: ‘If our first case had been forensic I be-
lieve it would have been challenged and the process may
well have been damaged in the courts’ [4]. The forensic
implications of genetic fingerprinting were nevertheless
obvious, and improvements of the laboratory process led
already in 1987 to the very first application in a forensic
case. Two teenage girls had been raped and murdered
on different occasions in nearby English villages, one in
1983, and the other in 1986. Semen was obtained from
each of the two crime scenes. The case was spectacular
because it surprisingly excluded a suspected man,
Richard Buckland, and matched another man, Colin
Pitchfork, who attempted to evade the DNA dragnet by
persuading a friend to give a sample on his behalf.
Pitchfork confessed to committing the crimes after he
was confronted with the evidence that his DNA profile
matched the trace DNA from the two crime scenes. For
2 years the Lister Institute of Leicester where Jeffreys
was employed was the only laboratory in the world doing
© 2013 Roewer; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication
waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise
stated.
Page 2
Roewer Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:22
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/22 
Page 2 of 10
this work. But it was around 1987 when companies such as
Cellmark, the academic medico-legal institutions around
the world, the national police, law enforcement agencies,
and so on started to evaluate, improve upon, and employ
the new tool. The years after the discovery of DNA finger-
printing were characterized by a mood of cooperation
and interdisciplinary research. None of the many young
researchers who has been there will ever forget the DNA
fingerprint congresses which were held on five continents,
in Bern (1990),  in Belo Horizonte (1992),  in Hyderabad
(1994), in Melbourne (1996), and in Pt. Elizabeth (1999),
and then shut down with the good feeling that the job was
done. Everyone read the Fingerprint News distributed for
free by the University of Cambridge since 1989 (Figure 1).
This affectionate little periodical published non-stylish
short articles directly from the bench without impact
factors and resumed networking activities in the different
fields of applications. The period in the 1990s was the
golden research age of DNA fingerprinting succeeded
by two decades of engineering, implementation, and
high-throughput application. From the Foreword of
Alec Jeffreys in Fingerprint News,  Issue 1, January
1989: ‘Dear Colleagues, […] I hope that Fingerprint
News will cover all aspects of hypervariable DNA and 
its application, including both multi-locus and single-
locus systems, new methods for studying DNA poly-
morphisms, the population genetics of variable loci
and the statistical analysis of fingerprint data, as well
as providing useful technical tips for getting good
DNA profiles […]. May your bands be variable’ [5].
Jeffreys’ original technology, now obsolete for forensic
use, underwent important developments in terms of the
basic methodology, that is, from Southern blot to PCR,
from radioactive to fluorescent labels, from slab gels to
capillary electrophoresis. As the technique became more
sensitive, the handling simple and automated and the
statistical treatment straightforward, DNA profiling, as
the method was renamed, entered the forensic routine
laboratories around the world in storm. But, what counts
in the Pitchfork case and what still counts today is the
process to get DNA identification results accepted in
legal proceedings. Spectacular fallacies, from the histor-
ical 1989 case of People vs. Castro in New York [6] to
the case against Knox and Sollecito in Italy (2007–2013)
where literally DNA fingerprinting was on trial [7], dis-
closed severe insufficiencies in the technical protocols
and especially in the DNA evidence interpretation and
raised nolens volens doubts on the scientific and eviden-
tiary value of forensic DNA fingerprinting. These cases
are rare but frequent enough to remind each new gener-
ation of forensic analysts, researchers, or private sector
employees that DNA evidence is nowadays an important
part of factual evidence and needs thus intense scrutiny
for all parts of the DNA analysis and interpretation
process.
In the following I will briefly describe the development
of DNA fingerprinting to a standardized investigative
method for court use which has since 1984 led to the
conviction of thousands of criminals and to the exoner-
ation of many wrongfully suspected or convicted individ-
uals [8].  Genetic fingerprinting per se could of course
not reduce the criminal rate in any of the many coun-
tries in the world, which employ this method. But DNA
profiling adds hard scientific value to the evidence and
strengthens thus (principally) the credibility of the legal
system.
Figure 1 Cover of one of the first issues of Fingerprint News
from 1990. 
The technological evolution of forensic DNA
profiling
In the classical DNA fingerprinting method radio-
labeled DNA probes containing minisatellite [9] or
oligonucleotide sequences [10] are hybridized to DNA
that has been digested with a restriction enzyme, sepa-
rated by agarose electrophoresis and immobilized on a
membrane by Southern blotting or - in the case of the
oligonucleotide probes - immobilized directly in the
dried gel. The radio-labeled probe hybridizes to a
set of minisatellites or oligonucleotide stretches in
Page 3
Roewer Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:22
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/22 
Page 3 of 10
genomic DNA contained in restriction fragments
whose size differ because of variation in the numbers
of repeat units. After washing away excess probe the
exposure to X-ray film (autoradiography) allows these
variable fragments to be visualized, and their profiles
compared between individuals. Minisatellite probes,
called 33.6 and 33.15, were most widely used in the
UK, most parts of Europe and the USA, whereas penta-
meric (CAC)/(GTG)5 
probes were predominantly ap-
plied in Germany. These so-called multilocus probes
(MLP) detect sets of 15 to 20 variable fragments per
individual ranging from 3.5 to 20 kb in size (Figure 2).
But the multi-locus profiling method had several limi-
tations despite its successful application to crime and
kinship cases until the middle of the 1990s. Running
conditions or DNA quality issues render the exact
matching between bands often difficult. To overcome
this, forensic laboratories adhered to binning ap-
proaches [11],  where fixed or floating bins were de-
fined relative to the observed DNA fragment size, and
adjusted to the resolving power of the detection
Figure 2 Multilocus DNA Fingerprint from a large family
probed with the oligonucleotide (GTG)5 
(Courtesy of Peter
Nürnberg, Cologne Center for Genomics, Germany). 
system. Second, fragment association within one DNA
fingerprint profile is not known, leading to statistical
errors due to possible linkage between loci. Third, for
obtaining optimal profiles the method required sub-
stantial amounts of high molecular weight DNA [12]
and thus excludes the majority of crime-scene samples
from the analysis. To overcome some of these limita-
tions, single-locus profiling was developed [13]. Here a
single hypervariable locus is detected by a specific single-
locus probe (SLP) using high stringency hybridization.
Typically, four SLPs were used in a reprobing approach,
yielding eight alleles of four independent loci per individual.
This method requires only 10 ng of genomic DNA [14] and
has been validated through extensive experiments and fo-
rensic casework, and for many years provided a robust and
valuable system for individual identification. Nevertheless,
all these different restriction fragment length polymorphism
(RFLP)-based methods were still limited by the available
quality and quantity of the DNA and also hampered by
difficulties to reliably compare genetic profiles from differ-
ent sources, labs, and techniques. What was needed was
a DNA code, which could ideally be generated even from a
single nucleated cell and from highly degraded DNA, a
code, which could be rapidly generated, numerically
encrypted, automatically compared, and easily supported in
court. Indeed, starting in the early 1990s DNA fingerprint-
ing methods based on RFLP analysis were gradually sup-
planted by methods based on PCR because of the improved
sensitivity, speed, and genotyping precision [15]. Microsa-
tellites, in the forensic community usually referred to short
tandem repeats (STRs), were found to be ideally suited for
forensic applications. STR typing is more sensitive than
single-locus RFLP methods, less prone to allelic dropout
than VNTR (variable number of tandem repeat) systems
[16], and more discriminating than other PCR-based typing
methods, such as HLA-DQA1 [17]. More than 2,000 publi-
cations now detail the technology, hundreds of different
population groups have been studied, new technologies as,
for example, the miniSTRs [18] have been developed and
standard protocols have been validated in laboratories
worldwide (for an overview see [19]). Forensic DNA profil-
ing is currently performed using a panel of multi-allelic
STR markers which are structurally analogous to the ori-
ginal minisatellites but with much shorter repeat tracts and
thus easier to amplify and multiplex with PCR. Up to 30
STRs can be detected in a single capillary electrophoresis
injection generating for each individual a unique genetic
code. Basically there are two sets of STR markers comply-
ing with the standards requested by criminal databases
around the world: the European standard set of 12 STR
markers [20] and the US CODIS standard of 13 markers
[21]. Due to partial overlap, they form together a standard
of 18 STR markers in total. The incorporation of these STR
markers into commercial kits has improved the application
Page 4
Roewer Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:22
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/22 
Page 4 of 10
of these markers for all kinds of DNA evidence with repro-
ducible results from as less than three nucleated cells [22]
and extracted even from severely compromised material.
The probability that two individuals will have identical
markers at each of 13 different STR loci within their DNA
exceeds one out of a billion. If a DNA match occurs be-
tween an accused individual and a crime scene stain, the
correct courtroom expression would be that the probability
of a match if the crime-scene sample came from someone
other than the suspect (considering the random, not
closely-related man) is at most one in a billion [14]. The
uniqueness of each person’s DNA (with the exception of
monozygotic twins) and its simple numerical codification
led to the establishment of government-controlled criminal
investigation DNA databases in the developed nations
around the world, the first in 1995 in the UK [23]. When a
match is made from such a DNA database to link a crime
scene sample to an offender who has provided a DNA sam-
ple to a database that link is often referred to as a cold hit.
A cold hit is of value as an investigative lead for the police
agency to a specific suspect. China (approximately 16 mil-
lion profiles, the United States (approximately 10 million
profiles),  and the UK (approximately 6 million profiles)
maintain the largest DNA database in the world. The per-
centage of databased persons is on the increase in all coun-
tries with a national DNA database, but the proportions are
not the same by the far: whereas in the UK about 10% of
the population is in the national DNA database, the per-
centage in Germany and the Netherlands is only about
0.9% and 0.8%, respectively [24].
Lineage markers in forensic analysis
Lineage markers have special applications in forensic
genetics. Y chromosome analysis is very helpful in cases
where there is an excess of DNA from a female victim
and only a low proportion from a male perpetrator. Typ-
ical examples include sexual assault without ejaculation,
sexual assault by a vasectomized male, male DNA under
the fingernails of a victim, male ‘touch’ DNA on the skin,
and the clothing or belongings of a female victim.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is of importance for the
analyses of low level nuclear DNA samples, namely from
unidentified (typically skeletonized) remains, hair shafts
without roots, or very old specimens where only heavily
degraded DNA is available [25].  The unusual non-
recombinant mode of inheritance of Y and mtDNA
weakens the statistical weight of a match between indi-
vidual samples but makes the method efficient for the
reconstruction of the paternal or maternal relationship,
for example in mass disaster investigations [26] or in
historical reconstructions. A classic case is the identifica-
tion of two missing children of the Romanov family, the
last Russian monarchy. MtDNA analysis combined with
additional DNA testing of material from the mass grave 
near Yekaterinburg gave virtually irrefutable evidence
that the two individuals recovered from a second grave
nearby are the two missing children of the Romanov
family: the Tsarevich Alexei and one of his sisters [27].
Interestingly, a point heteroplasmy, that is, the presence
of two slightly different mtDNA haplotypes within an
individual, was found in the mtDNA of the Tsar and his
relatives, which was in 1991 a contentious finding
(Figure 3). In the early 1990s when the bones were first
analyzed, a point heteroplasmy was believed to be an ex-
tremely rare phenomenon and was not readily explain-
able. Today, the existence of heteroplasmy is understood
to be relatively common and large population databases
can be searched for its frequency at certain positions.
The mtDNA evidence in the Romanov case was under-
pinned by Y-STR analysis where a 17-locus haplotype
from the remains of Tsar Nicholas II matched exactly to
the femur of the putative Tsarevich and also to a living
Romanov relative. Other studies demonstrated that very
distant family branches can be traced back to common
ancestors who lived hundreds of years ago [28].
Currently forensic Y chromosome typing has gained
wide acceptance with the introduction of highly sensi-
tive panels of up to 27 STRs including rapidly mutating
markers [29].  Figure 4 demonstrates the impressive
gain of the discriminative power with increasing num-
bers of Y-STRs. The determination of the match prob-
ability between Y-STR or mtDNA profiles via the
mostly applied counting method [30] requires large,
representative, and quality-assessed databases of hap-
lotypes sampled in appropriate reference populations,
because the multiplication of individual allele frequen-
cies is not valid as for independently inherited auto-
somal STRs [31].  Other estimators for the haplotype
match probability than the count estimator have been
proposed and evaluated using empirical data [32],
however, the biostatistical interpretation remains com-
plicated and controversial and research continues. The
largest forensic Y chromosome haplotype database is the
YHRD ([URL: "http://www.yhrd.org"] www.yhrd.org) hosted at the Institute of Legal
Medicine and Forensic Sciences in Berlin, Germany, with
about 115,000 haplotypes sampled in 850 populations
[33].  The largest forensic mtDNA database is EMPOP
([URL: "http://www.empop.org"] www.empop.org) hosted at the Institute of Legal Medi-
cine in Innsbruck, Austria, with about 33,000 haplotypes
sampled in 63 countries [34].  More than 235 institutes
have actually submitted data to the YHRD and 105 to
EMPOP, a compelling demonstration of the level of net-
working activities between forensic science institutes
around the world. That additional intelligence information
is potentially derivable from such large datasets becomes
obvious when a target DNA profile is searched against a
collection of geographically annotated Y chromosomal or
mtDNA profiles. Because linearly inherited markers have
Page 5
Roewer Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:22
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/22 
Page 5 of 10
Figure 3 Screenshot of the 16169 C/T heteroplasmy present in Tsar Nicholas II using both forward and reverse sequencing primers
(Courtesy of Michael Coble, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, USA).
a highly non-random geographical distribution the
target profile shares characteristic variants with geo-
graphical neighbors due to common ancestry [35].
This link between genetics, genealogy, and geography
could provide investigative leads for investigators
in non-suspect cases as illustrated in the following
case [36]: 
In 2002, a woman was found with a smashed skull
and covered in blood but still alive in her Berlin
apartment. Her life was saved by intensive medical
care. Later she told the police that she had let a man
into her apartment, and he had immediately attacked
her. The man was subletting the apartment next door.
The evidence collected at the scene and in the
Figure 4 Correlation between the number of analyzed Y-STRs and the number of different haplotypes detected in a global population
sample of 18,863 23-locus haplotypes.
Page 6
Roewer Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:22
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/22 
Page 6 of 10
neighboring apartment included a baseball cap, two
towels, and a glass. The evidence was sent to the state
police laboratory in Berlin, Germany and was
analyzed with conventional autosomal STR profiling.
Stains on the baseball cap and on one towel revealed
a pattern consistent with that of the tenant, whereas
two different male DNA profiles were found on a
second bath towel and on the glass. The tenant was
eliminated as a suspect because he was absent at the
time of the offense, but two unknown men (different
in autosomal but identical in Y-STRs) who shared the
apartment were suspected. Unfortunately, the apart-
ment had been used by many individuals of both
European and African nationalities, so the initial
search for the two men became very difficult. The po-
lice obtained a court order for Y-STR haplotyping to
gain information about the unknown men’s popula-
tion affiliation. Prerequisites for such biogeographic
analyses are large reference databases containing Y-
STR haplotypes also typed for ancestry informative
single nucleotide markers (SNP) markers from hun-
dreds of different populations. The YHRD proved use-
ful to infer the population origin of the unknown
man. The database inquiry indicated a patrilineage of
Southern European ancestry, whereas an African 
descent was unlikely (Figure 5). The police were able
to track down the tenant in Italy, and with his help,
establish the identity of one of the unknown men,
who was also Italian. When questioning this man, the
police used the information retrieved from Y-STR
profiling that he had shared the apartment in Berlin
with a paternal relative. This relative was identified as
his nephew. Because of the close-knit relationship
within the family, this information would probably
not have been easily retrieved from the uncle with-
out the prior knowledge. The nephew was suspected
of the attempted murder in Berlin. He was later
arrested in Italy, where he had committed another
violent robbery.
Information on the biogeographic origin of an un-
known DNA could also be retrieved from a number
of ancestry informative SNPs (AISNPs) on autosomes
or insertion/deletion polymorphisms [37,38] but per-
haps even better from so-called mini-haplotypes with
only <10 SNPs spanning small molecular intervals (<10 kb)
with very low recombination among sites [39]. Each ‘mini-
hap’ behaves like a locus with multiple haplotype lineages
(alleles) that have evolved from the ancestral human haplo-
type. All copies of each distinct haplotype are essentially
Figure 5 Screenshot from the YHRD depicting the radiation of a 9-locus haplotype belonging to haplogroup J in Southern Europe.
Page 7
Roewer Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:22
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/22 
Page 7 of 10
identical by descent. Thus, they fall like Y and mtDNA into
the lineage-informative category of genetic markers and are
thus useful for connecting an individual to a family or an-
cestral genetic pool.
Benefits and risks of forensic DNA databases
The steady growth in the size of forensic DNA data-
bases raises issues on the criteria of inclusion and
retention and doubts on the efficiency, commensur-
ability, and infringement of privacy of such large per-
sonal data collections. In contrast to the past, not only
serious but all crimes are subject to DNA analysis gen-
erating millions and millions of DNA profiles, many of
which are stored and continuously searched in national
DNA databases. And as always when big datasets are
gathered new mining procedures based on correlation
became feasible. For example, ‘Familial DNA Database
Searching’  is based on near matches between a crime
stain and a databased person, which could be a near
relative of the true perpetrator [40].  Again the first
successful familial search was conducted in UK in 2004
and led to the conviction of Craig Harman of man-
slaughter. Craig Harman was convicted because of
partial matches from Harman’s brother. The strategy
was subsequently applied in some US states but is not
conducted at the national level. It was during a dragnet
that it first became public knowledge that the German
police were also already involved in familial search
strategies. In a little town in Northern Germany the
police arrested a young man accused of rape because
they had analyzed the DNA of his two brothers who
had participated in the dragnet. Because of partial
matches between crime scene DNA profiles and these
brothers they had identified the suspect. In contrast to
other countries, the Federal Constitutional Court of
Germany decided in December 2012 against the future
court use of this kind of evidence.
Civil rights and liberties are crucial for democratic
societies and plans to extend forensic DNA databases
to whole populations need to be condemned. Alec
Jeffreys early on has questioned the way UK police
collects DNA profiles, holding not only convicted indi-
viduals but also arrestees without conviction, suspects
cleared in an investigation, or even innocent people
never charged with an offence [41]. He also criticized
that large national databases as the NDNAD of
England and Wales are likely skewed socioeconomi-
cally. It has been pointed out that most of the matches
refer to minor offences; according to GeneWatch in
Germany 63% of the database matches provided are re-
lated to theft while <3% related to rape and murder.
The changes to the UK database came in the 2012’s
Protection of Freedoms bill, following a major defeat at
the European Court of Human Rights in 2008. As of 
May 2013 1.1 million profiles (of about 7 million) had
been destroyed to remove innocent people’s profiles
from the database. In 2005 the incoming government
of Portugal proposed a DNA database containing sam-
ples from every Portuguese citizen. Following public
objections, the government limited the database to
criminals. A recent study on the public views on DNA
database-related matters showed that a more critical
attitude towards wider national databases is correlated
with the age and education of the respondents [42]. A
deeper public awareness on the benefits and risks of
very large DNA collections need to be built and
common ethical and privacy standards for the develop-
ment and governance of DNA databases need to be
adopted where the citizen’s perspectives are taken into
consideration.
The future of forensic DNA analysis
The forensic community, as it always has, is facing the
question in which direction the DNA Fingerprint tech-
nology will be developed. A growing number of col-
leagues are convinced that DNA sequencing will soon
replace methods based on fragment length analysis and
there are good arguments for this position. With the
emergence of current Next Generation Sequencing
(NGS) technologies, the body of forensically useful
data can potentially be expanded and analyzed quickly
and cost-efficiently. Given the enormous number of
potentially informative DNA loci - which of those
should be sequenced? In my opinion there are four
types of polymorphisms which deserve a place on the
analytic device: an array of 20–30 autosomal STRs
which complies with the standard sets used in the na-
tional and international databases around the world, a
highly discriminating set of Y chromosomal markers,
individual and signature polymorphisms in the control
and coding region of the mitochondrial genome [43],
as well as ancestry and phenotype inference SNPs [44].
Indeed, a promising NGS approach with the simultan-
eous analysis of 10 STRs, 386 autosomal ancestry
and phenotype informative SNPs, and the complete
mtDNA genome has been presented recently [45]
(Figure 6).  Currently, the rather high error rates are
preventing NGS technologies from being used in fo-
rensic routine [46], but it is foreseeable that the tech-
nology will be improved in terms of accuracy and
reliability. Time is another essential factor in police
investigations which will be considerably reduced in
future applications of DNA profiling. Commercial in-
struments capable of producing a database-compatible
DNA profile within 2 hours exist [47] and are currently
under validation for law enforcement use. The hands-
free ‘swab in - profile out’  process consists of auto-
mated extraction, amplification, separation, detection,
Page 8
Roewer Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:22
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/22 
Page 8 of 10
Figure 6 Schematic overview of Haloplex targeting and NGS analysis of a large number of markers simultaneously. Sequence data are
shown for samples from two individuals and the D3S1358 STR marker, the rs1335873 SNP marker, and a part of the HVII region of mtDNA
(Courtesy of Marie Allen, Uppsala University, Sweden).
and allele calling without human intervention. In the
US the promise of on-site DNA analysis has already
altered the way in which DNA could be collected in
future. In a recent decision the Supreme court of the
United States held that ‘when officers make an arrest
supported by probable cause to hold for a serious
offense and bring the suspect to the station to be
detained in custody, taking and analyzing a cheek
swab of the arrestee’s DNA is, like fingerprinting and
photographing, a legitimate police booking procedure’
(Maryland v. Alonzo Jay King, Jr.). In other words, DNA
can be taken from any arrestee, rightly or wrongly
arrested, as a part of the normal booking procedure.
Twenty-eight states and the federal government now
take DNA swabs after arrests with the aim of comparing
profiles to the CODIS database, creating links to unsolved
cases and to identify the person (Associated Press, 3 June
2013).  Driven by the rapid technological progress DNA
actually becomes another metric of quick identification. It
remains to be seen whether rapid DNA technologies will
alter the way in which DNA is collected by police in other
countries. In Germany for example the DNA collection is
still regulated by the code of the criminal procedure and
the use of DNA profiling for identification purposes only
is excluded. Because national legislations are basically so
different, a worldwide system to interrogate DNA profiles
from criminal justice databases seems currently a very dis-
tant project. 
At present the forensic DNA technology directly affects
the lives of millions people worldwide. The general accept-
ance of this technique is still high, reports on the DNA
identification of victims of the 9/11 terrorist attacks [48],
of natural disasters as the Hurricane Katrina [49], and of
recent wars (for example, in former Yugoslavia [50])
and dictatorship (for example, in Argentina [51]) impress
the public in the same way as police investigators in
white suits securing DNA evidence at a broken door.
CSI watchers know, and even professionals believe, that
DNA will inevitably solve the case just following the
motto Do Not Ask, it’s DNA, stupid! But the affirmative
view changes and critical questions are raised. It should
not be assumed that the benefits of forensic DNA
fingerprinting will necessarily override the social and
ethical costs [52].
This short article leaves many of such questions
unanswered. Alfred Nobel used his fortune to insti-
tute a prize for work ‘in ideal direction’. What would
be the ideal direction in which DNA fingerprinting,
one of the great discoveries in recent history, should
be developed?
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.
Received: 8 October 2013 Accepted: 8 October 2013
Published: 18 November 2013
Page 9
Roewer Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:22
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/22 
Page 9 of 10
References
1.  Doyle AC: A study in scarlet, Beeton’s Christmas Annual. London, New York
and Melbourne: Ward, Lock & Co; 1887.
2.  Jeffreys AJ, Wilson V, Thein SL: Individual-specific “fingerprints” of Human
DNA. Nature 1985, 314:67–74.
3.  Jeffreys AJ, Brookfield JF, Semeonoff R: Positive identification of an
immigration test-case using human DNA fingerprints. Nature 1985,
317:818–819.
4.  University of Leicester Bulletin Supplement August/September 2004.
5.  Jeffreys AJ: Foreword. Fingerprint News 1989, 1:1.
6.  Lander ES: DNA fingerprinting on trial. Nature 1989, 339:501–505.
7.  Balding DJ: Evaluation of mixed-source, low-template DNA profiles in fo-
rensic science. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013, 110:12241–12246.
8.  The innocence project. [[URL: "http://www.innocenceproject.org"] www.innocenceproject.org].
9.  Jeffreys AJ, Wilson V, Thein SL: Hypervariable ‘minisatellite’ regions in
human DNA. Nature 1985, 314:67–73.
10. Schäfer R, Zischler H, Birsner U, Becker A, Epplen JT: Optimized oligonucleotide
probes for DNA fingerprinting. Electrophoresis 1988, 9:369–374.
11. Budowle B, Giusti AM, Waye JS, Baechtel FS, Fourney RM, Adams DE, Presley
LA, Deadman HA, Monson KL: Fixed-bin analysis for statistical evaluation
of continuous distributions of allelic data from VNTR loci, for use in
forensic comparisons. Am J Hum Genet 1991, 48:841–855.
12. Roewer L, Nürnberg P, Fuhrmann E, Rose M, Prokop O, Epplen JT: Stain
analysis using oligonucleotide probes specific for simple repetitive DNA
sequences. Forensic Sci Int 1990, 47:59–70.
13. Wong Z, Wilson V, Patel I, Povey S, Jeffreys AJ: Characterization of a panel
of highly variable minisatellites cloned from human DNA. Ann Hum Genet
1987, 51:269–288.
14. Jobling MA, Hurles ME, Tyler-Smith C: Chapter 15: Identity and identifi-
cation. In Human Evolutionary Genetics. Abingdon: Garland Science;
2003:474–497.
15. Edwards A, Civitello A, Hammond HA, Caskey CT: DNA typing and genetic
mapping with trimeric and tetrameric tandem repeats. Am J Hum Genet
1991, 49:746–756.
16. Budowle B, Chakraborty R, Giusti AM, Eisenberg AJ, Allen RC: Analysis of
the VNTR locus D1S80 by the PCR followed by high-resolution PAGE. Am
J Hum Genet 1991, 48:137–144.
17. Saiki RK, Bugawan TL, Horn GT, Mullis KB, Erlich HA: Analysis of
enzymatically amplified beta-globin and HLA-DQ alpha DNA with allele-
specific oligonucleotide probes. Nature 1986, 324:163–166.
18. Coble MD, Butler JM: Characterization of new miniSTR loci to aid analysis
of degraded DNA. J Forensic Sci 2005, 50:43–53.
19. Butler JM: Forensic DNA Typing: Biology, Technology, and Genetics of STR
Markers. 2nd edition. New York: Elsevier Academic Press; 2005.
20. Gill P, Fereday L, Morling N, Schneider PM: The evolution of DNA
databases - Recommendations for new European STR loci. Forensic Sci Int
2006, 156:242–244.
21. Budowle B, Moretti TR, Niezgoda SJ, Brown BL: CODIS and PCR-based short
tandem repeat loci: law enforcement tools, Proceedings of the Second
European Symposium on Human Identification. Madison, WI: Promega
Corporation; 1998:73–88.
22. Nagy M, Otremba P, Krüger C, Bergner-Greiner S, Anders P, Henske B, Prinz
M, Roewer L: Optimization and validation of a fully automated silica-
coated magnetic beads purification technology in forensics. Forensic Sci
Int 2005, 152:13–22.
23. Martin PD, Schmitter H, Schneider PM: A brief history of the formation of
DNA databases in forensic science within Europe. Forensic Sci Int 2001,
119:225–231.
24. ENFSI survey on DNA Databases in Europe. December 2011, published
2012-08-18. [[URL: "http://www.enfsi.eu"] www.enfsi.eu].
25. Roewer L, Parson W: Internet accessible population databases: YHRD and
EMPOP. In Encyclopedia of Forensic Sciences. 2nd edition. Edited by Siegel
JA, Saukko PJ. Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V; 2013.
26. Calacal GC, Delfin FC, Tan MM, Roewer L, Magtanong DL, Lara MC, Rd F,
De Ungria MC: Identification of exhumed remains of fire tragedy victims
using conventional methods and autosomal/Y-chromosomal short
tandem repeat DNA profiling. Am J Forensic Med Pathol 2005, 26:285–291.
27. Coble MD, Loreille OM, Wadhams MJ, Edson SM, Maynard K, Meyer CE,
Niederstätter H, Berger C, Berger B, Falsetti AB, Gill P, Parson W, Finelli LN:
Mystery solved: the identification of the two missing Romanov children
using DNA analysis. PLoS One 2009, 4:e4838. 
28. Haas C, Shved N, Rühli FJ, Papageorgopoulou C, Purps J, Geppert M,
Willuweit S, Roewer L, Krawczak M: Y-chromosomal analysis identifies the
skeletal remains of Swiss national hero Jörg Jenatsch (1596–1639).
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2013, 7:610–617.
29. Ballantyne KN, Keerl V, Wollstein A, Choi Y, Zuniga SB, Ralf A, Vermeulen M,
de Knijff P, Kayser M: A new future of forensic Y-chromosome analysis:
rapidly mutating Y-STRs for differentiating male relatives and paternal
lineages. Forensic Sci Int Genet 2012, 6:208–218.
30. Budowle B, Sinha SK, Lee HS, Chakraborty R: Utility of Y-chromosome short
tandem repeat haplotypes in forensic applications. Forensic Sci Rev 2003,
15:153–164.
31. Roewer L, Kayser M, de Knijff P, Anslinger K, Betz A, Caglià A, Corach D,
Füredi S, Henke L, Hidding M, Kärgel HJ, Lessig R, Nagy M, Pascali VL, Parson
W, Rolf B, Schmitt C, Szibor R, Teifel-Greding J, Krawczak M: A new method
for the evaluation of matches in non-recombining genomes: application
to Y-chromosomal short tandem repeat (STR) haplotypes in European
males. Forensic Sci Int 2000, 114:31–43.
32. Andersen MM, Caliebe A, Jochens A, Willuweit S, Krawczak M: Estimating
trace-suspect match probabilities for singleton Y-STR haplotypes using
coalescent theory. Forensic Sci Int Genet 2013, 7:264–271.
33. Willuweit S, Roewer L, International Forensic Y Chromosome User Group: Y
chromosome haplotype reference database (YHRD): update. Forensic Sci
Int Genet 2007, 1:83–87.
34. Parson W, Dür A: EMPOP - a forensic mtDNA database. Forensic Sci Int
Genet 2007, 1:88–92.
35. Roewer L, Croucher PJ, Willuweit S, Lu TT, Kayser M, Lessig R, de Knijff P,
Jobling MA, Tyler-Smith C, Krawczak M: Signature of recent historical
events in the European Y-chromosomal STR haplotype distribution.
Hum Genet 2005, 116:279–291.
36. Roewer L: Male DNA Fingerprints say more. Profiles in DNA 2004, 7:14–15.
37. Phillips C, Fondevila M, Lareu MV: A 34-plex autosomal SNP single base
extension assay for ancestry investigations. Methods Mol Biol 2012,
830:109–126.
38. Pereira R, Phillips C, Pinto N, Santos C, dos Santos SE, Amorim A, Carracedo
A, Gusmão L: Straightforward inference of ancestry and admixture
proportions through ancestry-informative insertion deletion multiplex-
ing. PLoS One 2012, 7:e29684.
39. Pakstis AJ, Fang R, Furtado MR, Kidd JR, Kidd KK: Mini-haplotypes as
lineage informative SNPs and ancestry inference SNPs. Eur J Hum Genet
2012, 20:1148–1154.
40. Maguire CN, McCallum LA, Storey C, Whitaker JP: Familial searching: A
specialist forensic DNA profiling service utilising the National DNA
Database® to identify unknown offenders via their relatives - The UK
experience. Forensic Sci Int Genet 2013, 8:1–9.
41. Jeffreys A: Genetic Fingerprinting. Nat Med 2005, 11:1035–1039.
42. Machado H, Silva S: Would you accept having your DNA profile inserted
in the National Forensic DNA database? Why? Results of a questionnaire
applied in Portugal. Forensic Sci Int Genet 2013. Epub ahead of print.
43. Parson W, Strobl C, Strobl C, Huber G, Zimmermann B, Gomes SM, Souto L,
Fendt L, Delport R, Langit R, Wootton S, Lagacé R, Irwin J: Evaluation of
next generation mtGenome sequencing using the Ion Torrent Personal
Genome Machine (PGM). Forensic Sci Int Genet 2013, 7:632–639.
44. Budowle B, van Daal A: Forensically relevant SNP classes. Biotechniques
2008, 44:603–608. 610.
45. Allen M, Nilsson M, Havsjö M, Edwinsson L, Granemo J, Bjerke M:
Haloplex and MiSeq NGS for simultaneous analysis of 10 STRs, 386 SNPs
and the complete mtDNA genome, Presentation at the 25th Congress of
the International Society for Forensic Genetics. Melbourne; 2013. 2–7
September 2013.
46. Bandelt HJ, Salas A: Current next generation sequencing technology may
not meet forensic standards. Forensic Sci Int Genet 2012, 6:143–145.
47. Tan E, Turingan RS, Hogan C, Vasantgadkar S, Palombo L, Schumm JW,
Selden RF: Fully integrated, fully automated generation of short tandem
repeat profiles. Investigative Genet 2013, 4:16.
48. Biesecker LG, Bailey-Wilson JE, Ballantyne J, Baum H, Bieber FR, Brenner C,
Budowle B, Butler JM, Carmody G, Conneally PM, Duceman B, Eisenberg A,
Forman L, Kidd KK, Leclair B, Niezgoda S, Parsons TJ, Pugh E, Shaler R, Sherry
ST, Sozer A, Walsh A: DNA Identifications after the 9/11 World Trade Cen-
ter Attack. Science 2005, 310:1122–1123.
49. Dolan SM, Saraiya DS, Donkervoort S, Rogel K, Lieber C, Sozer A: The
emerging role of genetics professionals in forensic kinship DNA
Page 10
Roewer Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:22
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/22
identification after a mass fatality: lessons learned from Hurricane
Katrina volunteers. Genet Med 2009, 11:414–417.
50. Huffine E, Crews J, Kennedy B, Bomberger K, Zinbo A: Mass identification
of persons missing from the break-up of the former Yugoslavia:
structure, function, and role of the International Commission on Missing
Persons. Croat Med J 2001, 42:271–275.
51. Corach D, Sala A, Penacino G, Iannucci N, Bernardi P, Doretti M, Fondebrider
L, Ginarte A, Inchaurregui A, Somigliana C, Turner S, Hagelberg E: Additional
approaches to DNA typing of skeletal remains: the search for “missing”
persons killed during the last dictatorship in Argentina. Electrophoresis
1997, 18:1608–1612.
52. Levitt M: Forensic databases: benefits and ethical and social costs. Br Med
Bull 2007, 83:235–248.
doi:10.1186/2041-2223-4-22
Cite this article as: Roewer: DNA fingerprinting in forensics: past, present,
future. Investigative Genetics 2013 4:22. 
Page 10 of 10
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
