BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Fingerprinting plants in the past
  Telling plants apart in the olden days…
  Minisatellite and oligonucleotide DNA probes enable true plant fingerprinting
  Technical issues of hybridization-based plant DNA fingerprinting
Present-day fingerprinting of plants
  Method development and choice of markers
    PCR-based multi-locus methods
    PCR-based single-locus methods
    Single nucleotide polymorphisms
    Organellar DNA-based methods
    Choice of method
  Applications of present-day DNA fingerprinting in plants
    Genotype identification
    Genetic diversity, population structure and genetic relatedness
    Genome constitution: hybridization, introgression and polyploidy
    Plant speciation, phylogeny and systematics
    Phylogeography
    Genetic mapping
    The status of traditional DNA fingerprinting: concluding remarks
The future of DNA fingerprinting
  Discovery of nuclear microsatellites by high-throughput DNA sequencing
  High-throughput genotyping-by-sequencing
    Restriction Enzyme Anchored Sequencing: RADseq and related approaches
    Transcriptome sequencing: RNAseq and related approaches
  Outlook
  Abbreviations
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgements
Author details
References
Page 1
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1
REVIEW  Open Access
DNA fingerprinting in botany: past, present, future
Hilde Nybom1, Kurt Weising2* and Björn Rotter3
Abstract
Almost three decades ago Alec Jeffreys published his seminal Nature papers on the use of minisatellite probes for
DNA fingerprinting of humans (Jeffreys and colleagues Nature 1985, 314:67–73 and Nature 1985, 316:76–79). The
new technology was soon adopted for many other organisms including plants, and when Hilde Nybom, Kurt
Weising and Alec Jeffreys first met at the very First International Conference on DNA Fingerprinting in Berne,
Switzerland, in 1990, everybody was enthusiastic about the novel method that allowed us for the first time to
discriminate between humans, animals, plants and fungi on the individual level using DNA markers. A newsletter
coined “Fingerprint News” was launched, T-shirts were sold, and the proceedings of the Berne conference filled a
first book on “DNA fingerprinting: approaches and applications”. Four more conferences were about to follow, one
on each continent, and Alec Jeffreys of course was invited to all of them. Since these early days, methodologies
have undergone a rapid evolution and diversification. A multitude of techniques have been developed, optimized,
and eventually abandoned when novel and more efficient and/or more reliable methods appeared. Despite some
overlap between the lifetimes of the different technologies, three phases can be defined that coincide with major
technological advances. Whereas the first phase of DNA fingerprinting (“the past”) was dominated by restriction
fragment analysis in conjunction with Southern blot hybridization, the advent of the PCR in the late 1980s gave
way to the development of PCR-based single- or multi-locus profiling techniques in the second phase. Given that
many routine applications of plant DNA fingerprinting still rely on PCR-based markers, we here refer to these
methods as “DNA fingerprinting in the present”, and include numerous examples in the present review. The
beginning of the third phase actually dates back to 2005, when several novel, highly parallel DNA sequencing
strategies were developed that increased the throughput over current Sanger sequencing technology
1000-fold and more. High-speed DNA sequencing was soon also exploited for DNA fingerprinting in plants,
either in terms of facilitated marker development, or directly in the sense of “genotyping-by-sequencing”.
Whereas these novel approaches are applied at an ever increasing rate also in non-model species, they are
still far from routine, and we therefore treat them here as “DNA fingerprinting in the future”.
Keywords: DNA fingerprinting, Genetic mapping, Genotyping-by-sequencing, Microsatellites, Plants, Population
genetics, Single nucleotide polymorphisms, Systematics
Fingerprinting plants in the past
Telling plants apart in the olden days…
Many disciplines in botany are dependent on the ability
to differentiate among plant genotypes, and/or to esti-
mate the amount of diversity and relatedness in a set of
genotypes. Traditionally, such tasks have been conducted
mainly through data on morphological characteristics but
these have certain limitations, including insufficient vari-
ation among the studied genotypes, subjectivity in the data
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:weising@uni-kassel.de"] weising@uni-kassel.de
2Plant Molecular Systematics, Institute of Biology, University of Kassel, Kassel
34109, Germany
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
collection and treatment, and plasticity due to environ-
mentally induced variation. A more neutral and objective
tool was offered by molecular markers based on isoen-
zymes; that is, enzymes that catalyze the same chemical
reaction but differ in amino acid sequence and therefore
also in the speed taken to travel through an electrophor-
etic gel. Isoenzymes were introduced into plant science in
the early 1960s, and quickly increased in importance
throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Co-dominant allozyme
data (that is, allelic enzymes coded by genes at the same
locus) soon became very popular for studies of, for
example, population structure, gene flow, isolation-by-
distance (IBD),  mating systems and hybridization [1].
© 2014 Nybom et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication
waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise
stated.
Page 2
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 2 of 35
Protein extraction was, however, often a problem, es-
pecially for plants with high contents of polyphenols
in their leaves. The analysis of plants growing in re-
mote areas was also a problem, since proteins gener-
ally need to be isolated and purified within a short time
from sampling. A third major problem was the often in-
sufficient level of allozyme polymorphism among re-
lated genotypes.
Compared with proteins, the DNA molecule is very
robust and easy to work with, and the potential for
yielding polymorphic data is virtually inexhaustible. In
the 1970s, the advent of the DNA-based restriction frag-
ment length polymorphism (RFLP) technique enabled
botanists to analyze samples collected from plants grow-
ing almost anywhere. Samples, usually leaves, were usu-
ally dried on silica gel before being transported to a
laboratory, where they could be kept frozen until DNA
isolation. The RFLP method was, however, rather time-
consuming, with isolation of genomic DNA from the col-
lected material, cutting the DNA samples with restriction
enzymes, transferring the fragments with Southern blot-
ting to a filter, hybridizing the filter-bound fragments
with locus-specific probes, and finally utilizing for ex-
ample autoradiography to detect the fragments. Still,
the major constraint was the need for developing species-
specific hybridization probes for these analyses. RFLP
methodology was therefore applied mainly to economic-
ally important crop plants, with many active scientists
and large grants. In these crops, RFLP markers con-
stituted a highly appreciated tool for the development
of genetic maps [2],  and sometimes for cultivar iden-
tification and studies of genetic relatedness [3]. Never-
theless, a restricted availability of suitable loci often
resulted in insufficient polymorphism also with the RFLP
method.
In the 1980s, the RFLP methodology was also first ap-
plied to the chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) molecule. For
this, DNA samples were digested with either single or
combined restriction enzymes, and hybridized with radi-
olabelled cpDNA-specific probes from one of the univer-
sal libraries developed from, for example, Petunia. The
obtained information was used to construct restriction
site maps of the cpDNA molecule. Since the cpDNA
molecule is highly conserved, there is very little intra-
specific variation, and cpDNA-based RFLP studies have
therefore mostly been conducted on an inter-specific
level. By contrast, plant mitochondria have never been
much used in molecular analyses. The major reason is
that while the plant mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) se-
quence is usually highly conserved, the size and struc-
ture of mtDNA molecules may vary widely even within
individual plants [4]. Moreover, recent studies indicated
that substitution rates of mtDNA genes can vary enor-
mously even among closely related plant species [5]. 
Minisatellite and oligonucleotide DNA probes enable true
plant fingerprinting
When Jeffreys and colleagues [6,7] published their
groundbreaking papers on RFLP analyses with probes
developed from tandemly repeated DNA sequences in
human DNA, nobody expected that this new, so-called
DNA fingerprinting technique, would revolutionize also
the botanical science. However, since these new minisa-
tellite probes showed a high potential for revealing
individual-specific DNA fingerprints also in other mam-
mals [8] as well as in birds [9], botanists soon decided to
investigate the possibilities of applying this tool also in
plants. In a paper appearing in 1988, Dallas [10] was able
to distinguish among different rice cultivars, Oryza
sativa, by hybridizing restriction-digested rice DNA with
the human 33.6 minisatellite probe. The studied off-
spring from an individual rice plant proved to have iden-
tical fingerprints, which is the expected result since rice
is self-pollinating and thus highly homozygous. In
addition, Dallas was able to ascertain the Mendelian in-
heritance of DNA fragments from grandparents to the
second-generation offspring (F2
).
In the same year, two more papers reported on finger-
printing plant material with another minisatellite probe,
this time derived from the genome of the bacteriophage
M13. Whereas Ryskov and colleagues [11] obtained dif-
ferent DNA fingerprint patterns of two barley varieties,
Hordeum vulgare,  after hybridization with the M13
probe, Rogstad and colleagues [12] generated identical
M13 fingerprints from separate branches of a cotton-
wood tree, Populus deltoides, as well as from a mother
tree and its sucker plant, demonstrating somatic stabil-
ity. These authors also showed that fingerprints obtained
from the offspring from an inbred tomato, Solanum
lycopersicon,  were identical, while a high level of vari-
ation was encountered among sexually derived cotton-
wood trees, indicating that the degree of variation
depends on the mode of reproduction. In the following
years, the ability of minisatellite probes to distinguish
between specimens derived by sexual recombination and
specimens derived by vegetative propagation or apomixis
(that is, seed set without prior fertilization) was demon-
strated in numerous plants, including North American
quaking aspen, Populus tremuloides [13],  and various
raspberry and blackberry species, Rubus spp. [14,15].
In cultivated plants, propagation is undertaken either
through seeds (especially in annual and biennial crops)
or vegetatively (in fruit crops, as well as in many woody
ornamentals).  In the latter, each cultivar is expected to
consist of a single monomorphic genotype. DNA finger-
printing thus became a very efficient means of investi-
gating identity as demonstrated in some Rubus cultivars
[16].  In such crops, new and unique characters some-
times appear in, for example, a single branch of a tree
Page 3
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 3 of 35
through the occurrence of minor somatic mutations.
Propagation of material collected from these deviating
plant parts gives rise to new cultivars (known as, for ex-
ample, sports in apple).  Analysis of sports marketed
under different names but all derived from the well-
known ‘Red Delicious’  apple, however, produced com-
pletely identical DNA fingerprints [17]. Obviously none
of the minor DNA differences between these sports had
been targeted by the M13 probe.
Still another set of RFLP hybridization probes was in-
troduced in the early days of DNA fingerprinting,
namely synthetic oligonucleotides such as (GACA)4 
and
(GATA)4 
[18]. These probes hybridized to short, tandem-
repeated sequences (microsatellites; simple sequence re-
peats (SSRs)) in the genome, and produced polymorphic
fragment patterns in, for example, cultivars of chickpea,
Cicer arietinum [19], banana [20], tomato [21,22] and rice
[23], in double-haploid lines of sugar beet (Beta vulgaris)
[24], and in wild plants of the Chilean annual Microseris
pygmaea [25]. As an experimental bonus, the oligonucleo-
tide probes allowed hybridization directly within the dried
gels, thus circumventing Southern blotting altogether.
A typical banding pattern resulting from this ancient,
so-called “oligonucleotide fingerprinting” methodology
is shown in Figure 1.
Technical issues of hybridization-based plant DNA
fingerprinting
The successful application of minisatellite and oligo-
nucleotide probes for DNA fingerprinting by Southern
blot hybridization is dependent on the availability of rela-
tively large quantities of very clean DNA in order for the
restriction enzymes to produce clear fragment profiles. 
DNA isolation thus became a crucial step, and many dif-
ferent protocols were developed [26,27]. Other methodo-
logical advances such as the use of non-radioactive
fragment detection - for example, digoxigenin-based label-
ling - were also described [28,29]. Since oligonucleotide
probes sometimes yield a high background and can be
sensitive to minute changes in temperature during
hybridization, a PCR-based method for producing longer
and more robust probes (typically 300 to 600 bp) but still
with short repeated motifs such as, for example, (GACA)n
was developed by Rogstad [30]. Hybridization of the same
filter (stripped and re-hybridized consecutively) with nine
of these so-called PCR-STR (synthetic tandem-repeat)
probes produced polymorphic DNA fingerprints in turnip
(Brassica rapa) plants, and allowed the verification of
Mendelian fragment transmittal to the offspring [31].
Data evaluation remained relatively ‘primitive’ in many
of these early studies. Usually, the number of analyzed
samples was well below 50, and numbers of polymorphic
bands seldom reached more than 20 to 40 in each study.
Moreover, experimentally induced differences in hybridi-
zation efficiency between the electrophoretic gels and
filters often precluded the pooling of data from samples
analyzed on different gels [32]. Therefore, manual com-
parisons of fragment profiles were usually performed for
evaluating relationships among the studied samples.
This information was then used to make deductions
about, for example, the transfer of pollen among different
cultivars in an apple orchard [33], the hybrid origin of a
blackberry microspecies [34], and the mode of seed setting
in experimentally produced blackberry hybrids [35].  For
quantitative comparisons, the proportion of shared bands
was usually calculated with Dice’s coefficient, also known
Figure 1 Hybridization-based restriction fragment length polymorphism fingerprints of tomato plants (Solanum lycopersicum).
Five-microgram aliquots of genomic DNA from two individual plants each of three wild species (a to c) and 10 cultivars (d to m) were digested
with the restriction enzyme HinfI, separated on a 1.4% agarose gel, and in-gel hybridized with the radioabelled oligonucleotide probe (GGAT)4
(Kaemmer and colleagues [22]). Banding patterns were visualized by autoradiography. Positions of size markers are indicated (kb = kilobase pairs).
MW, molecular weight.
Page 4
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 4 of 35
as Nei and Li’s coefficient [36]. The results were compared
with previous information on propagation and distri-
bution of the investigated material. For example, Tzuri
and colleagues [37] and Vainstein and colleagues [38]
estimated variability among and within different groups of
carnations, and obtained patterns that could be associated
with mode of propagation (by seed or vegetatively) as well
as the known origination (from Dianthus caryophyllus or
from Dianthus hybrids).  Analyses of genetic relatedness
based on banding pattern similarity have been carried out
also among, for example, Rubus cultivars [29,39] and
among and within populations of wild plant species such
as box elder, Acer negundo [40], and paw-paw, Asimina
triloba [41].
Methods for assessing genetic diversity were soon
improved, and reports on the use of DNA fingerprinting
for estimating population genetics parameters, such as
expected heterozygosity, Wright´s F-statistics and the
number of migrants per population and generation, be-
came increasingly common during the 1990s. Whenever
tested, results obtained with these dominant multi-locus
markers were usually consistent with those from previ-
ous studies using co-dominant allozyme markers. Using
a resampling program, M13 fingerprinting-derived esti-
mates for genetic identity within and between populations
as well as population subdivision proved to be closely
associated with the breeding system in three species of
Plantago [42]. The selfing species P. major showed rela-tively little within-population variation compared to
the mixed breeding P. coronopus and the outbreeding
P. lanceolata. Interpopulation differentiation was, by con-
trast, more pronounced in the selfing species compared
with the other two. Population genetics parameters from
RFLP-based fingerprinting data were reported also in,
for example, Gambel oak, Querus gambelii [32],  com-
mon cattail, Typha latifolia [43], and two species of buck-
eye, Aesculus [44].
For more information on the methodology, applica-
tions and results obtained by hybridization-based finger-
printing with mini- and microsatellite complementary
probes, see the reviews by Nybom [45,46], Weising and
colleagues [26], Rogstad [47] and Weising and Kahl [48].
Present-day fingerprinting of plants
Method development and choice of markers
PCR-based multi-locus methods
Shortly after the invention of the ingenious PCR proced-
ure by Saiki and colleagues [49],  three PCR-based ap-
proaches to generate DNA fingerprints were published
more or less at the same time. All of these methods used
single oligonucleotide primers with arbitrary sequences
to produce PCR fragments from genomic DNA, result-
ing in multi-locus banding patterns after electrophoretic
separation and visualization by staining or radiography 
[50-52].  The so-called random amplified polymorphic
DNA (RAPD) approach developed by Williams and col-
leagues [51] soon became the most popular variant of
these methods. Major explanations for this immediate
success include the small quantities needed of sample
DNA, and the simple and fast procedures compared to
the hybridization-based methods. Results from a typical
RAPD experiment are illustrated in Figure 2.
A few years later, Zabeau and Vos [53] and Vos and
colleagues [54] presented the amplified fragment length
polymorphism (AFLP) technique, which represented an
ingenious combination of RFLP and PCR methodology.
AFLP analyses became soon very popular, mainly be-
cause of the large numbers of polymorphic bands ob-
tained in a single experiment. The inter-simple sequence
repeat (ISSR) method developed by Gupta and col-
leagues [55] and Zietkiewicz and colleagues [56] relied on
microsatellite-complementary PCR primers that could be
used in an anchored or unanchored version. RAPD, AFLP
and ISSR are still much used nowadays, although RAPD
especially has often been criticized for problems with
reproducibility and competitive priming, as reviewed in
Weising and colleagues [26]. These problems are less pro-
nounced for AFLP and ISSR where more stringent PCR
conditions can be applied. Nevertheless, all three methods
usually arrived at quite similar estimates of genetic diver-
sity and genetic distances when applied to the same plant
material, as reviewed in Weising and colleagues [27].
Other less frequently used methods to generate multi-
locus PCR fingerprints include the sequence-related
amplified polymorphism (SRAP) technique that specific-
ally amplifies polymorphic junction fragments between
exons and the flanking intronic DNA [57,58], and the tar-
get region amplification polymorphism (TRAP) method
[59]. Common features of SRAP and TRAP include the
use of two primers of about 18 nucleotides length (one of
which targets a protein-coding region), and non-stringent
PCR conditions during the first five cycles. The so-called
selective amplification of polymorphic microsatellite loci
(SAMPL) is a variant of the AFLP technology that
combines AFLP- and microsatellite-specific primers [60],
whereas the direct amplification of minisatellite DNA
(DAMD) utilizes primers that are specific for minisa-
tellites rather than microsatellites [61].  Yet another
approach, resistance gene-analog polymorphism (RGAP),
makes use of PCR primers that bind to the conserved do-
mains of plant resistance genes [62].
The Diversity Arrays Technology (DArT) is a high-
throughput method based on the hybridization of fluor-
escent DNA probes to a set of target DNAs spotted onto
a microarray [63,64]. The DNA is first digested with one
or two restriction enzymes, followed by the ligation of
specific adapters as in AFLP. Individual PCR products
are spotted onto a grid to form an ordered microarray
Page 5
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 5 of 35
Figure 2 Random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) fingerprints of Pelargonium. DNA aliquots from 13 cultivars of Pelargonium hortorum
(lanes a to m), nine cultivars of P. peltatum (lanes n to v), and one individual of the wild subspecies P. peltatum ssp. dibrachya (lane w) were
amplified with the arbitrary 10-mer primer OPG-5. RAPD products were separated on a 1.5% agarose gel and stained with ethidium bromide.
Positions of size markers (lane S) are indicated in base bairs (bp). N, negative control (no template DNA in the PCR assay). MW, molecular weight.
that represents hundreds of arbitrarily selected restric-
tion fragments from all cultivars/species and various
genomic regions of the gene pool of interest. Individual
genomic DNA samples are pretreated in the same way
as the pooled representatives (that is, restriction, ligation
of adapter, and PCR with adapter-specific primers). Be-
fore being individually hybridized to the chip, each
probe DNA is labelled with a fluorochrome to enable
detection. Like AFLP and RAPD, DArT does not require
previous sequence information. It allows simultaneous
analysis of hundreds or even thousands of polymorphic
loci, but the need to generate a microarray restricts the
general use of the technique. By 2012, DArT technology
has been developed for about 60 organisms, mostly crop
and model plants [65], but also some wild plants such as
the fern Asplenium viride [66].
Transposable elements and especially the retrotran-
sposons bounded by long terminal repeats (LTRs) have
proved to be useful for developing particularly sensitive
multi-locus profiling techniques, either alone or in com-
bination with other types of primers [67]. In the inter-
retrotransposon amplified polymorphism (IRAP) approach
developed by Kalendar and colleagues [68],  primers are
directed towards the LTRs of BARE-1, a retrotransposon of
barley. The same authors also introduced retrotransposon-
microsatellite amplified polymorphism (REMAP) which
combines outward-facing LTR-specific primers with an-
chored microsatellite primers. Basically the same strategy,
known as copia-SSR, was simultaneously developed by
Provan and colleagues [69].  In the so-called sequence-
specific amplification polymorphism (S-SAP) analysis,
retrotransponson-specific primers are combined with
AFLP primers [70]. S-SAP often produces highly variable 
fingerprints that are frequently more informative than
AFLP. Related approaches have been developed for other
plant transposons [71,72].
PCR-based single-locus methods
Because of their abundance, high polymorphism in the
number of tandem repeats, co-dominant inheritance,
excellent reproducibility and ease of use, PCR-amplified
single-locus microsatellite markers have become the
marker of choice for many applications, and presently re-
main more important than any of the other traditional
DNA fingerprinting methods [73,74]. Typically, a pair of
microsatellite-flanking primers is used to amplify the tar-
geted locus by PCR, amplification products are separated
by polyacrylamide or capillary electrophoresis, and band-
ing patterns are monitored by radiography or fluorog-
raphy. When locus-specific microsatellite analysis was
first used in plants in 1992 [75],  the need for devel-
oping species-specific microsatellite-flanking primers was
still a serious drawback, requiring tedious cloning and
enrichment strategies (see the reviews by Squirrell and
colleagues [76] and Weising and colleagues [27]).  Now-
adays, this task has become relatively simple for (1) the in-
creasing number of plant species with DNA sequence
data in public databases and (2) the development of ultra-
fast “next generation sequencing” technologies that enable
the identification of microsatellite loci and design of
primers by random genomic sequencing (see "The future
of DNA fingerprinting" below).  A typical result from a
microsatellite genotyping experiment is shown in Figure 3.
Lately, expressed sequence tags (ESTs) have become a
viable alternative to genomic DNA as a source for SSR
loci, resulting in so-called EST-SSR markers that are
Page 6
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 6 of 35
Figure 3 Locus-specific microsatellite analysis of four populations of the Lesser Periwinkle (Vinca minor) using a primer pair specific
for locus Vimi43 (Möller, personal communication). For each population, ten samples were genotyped. Populations 1 and 2 were collected
in northern Italy, whereas populations 3 and 4 were sampled in central Germany. Strong indications for clonality can be found in populations
1, 3 and 4. S, size standard: T-ladder derived from a chloroplast DNA fragment of Macaranga indistincta. Molecular weights (MW) of size markers
are indicated in base pairs (bp).
either generated by cDNA cloning and sequencing [77]
or, more commonly, by exploiting existing EST data-
bases [78-80].  Database mining is often quite efficient,
since EST-SSRs are surprisingly common and may be
expected every 2 to 10 kb of EST sequence; for example,
one per 6.3 kb in Hordeum vulgare [78]. These estimates
of course depend on the search criteria and the search
script used, most importantly on the minimum number
of repeats used to define a microsatellite. Trinucleotide
repeats commonly prevail in protein-coding regions of
ESTs, whereas dinucleotide repeats are more frequent
in 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs).  Expansions
and deletions in coding regions can be tolerated for tri-
and hexanucleotide repeats, because they do not perturb
reading frames.
EST- and cDNA-derived SSRs have several important
advantages over anonymous markers (see the review by
Varshney and colleagues [81]). First, developing markers
from already existing sequences is easy, fast and eco-
nomical. Second, any type of microsatellite will be de-
tected, whereas only SSRs with predefined motifs are
captured by enrichment strategies. Third, EST-SSRs are
physically linked to an expressed gene, which may en-
code a trait of interest. Finally, primer target sequences
that reside in transcribed DNA regions are expected to
be relatively conserved thus enhancing the chance of
marker transferability across taxa. On the negative side,
the association with coding regions sometimes limits the
polymorphism of EST-derived SSR markers, resulting in
fewer alleles and/or lower observed heterozygosity [78],
but this is not necessarily the case. For example, Pashley
and colleagues [79] compared the performance of 48 
anonymous versus 48 EST-derived SSR markers from
common sunflower, Helianthus annuus, and their trans-
ferability to two other Helianthus species. Their study
showed that: (1) 73% of the EST-derived SSR markers
were transferable among all species, compared with only
21% of the anonymous SSR markers; (2) EST-SSRs were
on average only slightly less polymorphic that anonym-
ous SSRs, both in the focal and the non-focal species;
and (3) EST-SSRs located in coding regions were more
readily transferable than those in untranslated regions -
without differing significantly from the latter in terms of
variability.
Locus-specific markers can also be developed from
individual bands within multi-locus profiles, as exem-
plified by the sequence characterized amplified re-
gions (SCARs).  In the original description of the
approach, specific primer pairs were designed for amplify-
ing single bands of a RAPD profile [82]. SCARs have been
used for cultivar identification in, for example, olive, Olea
europaea [83], and sweet cherry, Prunus avium [84]. In
the cleaved amplified polymorphic sequences (CAPS) ap-
proach [85], the resulting PCR product is treated with a
restriction enzyme before scoring of fragments.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms
In the last decade, DNA fingerprinting methods based on
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have become in-
creasingly important, especially in conjunction with micro-
array analyses that allow the simultaneous screening of
very large numbers of SNP sites (see the review by Appleby
and colleagues [86]). Among the many types of mutations
occurring in genomes, single nucleotide exchanges stand
Page 7
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 7 of 35
out by their high absolute numbers as well as their biallelic
nature, relatively low mutation rates, even distribution
across the genome and relative ease of detection. In plants,
one SNP is typically found per approximately 100 to
500 bp of DNA, but the average density depends on the
studied species and the genomic region investigated.
Numerous technologies have been developed for SNP dis-
covery as well as for SNP genotyping [86]. Direct sequen-
cing of multiple copies of the same genomic region is the
most obvious method for SNP discovery, and has become
very efficient after the development of high-throughput
sequencing systems [87,88] (see "The future of DNA fin-
gerprinting" below). Like SSRs, SNPs can also be mined
from existing databases [89]. Practically all SNP genotyping
assays are amenable to automation and therefore allow
routine high-throughput analyses of large numbers of
samples.
SNP markers are already well established in all major
crop species [90,91], especially in those for which fully se-
quenced genomes are available. Recently, microarrays with
typically 10,000 to 40,000 SNP markers (SNP-Chips) have
been developed for many crops, and large-scale screenings
of germplasm collections can now be undertaken at com-
paratively low costs [92]. Given that thousands of SNPs
can be detected by novel sequencing approaches, SNP
genotyping will receive increased attention, at least in
economically important crop plants. However, poor
transferability to related species may hamper their suc-
cessful implementation for large-scale genotyping projects
across genera.
Organellar DNA-based methods
The most commonly used organelle for genetic studies
in plants is the chloroplast. Since recombination is rare
or absent in plastid genomes, all DNA polymorphisms
for a certain individual can be combined to form a
“haplotype”.  Plastid DNA polymorphisms at the intra-
specific level are relatively rare, and the numbers of
detected band profiles (haplotypes) are therefore often
considerably lower than those detected by nuclear markers.
On the positive side, the high conservation of organellar
DNA sequences has enabled the development of non-
specific, so called universal, PCR primers that amplify
cpDNA introns and intergenic spacers in a wide array of
plant species [93,94]. Universal primers are also available
for the amplification of SSR loci in the chloroplast genome
[95].  Polymorphisms within the amplified fragments can
be monitored by various approaches, including the detec-
tion of length variants by high-resolution electrophoresis,
and the detection of sequence variants by sequencing, or
by digesting the PCR products with restriction enzymes in
an approach called PCR-RFLP.
Plastid DNA is especially useful in studies where a low
mutation rate is desirable, such as in the analyses of 
phylogenetic and phylogeographic patterns. Often both
plastid and nuclear markers are combined in the same
study for complementary information. Since the mode of
plastid inheritance is usually maternal in angiosperms
and paternal in gymnosperms, these markers also have
the potential for tracing uni-parental lineages over large
distances in time and space.
Choice of method
The pros and cons of different molecular marker methods
have been discussed in a number of comparative investiga-
tions (see [27,96]). The actual choice of method must of
course take marker availability, costs, expertise, equipment
and many other factors into consideration. Based on 292
papers published between mid-2006 and mid-2009 on
discrimination among plant cultivars, locus-specific micro-
satellite analysis (SSR) was the most popular method
(36%), followed by RAPD (27%), ISSR (13%), AFLP (11%),
other nuclear DNA-based methods (10%,  including for
example CAPS, DAMD, IRAP, REMAP, SNPs, SCAR and
SRAP) and organellar DNA-based methods (3%,  mostly
cpDNA) [97].  If the purpose of a study is to simultan-
eously discriminate both dissimilar and very similar en-
tities, applying a whole battery of marker types may be the
best solution.
While insufficient repeatability of DNA marker pro-
files can be regarded as a methodological artefact, insuf-
ficient germline stability of sequences corresponding to
DNA markers can cause “biological artefacts” due to
excessively high mutation rates. This problem is most
likely to arise with the most sensitive types of markers,
such as SSRs. The ability to merge data from different
studies, even when developed in different laboratories, is
a major asset of this method. The same is true for the
other single-locus DNA markers, such as SNPs, SCARs
and CAPS, but these are usually only biallelic. Neverthe-
less, the potential number of SNPs is virtually unlimited,
and various SNP-based assay methods have already been
developed (see above). In a comparative study on 58 maize
inbred lines, SNPs outperformed SSRs both in terms of
quality and quantity [98].
Exceptionally high mutation rates and reduced germline
stability are often encountered when using retrotransposon-
based markers [67]. Thus, several reports have indicated
that S-SAP markers are especially useful for discriminat-
ing among clones derived by somatic mutations [99] or
among genotypes derived by recombination among highly
similar entities [100]. The S-SAP primers are usually de-
signed according to species-specific sequence information
but positive results have also been obtained by using uni-
versal retrotransposon-based sequences [101].
Besides their application for the identification of plant
material and for the estimation of similarity and related-
ness, DNA markers have been extensively used for the
Page 8
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 8 of 35
construction of genetic linkage-based genomic maps,
with a major aim of identifying markers that are closely
linked and therefore co-inherited with genes for specific
traits (see "Genetic mapping" below).  Dense linkage
maps have been constructed for numerous plant species
including all major crops using all kinds of markers. For
ease of scoring when screening large numbers of pro-
geny, singe-locus biallelic markers such as SNPs are usu-
ally preferred for this purpose.
Applications of present-day DNA fingerprinting in plants
Genotype identification
Since the humble beginnings in 1988, DNA fingerprint-
ing has become an immensely important instrument for
genotype identification in both wild plant species and
their cultivated relatives. Plants differ widely in life
history traits including reproductive parameters such
as propagation method and, for those that propagate by
seed, also in breeding system (selfing or cross-pollinated)
and in the mode of pollen and seed dispersal. All these
factors have profound influence on the amount and parti-
tioning of genetic variability between and within various
entities such as cultivars and populations. These differ-
ences affect the utilization of DNA markers for finger-
printing individual plants or genotypes.
In some cases, DNA-based estimates of similarity
among a set of genotypes show a relatively close associ-
ation with previous morphology-based estimates, but
there are also considerable discrepancies in other cases.
If the morphological characters are mostly quantitative
in nature, correspondence with DNA marker estimates
is generally quite high as compared to qualitative charac-
ters, which are more likely to reflect only a small num-
ber of mutation events. It has also been suggested that
molecular data are better at differentiating cultivated
genotypes as well as their wild relatives according to
origin and pedigree, whereas conventional pomological
characterization data are more closely associated with
physiological properties [102].
Genotype identification in wild plants: the influence
of life history traits Proper identification of individual
genotypes is an important basis for many wild-plant-
based studies. As mentioned above, various life history
traits affect the amount and partitioning of genetic vari-
ation. Inbreeding species are, for example, most useful
for forensic applications, since they typically produce
suitable-sized patches of genetically identical or almost
identical plants [103].  By contrast, outcrossing species
are characterized by a situation where every plant has a
different genotype. While potentially very informative, it
is usually extremely difficult to secure forensic evidence
involving a particular, unique plant specimen. Clonal
plants, whether due to extensive vegetative propagation 
or apomixis frequently produce large numbers of pro-
geny with the same genotype (see also Figure 3).  Such
genotypes can cover large geographical areas and are
thus not sufficiently accurate for tying botanical evi-
dence to a certain location.
In other research areas, the variation in plant life his-
tory traits can, however, be regarded as a positive factor;
a wide range of biological questions can be answered by
choosing suitable material and methods. DNA marker
analyses have thus been able to estimate genotype age in
plant clones, which have often proved to be considerably
larger - and therefore often also older - than expected
from previous data. For example, Steinger and colleagues
[104] studied Carex curvula,  a sedge species found in
the European Alps. RAPD analysis of 116 tillers from a
small patch (2.0 × 0.4 m) identified a total of 15 multi-
locus genotypes. More than half of the sampled tillers
proved to belong to a single, large clone estimated to
be around 2,000 years old. Invasive species sometimes
produce particularly large clones, such as the Japanese
knotweed, Fallopia japonica,  and the alligator weed,
Alternanthera philoxeroides,  both of which displayed
a single RAPD phenotype in spite of being sampled over
very large areas [105,106].  In other cases, DNA marker
analyses have revealed more heterogeneity than expected.
Each of five investigated Chinese populations of the inva-
sive water hyacinth Eichhornia crassipes were thus shown
to consist of at least three different clones according to
their RAPD profiles [107].
Information about clonal growth can be very helpful
for determination of factors involved in shaping popula-
tion structure. When a microsatellite-based study was
carried out in the marine eelgrass Zostera marina, clonal
size proved to be positively correlated with heterozygos-
ity [108]. Outbreeding clones were larger and contained
more flowering shoots, indicating that inbreeding de-
pression had decreased vigor and fertility. An unexpect-
edly high degree of genetic homogeneity was recently
described in the geophyte Gagea spathacea [109].  All
but two of 138 examined specimens, representing 52
populations throughout the entire distributional area
in northern, central and eastern Europe, had identical
AFLP profiles. Probably this highly polyploid taxon has
derived from a hybridogenic event, and has managed to
attain its large area almost exclusively by bulbil pro-
duction and spreading rather than by seed set and seed-
ling establishment.
DNA fingerprinting has also helped to clarify the re-
productive system in species that can produce seeds
both sexually and asexually (that is, by apomixis). Many
Taraxacum populations consist of triploid individuals
that apparently reproduce through apomixis and there-
fore are clonal. Such clones can sometimes cover large
areas as was demonstrated in an AFLP study [110].  A
Page 9
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 9 of 35
comparison of SSR and AFLP data showed that both
marker types were able to discriminate among nine apo-
mictic microspecies (defined on morphological character-
istics) of Taraxacum, but that AFLP was more sensitive in
detecting also small, mutation-derived differences within
each microspecies [111]. By contrast, two dinucleotide re-
peat SSR loci detected considerably more variation than
AFLP in apomictic lineages of Ranunculus carpaticola
[112,113]. Evidence for an origin by mutation instead of
by recombination was provided by the lack of allele segre-
gation in the investigated SSR loci. Thus, in each lineage,
the same number of alleles was always found within a
locus, and these alleles also formed classes of related allele
sizes within each lineage.
The availability of adequate tools to identify individual
genotypes can be immensely useful in plant ecology.
Thus, SSR-analysed Taraxacum clones were recently
employed to investigate biodiversity and ecosystem func-
tioning. In one study, five identified Taraxacum clones
were used for setting up experimental plots where ef-
fects of levels of diversity in both favorable (fallow field)
and unfavorable (mowed lawn) conditions could be
quantified [114].  The genotypic diversity effects appear
to be stronger in environments where intra-specific
competition is more intense. In a parallel study, geno-
type × environment associations were studied in natural
populations with the same set of Taraxacum clones [115].
Genotypes that produced poorly under favorable condi-
tions instead showed the highest performance under
stressful conditions.
Genotype identification in vegetatively propagated
cultivars All plants belonging to a particular cultivar of
an asexually propagated crop are expected to share iden-
tical DNA fingerprints, except for rare mutations. By
contrast, sexually derived cultivars are expected to ex-
hibit non-uniform fingerprint patterns. However, there
are crops for which the major breeding method involves
selection amongst rather similar seedlings that originate
from a very small number of widespread cultivars. This
situation can be exemplified by peach, Prunus persica,
which is self-fertile and self-pollinating to a large extent.
In such crops, new cultivars sometimes have DNA fin-
gerprints that are almost identical or at least very similar
to those of the seed parent in spite of being derived
through sexual recombination. By contrast, variation is
sometimes encountered where one expected uniformity.
Vegetatively propagated crops are usually still capable of
producing sexually derived seeds, and these may germin-
ate and develop into fertile but unnoticed plants in less
well-tended fields and orchards. There is therefore an in-
creased risk, especially for older cultivars, that a certain
name is being used on several different entities, some of
which have originated from seed setting. 
Irrespective of propagation and breeding method, the
value of accessions in plant genetic-material collections
benefits tremendously from DNA marker-aided identifi-
cation. This is, however, especially important in vegeta-
tively propagated crops that must be grown in the field
or maintained in greenhouses at high costs. Previous re-
views [97,116] show that a higher number of mislabelled
plant accessions are revealed using DNA markers (typic-
ally 25 to 30% mislabellings) as compared to traditional
(pomological or ampelographic) characters (typically 5
to 10% mislabellings).  Different categories of problems
with synonyms and homonyms have been defined [116],
and appear to be especially prevalent in locally grown and
often older germplasm whereas well-known modern-day
cultivars are correctly identified to a much higher extent.
For large-scale profiling of, for example, accessions in
a genetic resources collection, SSR markers are usually
preferred [117].  Although generally regarded as highly
reproducible, problems are sometimes encountered with
incorrect allele sizing, the occurrence of null alleles,
allele drop-out (only one of two alleles is amplified at
a heterozygous locus), false alleles (artefactual amplifi-
cation products) and occasional amplification of isoloci (an
isolocus is a similar but non-identical locus in the genome,
common in allopolyploid species). While dinculeotide re-
peat SSRs are the most common type of microsatellite, less
stuttering and improved allele sizing can be achieved with
markers based on tri- or tetranucleotide repeats [117,118],
although these are sometimes also less informative.
Zhang and colleagues [119] checked the accuracy and
reliability of 15 SSR loci for clone identification in cacao,
Theobroma cacao, and reported an average error rate of
only 0.014 for allele drop out and 0.019 for false alleles.
Some loci were more error-prone than others, suggest-
ing that putative loci should be evaluated not only for
their polymorphism but also for reliability prior to large-
scale analyses. Vélez and Ibánez [120] checked 19 SSR
loci in a study of more than 4,000 plants representing 19
grapevine cultivars. After removal of some minor tech-
nical artefacts, 99.8% of the samples matched to the ex-
pected genotype. Some loci, however, proved to be rather
sensitive to the occurrence of chimeric mutations whereas
others were not. Artefactual variation of SSR markers was
also indicated in a study of olive [121]. Interestingly, SSR
alleles that differed among olive samples from the same
cultivar were only 2 bp (one repeat unit) apart, whereas
samples from different cultivars usually exhibited larger
size dissimilarity in the polymorphic alleles. If available,
accurate pedigree information is very valuable for check-
ing the reliability of marker profiles.
The possibility to merge SSR-derived data from differ-
ent investigations is often reported as a major asset of
this method. This option is, however, dependent on
the use of identical SSR loci and suitable standardization
Page 10
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 10 of 35
procedures. Since absolute allele sizes of the SSR markers
often differ when results from different laboratories are
compared, a representative reference material with many
different alleles should be used at all laboratories involved
in the genotyping program, and the material for these
standards should be harvested from predetermined plants
in one collection only. By comparison with suitable stand-
ard alleles, sample alleles can then be defined according to
relative number of core repeat units instead of relying only
on the absolute fragment length in base pairs.
Increased attention has recently been paid to the use
of SNP markers for genotype identification in vegeta-
tively propagated cultivars. Advantages of SNPs are their
potential abundance and the fact that they do not rely
on fragment length variation like SSR, and therefore are
easier to standardize across different laboratories and
equipment. Numerous high- and low-density SNP arrays
have recently been developed for different crops. For
example, a set of 48 SNPs was developed in grapevine,
Vitis vinifera,  through resequencing of 11 genotypes
[122].  High-throughput SNP genotyping can be con-
ducted using bead arrays or microarrays (SNP chips)
such as in, for example, Citrus [123]. Since the number
of polymorphisms covered in these assays is usually sev-
eral hundred to many thousand, the obtained data can
also be used for detecting quantitative trait loci (QTL).
Genotype identification in seed-propagated cultivars
In seed-propagated crops, at least some genetic variation
usually persists also within cultivars. This is especially
pronounced in highly outcrossing species, thus making
DNA-marker-aided cultivar identification considerably
more difficult. The situation is further complicated by
the fact that each seed production cycle can lead to the
introduction of new genetic variation - for example, due
to foreign pollen. A considerable influx of new alleles was
thus demonstrated after 7 to 13 subsequent regenerations
of open-pollinating rye, Secale cereale [124].
Even with all the precautions taken in connection with
modern gene bank regenerations, changes in allele fre-
quencies can result from just recombination and selec-
tion. This was clearly demonstrated in an AFLP analysis
of 50 white cabbage, Brassica oleracea,  accessions to-
gether with first-generation regeneration products from
six of these accessions [125]. The genetic changes between
original accessions and their respective regenerants were
of the same magnitude as the differences among some of
the more similar accessions. Moreover, while most alleles
remained stable between generations, frequencies of some
alleles instead changed considerably, suggesting that unin-
tentional selection had taken place.
Obviously, a large number of markers are required for
proper quantification of genetic changes between genera-
tions, and for efficient discrimination among outcrossing, 
seed-propagated cultivars. Such large numbers are, for
example, provided by the DArT technology that proved
very useful for distinguishing Festulolium cultivars
(Festuca × Lolium experimentally produced hybrids) with
7,680 probes on a microarray [126]. In this study, each cul-
tivar was represented by 20 individual plants. These plants
were analyzed both as individual and bulked samples. In
order to minimize the loss of low-frequency bands, bulks
with only five plants in each were recommended.
Inbreeding crops are usually considered less problem-
atic than outcrossers, since the cultivars are more homo-
geneous. However, some inbreeding crops still contain
intra-varietal variability, especially in the case of primi-
tive cultivars or landraces. Propagation cycles performed
in a genebank with such material can cause prominent
gene frequency changes due to gene flow and inadvert-
ent selection. In these cases, pure-lining of the accessions
may be necessary to avoid loss of diversity, as exemplified
by the USDA Soybean Germplasm Collection [127].  In
addition, selfing crops often contain a multitude of genet-
ically very similar cultivars, thus necessitating the use of
highly polymorphic markers for discrimination. While the
commonly applied AFLP and SSR markers have produced
sufficient results in many studies, the retrotransposon-
based S-SAP method has been shown to resolve even
very closely related plant accessions in, for example, wheat,
Triticum aestivum.  Nowadays, SNP markers receive in-
creasing attention also in sexually propagated crops,
mainly for the almost inexhaustible number of potential
polymorphisms. Genome-specific SNPs have thus been de-
veloped from wheat gene intronic regions, and have
proven highly useful for cultivar discrimination as well as
enabling a quantification of genetic diversity at each of the
genomes in this hexaploid crop [128].
Genotyping somatic mutations Spontaneously occur-
ring somatic mutations can give rise to so-called ‘sports’.
These deviate from the original cultivars in minor but
economically important traits such as fruit color in fruit
and berry crops, and flower or leaf color in ornamentals.
Sports are difficult to distinguish with DNA fingerprint-
ing since the markers usually cover only a minute part of
the genome. In addition, chimeras are quite common -
that is, mutations that occur in only one of the three
meristematic cell layers in the apical meristem that differ-
entiate into the various plant tissues. The existence of chi-
merism was very elegantly demonstrated in grapevine,
Vitis vinifera,  by Franks and colleagues [129].  Although
grapevine is a diploid species, some SSR loci occasionally
showed three alleles when different sports were analyzed.
It turned out that plants regenerated from cell layers L1
and L2, respectively, had different SSR alleles as well as
different phenotypic characteristics. SSR analysis was used
to identify chimeric clones also in ‘Cabernet Sauvignon’
Page 11
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 11 of 35
[130],  ‘Grüner Veltliner’  [131] and ‘Moscatel Galego
Branco’ [132] while clones of ‘Pinot’ were successfully dis-
tinguished with the S-SAP method [99].  In this study,
three different retrotransposon-based primer pairs pro-
duced a total of 1,274 bands, one third of which were
polymorphic and able to discriminate among all the 19 in-
vestigated clones.
S-SAP analysis has been successful for the genotyping
of sports also in other crops, such as apple. Using
15 S-SAP primer combinations, five sports of ‘Gala’ and
one of ‘Braeburn’ could be discriminated, both from each
other and from the two original genotypes [133], whereas
24 SSR primer pairs generating a total of 64 alleles, and 35
AFLP primer combinations generating more than 1,000
bands, failed to do so. Based on two Ty1-copia LTR retro-
transposons, a set of 19 bud sports of the apple cultivar
‘Fuji’  were investigated with S-SAP [134]. All sports ob-
tained unique DNA profiles. Other retrotransposon-based
methods can also be quite useful. In 24 sports of clemen-
tine, Citrus reticulata, application of eight IRAP primers
produced a total of five polymorphic bands whereas
RAPD (26 primers), ISSR (16 primers), AFLP (8 primer
combinations), S-SAP (9 primer combinations) and SSR
(9 primer pairs) revealed, at the most, one (S-SAP) or two
(RAPD) polymorphisms [135,136].
Some studies found surprisingly high levels of marker
polymorphism within cultivars, such as in olive, where
clones have been selected and subsequently multiplied
by vegetative propagation for centuries. In one study, 27
putative clones of ‘Verdeal-Transmontana’ could be dif-
ferentiated with ISSR [137] while even higher levels of
polymorphism were encountered with RAPD (50% poly-
morphic bands) and ISSR (54%) in the screening of 120
putative clones of ‘Cobrançosa’  [138]. Possible explana-
tions for these observations include a polyclonal origin,
accumulation of somatic mutations over the long life-
span of this woody species, and unnoticed establishment
of sexual progeny in the orchards.
Genotyping in vitro-propagated material Heritable
somaclonal variation - that is, variation among regenerants
due to somatic mutations - can be significantly enhanced
by some micropropagation techniques. Although often
regarded as an undesirable side-effect, these mutations
can be valuable in crops that lack sexual reproduction
(such as, for example, banana) or have very long gener-
ation cycles (such as, for example, palm trees). In general,
axillary branches yield the most stable regenerants,
followed by somatic embryogenesis and finally organogen-
esis. It is, however, impossible to predict whether markers
will be able to find any variation in regenerated material,
or what methods will prove to be most efficient.
Very few polymorphisms have generally been found in
tissue culture regenerants. The extent of DNA marker 
polymorphism can, however, vary considerably between
plant materials - even of the same species - as was shown
by comparing the very uniform regenerants of the banana
cultivar ‘Prata Ana’ [139] with the highly variable regener-
ants of cultivar ‘Valery’  [140]. When AFLP analysis was
applied to regenerants of Helichrysum italicum, plantlets
derived directly from leaves showed the same level of vari-
ability as plantlets that had passed through a callus stage
[141]. Although only 6.2% of a total of 449 bands were
polymorphic, almost all plantlets differed from the original
genotype in at least one band. The same band polymorph-
ism was encountered in several plantlets in some cases,
suggesting a hot spot of DNA instability. In another study,
plant material of date palm derived from asexual embryo-
genesis showed considerably more variability than plants
derived from organogenesis when analyzed with AFLP
markers [142].
Detailed sequence-based analysis of the molecular
events responsible for SCAR marker polymorphism (for
example, insertion or excision of transposons, microde-
letion, recombination) between somaclones and sexual
recombination-derived lines of maize, demonstrated that
the same mechanisms apparently determine both in vitro
and in vivo variability [143]. Therefore, it was concluded
that cell culture only enhances the rate of heritable gen-
omic changes which otherwise occur naturally in living
organisms. Carrier and colleagues [144] studied somaclo-
nal variation in the grapevine cultivar ‘Pinot noir’ by high
throughput sequencing and found that insertion poly-
morphism generated by transposable elements was re-
sponsible for most of the variation.
Forensic botany In theory, DNA fingerprints obtained
from plant fragments should be able to provide import-
ant evidence in crime investigations but success has
been limited so far, probably due to problems with iso-
lating DNA of sufficient quality from poorly preserved
plant material. SSR markers are often chosen for forensic
work since they work comparably well also with heavily
degraded DNA. One famous early case, however, in-
volved RAPD analysis of seed pods of the Palo Verde
tree, Cercidium sp., recovered both from the crime site
and from the pick-up truck of a suspect [145], while an-
other case made use of SSR and RAPD analysis to com-
pare fragments from clonally reproducing bryophytes
(mosses) collected both on the crime site and on the
suspect himself [146]. In subsequent experiments, a high
likelihood of picking up fragments of bryophytes by
walking outdoors wearing rubber boots was shown, as
well as the ability to isolate DNA of sufficient quality
after several months of storing bryophyte material under
adverse conditions [147]. These facts together with the
high level of clonality in many bryophyte species make
them an ideal target for forensic analysis. In yet another
Page 12
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 12 of 35
criminal case, seedlings of the inbreeding herbaceous
knotweed Polygonum aviculare obtained from germinat-
ing seeds found in the wheelhouse of a suspect’s car tire,
and from a large number of soil samples taken at the
crime site and various reference localities, were analyzed
with AFLP [103].
Detection of adulterations of food, drink and medicinal
products is another area for forensic botany. Licensing
arrangements sometimes require that a specified clone,
cultivar or landrace is utilized in the manufacturing of
food and beverages. Thus, well-defined grapevine clones
must be used to receive “appellation d'origine controllée”
labelling in France. In one study, musts (that is, freshly
pressed grape juice destined for wine-making) from two
different grape cultivars could be identified using two
SSR markers [148].  In another study, musts containing
different proportions of two grape cultivars were analyzed
with densitometry measurements of the SSR amplification
products after separation and staining on polyacrylamide
gels [149].  In Greece, Nemea wines are marketed with
protected denomination of origin (PDO). Instead of using
only the prescribed cultivar ‘Agiorgitiko’,  the more pro-
ductive ‘Cabernet Sauvignon’  is sometimes added. DNA
samples from fresh and fermented products, containing
various mixtures of these two cultivars, were therefore
subjected to a CAPS assay [150]. Presence of the adulter-
ant could be detected down to 10% throughout the fer-
mentation process.
Olive oil is also often marketed with PDO labelling.
RAPD, ISSR and SSR analysis of Portuguese olive oils
allowed the determination of geographic origin of the
cultivars on which they had been based [151]. Similarly
all 10 olive cultivars involved in samples of Italian oil
samples could be identified with only one AFLP primer
pair [152].  For rice, the adulteration of the expensive
Basmati rice is an important issue, not only for European
and US customs but also for consumers. Basmati cultivars
have often been mixed with crossbred Basmati varieties
and long-grain non-Basmati varieties. Several DNA-based
markers have been proposed, and some were commercial-
ized for adulteration tests, such as the multiplexed SSR
markers developed by Archak and colleagues [153]. DNA
analyses of various plant-based food products have simi-
larly been used for authentication. The presence of the
apple ‘Annurca’ could thus be verified by SSR analysis in
highly processed nectar and purée products [154]. Using
relatively short SSR target sequences (below 160 bp),  it
was also possible to amplify genomic DNA from canned
pear fruit and fruit juice while markers with longer target
sequences failed [155].
Medicinal drugs constitute another important product
area where adulterants cause major problems. Based on
nine SNP sites, all populations except two could be dis-
tinguished in DNA isolated from the dried stems of the 
orchid Dendrobium officinale, which is a valuable source
of ‘Fengdou’ drugs used in traditional Chinese medicine
[156]. The latter two populations could instead be distin-
guished using a more complex procedure known as sup-
pression subtraction hybridization which involves PCR
amplification, differential DNA fragment cloning and se-
quencing. Using these protocols, origination of the plant
material could be determined for 50 drug samples obtained
at a commercial market. For more information on DNA
marker use in medicinal plants, see the reviews by Nybom
and Weising [157] and Sarwat and colleagues [158].
A variety of DNA marker methods have been used to
demonstrate infringement of Plant Breeder’s Rights, ei-
ther in court or, in our experience much more common,
leading to a settlement outside of court [159]. A related
field concerns the identification of plants, the possession
of which is considered illegal. Thus several studies have
been published on the identification of Cannabis sativa
specimens as part of drug enforcement [160]. In one ap-
proach, 15 SSR loci were combined into a single multiplex
to enable fast and user-friendly discrimination between
Cannabis genotypes [161]. One of the detected genotypes,
however, proved to be very common in police seizure-
derived evidence material, suggesting that many illicit
growers had access to the same clone. This clonal propaga-
tion of course makes it difficult to determine the origination
of a particular batch. A related DNA marker application
concerns violation of trade restrictions. A special situation
is encountered when products from protected trees are in-
volved since woody tissue usually yields heavily degraded
DNA. Nevertheless, a set of SNP markers derived from
cpDNA intergenic spacers have proven useful for identifi-
cation of tropical tree species using wood-derived DNA
samples [162].
Genetic diversity, population structure and genetic
relatedness
Discrimination among different genotypes is often only a
starting point for the subsequent quantification of gen-
etic variability among these genotypes and analysis of
patterns of relatedness and gene flow. The extent of gen-
etic variation in a species and its distribution among and
within populations is determined by a large number of
factors, such as the breeding system, historical events re-
garding, for example, habitat availability and immigra-
tion, population size, migration between populations and
many biotic and abiotic ecological factors. Nybom and
Bartish [163] compiled 106 RAPD-based studies and de-
scribed the effects of several life history characters and
sampling strategies on genetic diversity estimates. In
another paper [96],  307 nuclear DNA marker studies
(RAPD, AFLP and SSR) were compiled and investigated
in a similar manner. One outcome of these surveys was
that long-lived, outcrossing and late successional taxa
Page 13
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 13 of 35
retain most of their variation within populations, whereas
annual, selfing and early successional taxa allocate more
variation among populations. Within-population diversity
is, in general, negatively correlated with the level of popu-
lation differentiation.
The uniparentally inherited plastid genomes behave as
a single, haploid character, and the effective population
size for plastid markers is therefore only half of that
of nuclear (diploid and biparentally inherited) markers.
Consequently, population differentiation due to genetic
drift occurs much faster for cpDNA markers than for
nuclear markers. Because of their relatively high intra-
specific variability, chloroplast and mitochondrial micro-
and minisatellites are therefore very useful for studying
genetic structure at a species-wide scale.
Population differentiation and gene flow DNA markers
have become a major tool for studying fundamental evo-
lutionary influences of natural selection, mutation, gene
flow and genetic drift on wild plant populations. While
selection and colonization history is responsible mainly
for large-scale structuring of genetic variation, gene flow
and genetic drift operate also at a more narrow geo-
graphic scale. Among these factors, gene flow especially
has received much attention since it is crucial in deter-
mining levels of species integrity and subdivision. As
already mentioned, breeding system has a profound
effect on gene flow and the partitioning of genetic vari-
ation between and within populations. The occurrence
of IBD between populations has been demonstrated with
DNA markers in many different kinds of outcrossing
plant species such as, for example, the herb Saxifraga
oppositifolia [164],  the Brazilian peppertree Schinus
terebinthifolius [165] and the Australian shrub Grevillea
mucronulata [166].  IBD has been shown to occur, al-
though much more seldom, also in selfing species such as
wild emmer wheat, Triticum dicoccoides [167]. In accord-
ance with these results, a correlation was found between
collection distance and RAPD-based among-population
diversity estimates for outcrossing taxa [163].  A corre-
sponding association was, however, not found for self-
ing taxa.
In addition to the inherent dispersal capabilities of a
species, gene flow is also affected by natural and an-
thropogenic habitat heterogeneity. Spatial autocorrelation
analysis has thus become a valuable tool for studying
spatial scale-dependent changes in DNA marker poly-
morphism within a population or group of closely occur-
ring populations, and the impact of habitat characteristics
on the resulting spatial genetic structure (SGS).  Several
computational methods have been used to calculate
autocorrelation coefficients that measure the genetic
similarity between individuals that fall within a defined
distance class. A positive autocorrelation is frequently 
encountered over shorter distances, even if there is no
overall linear correlation between geographic and genetic
distances when calculated across the whole data set. Using
RAPD data, Torres and colleagues [168] found significant
autocorrelation in the first distance class (15 m) in pop-
ulations of the endangered cliff specialist Antirrhinum
microphyllum, suggesting a patchy distribution of gen-
etic diversity. This is consistent with the territorial
behavior of the main pollinator Rhodanthidium sticticum,
short-distance seed dispersal, and a likewise patchy distri-
bution of suitable habitats.
Many plant species comprise both central, so-called
core populations as well as more or less peripheral pop-
ulations. Such populations may experience considerable
differences in the magnitude of operating evolutionary
and ecological forces. For example, edge and core popula-
tions of the herb Pulmonaria officinalis exhibited strong
differences in allelic and genotypic richness, expected het-
erozygosity and inbreeding coefficent when analyzed with
SSR markers [169]. Similarly, an SSR analysis of eastern
white cedar, Thuja occidentalis, showed that SGS could
be detected over a six times larger distance (90 m) within
peripheral populations compared to within core popula-
tions (15 m) [170].
Autocorrelation analysis has demonstrated IBD also in
mainly selfing species but then usually at a very narrow
scale, as was shown in the wild barley species Hordeum
spontaneum [171].
Highly informative estimations of gene flow can be ob-
tained by genotyping the same plant material using both
nuclear and organellar markers. Since the former are bi-
parentally inherited and the latter usually only mater-
nally inherited, the resulting data provide an indication
of the relative importance of pollen versus seed migra-
tion [172]. This ratio can vary by at least two orders of
magnitude, and is typically much lower for insect- as
compared to wind-pollinated plants [173].  In dioecious
and therefore obligatory outcrossing plants, a mixture of
autosomal and sex-linked SSR markers can provide
direct evidence of the relative importance of seed ver-
sus pollen dispersal. Contrary to previous expectations,
similar levels of pollen and seed dispersal were detected in
the dioecius perennial plant Silene latifolia [174].  In
selfing species, the lower incidence of inter-plant
pollen transfer is expected to reduce the pollen to seed
migration ratio, as verified by values well below unity at
short distances within wild populations of Hordeum
spontaneum [171].
While genes can move between populations by seed
and/or pollen, colonization of new habitats is dependent
on seed only. In coastal plants, seeds often have the
potential to disperse over long distances by hydro-
chory. In a study of wild sea beet, Beta vulgaris subsp.
Maritima, comprising more than a thousand plants from
Page 14
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 14 of 35
33 populations along the French coast of the Anglo-
Norman gulf, both mitochondrial and nuclear SSRs were
applied [175]. Analysis of SGS and determination of zones
of sharp genetic change demonstrated narrow IBD indica-
tive of short-range dispersal, as well as genetic barriers fit-
ting the orientation of marine currents and indicative of
long-range seed dispersal.
Effects of an increased subdivision or fragmentation of
natural plant habitats has received much attention lately;
dispersal between populations is reduced as well as
genetic diversity. Outcrossing species may especially
suffer from enforced selfing or biparental inbreeding
in fragmented habitats, and lose much of their poten-
tial for adaptation to changing environmental condi-
tions. Using SSR markers, White and colleagues [176]
compared fragmented versus continuous populations
of the tropical tree Swietenia humilis in Honduras. Gen-
etic variation was still high in all habitat fragments, but
low-frequency alleles were more scarce, thus foreboding
future genetic erosion. In another early study on trop-
ical trees, Aldrich and Hamrick [177] reconstructed a
population-level pedigree of Symphonia globulifera.
Seedlings only occurred in primary and remnant forests,
but not in pastures. Surprisingly, however, the majority of
seedlings in fragmented forests proved to be derived from
a few adult trees located in the open pasture land. Thus
the genetic bottleneck experienced by the seedlings in
remnant forest patches was caused by the reproductive
dominance of a few spatially isolated trees in pasture land,
in conjunction with unusually high levels of selfing in
these trees.
Overall, tree species have been considered as compara-
tively resilient to fragmentation due to their often highly
effective long-distance dispersal mechanisms. Recently,
however, the wind-pollinated and wind-dispersed Andean
tree Polylepis multijuga was analyzed with AFLP and
shown to contain surprisingly little heterozygosity and
to display SGS at short distances, suggesting that
most seeds moved only a few meters [178].  This type
of information is valuable when developing conserva-
tion plans for species protection and perhaps also for a
possible reintroduction. Information about, for example,
colonization and spreading behavior can be equally helpful
when developing measures for stopping further growth of
an invasive species. A combination of spatial genetic and
geostatistical analyses of data from chloroplast and nu-
clear SSRs showed how the original two introductions of
the invasive Brazilian peppertree Schinus terebinthifolius
in western and eastern Florida, respectively, had spread
and hybridized in little more than one century [165]. Since
both long-distance jumps and short-distance diffusive
spread could be demonstrated, highly concerted eradica-
tion efforts or the manufacturing of effective biocontrol
agents are apparently called for. 
Genetic relatedness DNA fingerprinting data are often
used to quantify levels of relatedness among genotypes
or groups of genotypes, and numerous relatedness esti-
mators have been described and compared. When wild
plants are involved, the purpose is often to compare
DNA marker-derived estimations of relatedness with
current systematic treatment (see also "Applications of
present-day DNA fingerprinting in plants" above). Other
applications include parentage analysis, which is the
most direct way to estimate gene flow. SSRs are the
most commonly used markers for this purpose but data
simulations have shown that multi-locus markers such
as AFLP can also be used with high confidence, at least
when the dominant alleles occur in frequencies of 0.1 to
0.4 [179]. Using SSR, a paternity analysis was conducted
in a natural stand with two oak species, Quercus robur
and Q. petraea [180].  The spatial distribution of male
parents of the offspring from 13 maternal progeny arrays
was determined, and the information used for calcula-
tion of pollen dispersal curves and analysis of gene flow.
Similarly, gene flow was estimated from an SSR-based
paternity analysis in the South American palm tree
Euterpe edulis [181]. First, an exclusion analysis was per-
formed by comparing adult and juvenile genotypes. After
that, a paternity index was calculated among adults that
could be the putative parents for a particular juvenile.
Gene flow was shown to take place over longer distances
than expected (up to 22 km), but it was not possible to
distinguish between seed versus pollen transport. Since
chloroplasts are paternally inherited in conifers, chloro-
plast simple sequence repeat (cpSSR) markers can, how-
ever, be very useful for direct estimates of paternity, as
was demonstrated in white fir, Abies alba [182].
Access to correctly defined relationships can be very
important in plant breeding for the calculation of herit-
ability of specific traits. Various statistical formulae have
therefore been developed for determining genetic rela-
tionships among individual plants. In a comparison of
either purely marker-derived estimations of relationships
or combined pedigree and marker-derived estimations,
the latter proved to be more informative when analyzing
Scots pine, Pinus sylvestris, offspring in a progeny test of
open-pollinated genotypes in a seed orchard [183]. Sur-
prisingly incongruent data were obtained when S-SAP
markers, SNPs and pedigree data for a set of 35 wheat
cultivars were compared [184]. The molecular methods
produced similar estimates for the overall partitioning
of genetic diversity between and within groups of cul-
tivars, but the genetic similarities between pairs of
cultivars were not correlated. SNP-based data were
more closely associated with pedigree information
than S-SAP-based estimates, probably because polymor-
phisms are strongly dependent on retrotransposon-related
genomic rearrangements.
Page 15
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 15 of 35
For cultivated crop plants, estimates of relatedness can
provide valuable insights into the domestication process
when material originating from different geographic
areas is analyzed such as in, for example, Italian olive
cultivars [121].  Relatedness among cultivated material
on the one hand, and wild populations of the same or
closely related species on the other hand, has also been
addressed in, for example, apple using SSR, AFLP and
cpDNA markers [185,186] (see also "Hybridization and
introgression" below).
Estimating the true level of genetic relatedness among
cultivars from nuclear DNA marker data is quite diffi-
cult, since the obtained information can usually only
estimate identity by state (phenetic analysis) instead of
the more desirable identity by descent (phylogenetic
analysis).  One interesting approach towards a true
phylogenetic analysis has, however, been achieved within
the HiDRAS project [187]. This project involves the ana-
lysis of specific chromosomal regions in genetically re-
lated apple cultivars using a large set of SSR markers
that cover almost the whole genome. Thus, being able to
accurately detect levels of genetic relatedness between
different cultivars is very helpful for further analyses of,
for example, QTL inheritance.
DNA marker-based procedures have frequently been
applied to assess diversity and relatedness in collections
of cultivated plant material - for example, gene banks.
Interestingly, the anticipated loss of overall genetic di-
versity proved to be negligible when studied in 198
Nordic bread wheat landraces and cultivars that were
developed during the last 100 years [100]. DNA markers
are also highly useful for the purpose of setting up
core collections within gene banks - that is, subsets
of the entire plant material, chosen so as to preserve
as much as possible of the initial diversity. Two main
approaches have been used; the first with some kind
of stratification using cluster analysis, and the second
with methods for determination of genetic unique-
ness. Numbers of retained SSR alleles can be maximized
using a measure of uniqueness known as maximation
strategy [188-190].
Genome constitution: hybridization, introgression and
polyploidy
In contrast to animals, many plant groups are character-
ized by highly variable ploidy levels, often even within
the same species. This addition of genomes has certain
effects on DNA marker application and data treatment.
Moreover, the formation of hybrids by fusion of gametes
from two different entities (species, subspecies, and so
forth) is also common in plants [191]. While homoploid
hybridization takes place at the same ploidy level, most
hybridization events instead involve the duplication of
genomes, resulting in allopolyploid taxa. 
Hybridization and introgression In a series of classical
studies, homoploid hybridization among American Iris
species was investigated using a wide variety of DNA-
based methods. First, Iris fulva and I. hexagona were
shown to each have a species-specific rDNA profile [192].
Subsequently, DNA profiles indicated inter-specific
hybridization as well as further introgression in both di-
rections in populations where the two species co-occurred
[193]. Diagnostic RAPD and cpDNA-CAPS markers were
generated for these two species as well as for I. brevicaulis,
and I. nelsonii was shown to have derived from hybridization
between all three species [194].
Another important set of studies on homoploid
hybridization has been undertaken in the sunflower
genus, Helianthus. RAPD linkage maps were developed
for the sympatric and hybridizing species H. petiolaris
and H. annuus and subsequently used to analyze the
genome of a recently formed hybrid species, H. anomalus,
as well as of an artificially generated hybrid [191,195].
Later on, divergence between the two parental species
was analyzed using 108 mapped SSR markers [196],
and below average introgression was noted for SSR
markers located close to QTLs for species differences
when two parapatric species, H. annuus and H. debilis,
were investigated [197,198]. Interestingly, gene flow was
mainly in the direction from the hybrid back into these
two parental species [199].
cpDNA-derived information has played a major role in
elucidating many cases of homoploid hybridization and
subsequent introgression. Studies of multiple taxa in
several tree genera have thus shown that chloroplast
haplotypes often are closer associated with geographic
origin than with species affiliation - for example, in oak
trees, Quercus [200], in Eucalyptus from Tasmania [201]
and in the South East Asian pioneer tree genus Macaranga
[202].  This introgression phenomenon has been coined
“chloroplast capture” [203].
DNA markers are also commonly used for detecting
both ancient and ongoing hybridization between crops
and their wild relatives. Malus sieversii grows in
Kazakhstan and has been suggested as progenitor of cul-
tivated apple, M. domestica,  based on morphological,
historical and molecular evidence [204].  Nuclear SSR-
based analyses have later been undertaken to investi-
gate the genetic diversity and population structure in
M. sieversii [205].  The origination of cultivated apple
may, however, be more complicated. In another SSR-
based study, three separate although partly overlap-
ping gene pools were formed by (1) M. sieversii, (2) the
European wild apple species M. silvestris, and (3) old and
modern apple cultivars [186]. In the same plant material,
analyses of chloroplast haplotypes produced rather unex-
pected results. Thus, M. sylvestris not only had the same
common haplotypes as M. domestica, but there was also
Page 16
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 16 of 35
local sharing of uncommon haplotypes between the
two species, suggesting recent inter-specific gene flow.
A strong affinity between M. sylvestris and modern
apple cultivars was likewise suggested in an SSR ana-
lysis of 839 genotypes collected from China to Spain,
and representing four wild species as well as culti-
vated apple [206].  In this study, data were analyzed
both with the computer program STRUCTURE, and
with approximate Bayesian computation which offers
a more historical perspective on gene flow.
Two variants of STRUCTURE, InStruct and NewHybrids,
were used by Muranishi and colleagues [207] in a recent
SSR-based study of Magnolia stellata and M. salicifolia
together with putative F1 
and F2 
hybrids and backcrosses.
The resulting clusters could be verified also with morpho-
logical trait analysis. Simultaneous application of cpDNA
SSR markers showed that introgression was heavily asym-
metric, with M. salicifolia being the seed parent of almost
all hybrids and backcrosses.
In plant breeding, there can be good reasons for
analyzing parental contributions in recently developed,
experimental hybrids, especially if the breeding process
has involved one or several generations of backcrossing.
The amount of parental influence could thus be quantified
using a microarray analysis with 7,680 probes simultan-
eously detecting SNPs, indels and methylation differences,
in a set of intergeneric hybrids between the commercially
important grass genera Festuca and Lolium [126]. The ex-
tent of similarity between the derived Festulolium cultivars
and the parental genomes was clearly associated with the
type of crossings performed - that is, F1
, F2 
or backcrosses.
Polyploidy Polyploidy is very common in the plant
kingdom. Although the same marker technologies can
be used for genotyping diploid as well as polyploid sam-
ples, statistical analyses and interpretations are usually
less straightforward when polyploid samples are involved.
Many species are allopolyploids and have been derived
from their diploid ancestors by hybridization. Moreover,
molecular studies of allopolyploid taxa and their putative
progenitor taxa have shown that multiple origination is
the rule rather than the exception. While frequent gene
flow between polyploid lineages and back-crossing to par-
ental taxa can further confound this process, a more easily
studied case is offered in apomictic species where the spe-
ciation event is more or less frozen in time. One such ex-
ample is the North American allopolyploid cloak fern,
Astrolepis integerrima,  which was recently studied by
cpDNA sequencing and AFLP analysis [208]. Six relatively
localized cpDNA haplotypes were detected, some of which
were further divided by AFLP. All in all, the results sug-
gested that a total of 10 A. integerrima lineages have been
formed through multiple independent hybridizations be-
tween A. cochisensis and A. obscura. 
Identification of the putative progenitor species of poly-
ploids can be attempted with various types of markers,
including the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region in
the nuclear ribosomal RNA gene clusters which was se-
quenced and analyzed in, for example, polyploid rose cul-
tivars and species [209]. Nair and colleagues [210] used
IRAP primers to determine the genomic constitution in a
set of mostly triploid banana cultivars. Primer sequences
were derived from two different retrotransposons, one oc-
curring in the A genome (Musa acuminata) and the other
in the B genome (M. balbisiana). A more easily applied
CAPS marker, obtained from PCR amplification of the
ITS region followed by restriction with RsaI, has also been
applied for this task [211]. More recently, application of
653 DArT markers similarly allowed the discrimination
between A and B genomes, and the identification of these
genomes within a set of banana cultivars [212].
Multi-locus based methods such as RAPD and AFLP
are sometimes used for studying population genetics in
species with different ploidy levels, but problems can
arise due to a positive correlation between ploidy level
and number of scored bands [213]. In addition, banding
patterns may differ qualitatively between samples at dif-
ferent ploidy levels, and thus give rise to scoring errors.
Single-locus markers such as SSRs and SNPs are also
problematic due to the occurrence of multiple alleles
and complex segregation ratios. SSR markers may be
more or less genome (and species)-specific and therefore
fit only one of the two homologous genomes of an allo-
polyploid hybrid, producing no amplification in the
other (null alleles, or allele drop-out).  Truly genome-
specific SSR loci that consistently produce a maximum of
only two alleles in each sample are rare, but can be quite
useful as demonstrated in the hexaploid Mercurialis
annua [214]. With these markers, population genetics pa-
rameters could be calculated as if the species instead were
diploid.
For allopolyploid crops with intermediate levels of simi-
larity among homologous genomes, such as tetraploid po-
tato, SSR primers in general produce a variable number of
bands per locus. For example, Fu and colleagues [215]
found a total of 64 alleles when investigating 169 potato
accessions with 36 SSR primer pairs. Even apparently dip-
loid species such as apple may be “ancient polyploids” in
which some primer pairs can produce a second set of
alleles derived from an unrecognized duplicated genomic
area [187].  Amplification of these supernumerary loci
(isoloci) frequently varies with the experimental con-
ditions, and can cause problems when data are being
combined from several laboratories.
In autopolyploids and in allopolyploids with low gen-
omic differentiation, SSR analyses usually produce multiple
alleles of a single locus in each genotype, as demonstrated
in the autopolyploid and apomictic Ranunculus kuepferi
Page 17
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 17 of 35
[216] and in allopolyploid species and cultivars in the
genus Rosa [217-219]. To fully utilize the information con-
tent of the obtained DNA profiles, segregation patterns
must be determined. This, however, requires the ability to
score allele dosage, in contrast to just the presence or ab-
sence of an allele. The MAC-PR approach (microsatellite
DNA allele counting - peak ratios) determines allele copy
number based on quantitative differences between micro-
satellite allele peak ratios and therefore allows the precise
determination of allelic configuration in each studied sam-
ple, as was shown in tetraploid roses [217,220]. Using this
approach, inheritance patterns have been studied even in
the absence of experimental crosses [221].  High-quality
banding patterns are, however, needed for successful ap-
plication of the MAC-PR, as well as repeatability of rela-
tive allelic amplification intensities among individuals and,
thus, homology of microsatellite marker alleles within a
species.
In crop plants with detailed pedigree information, the
so-called microsatellite allele dose and configuration es-
tablishment (MADCE) procedure can be used to trace
the transmittal of SSR alleles through documented gen-
erations of the investigated plant material, and deter-
mine the exact allele copy number in the target cultivars
[222]. Originally, the MADCE procedure was applied in
apple [222] but informative results have recently been
obtained also for the Strawberry Crop Reference Set
within the RosBreed research project (Bassil N, personal
communication).
In many situations, allele dosage can, however, not be
accurately scored with the methods chosen, and much
plant material lacks or has only unsatisfactory pedigree
information. Specialized programs have therefore been
developed for analyzing polyploids with SSR markers,
such as, for example, TETRA [223] and POLYSAT [224].
The fitTetra R package has been developed for enab-
ling genotype calling in tetraploid species from bialle-
lic marker data, and is especially useful for large-scale
SNP analyses in material with high levels of polysomic al-
lele segregation such as potato [225]. By contrast, the bead
array MSV package [226] appears to be more useful for
material with mainly disomic segregation.
A major drawback with any multi-locus approach is the
loss of information about exact levels of heterozygosity
and about genome inheritance. In addition, genetic dis-
tances between cultivars are exaggerated as compared to
distances calculated on the basis of co-dominant data
[220]. A method for calculating genetic distances that per-
mits unbiased comparisons between different ploidy levels
has, however, been described [227] and is available in the
computer program package GENOTYPE/GENODIVE.
Another approach is based on the formation of multi-
locus allele phenotypes of each investigated individual,
and calculation of phenotype-based estimates of genetic 
diversity and differentiation [228]. For more information
on methods to describe the population genetics of poly-
ploids, see Assoumane and colleagues [229].
Plant speciation, phylogeny and systematics
As the availability of DNA-based information increases,
more attention is being paid to the genomic patterns of
differentiation among plant species. According to the
genic view of plant speciation, small “genomic islands”
may be responsible for much of the differentiation be-
tween taxa through divergent selection or reproductive
isolation barriers, while the remainder so-called “porous
genome” is more permeable to gene flow [230,231].  In
this context, the choice of molecular method becomes
crucial for the ability to reflect genomic differentiation
in a phylogenetically relevant perspective. To determine
relative marker sensitivity in monitoring inter-specific dif-
ferentiation, Scotti-Saintagne and colleagues [232] con-
ducted a genome scanning experiment with 389 markers
(allozymes, AFLPs, SCARs, SSRs and SNPs) on sam-
ples from pairs of populations of the sympatric oak
species Quercus robur and Q. petraea.  Distribution of
markers according to their ability to detect inter-species di-
versity was clearly L-shaped; apparently only a few markers
were located in genomic regions responsible for species
differentiation. As expected, these markers were more
likely to reside in coding regions than in non-coding re-
gions. In another genome scan based on 88 mapped SSR
loci, most loci again showed considerable migration be-
tween the analyzed taxa: sunflower species Helianthus
annuus,  H. debilis and their inter-specific hybrid [199].
The genomic regions that are responsible for genetic dif-
ferentiation therefore appear to be small in these taxa,
whether estimated as level of species differentiation or as
migration rates.
When targeting differentiation at a larger taxonomic
scale, DNA sequence information of the chloroplast gen-
ome and/or nuclear genic regions, is usually preferred
over DNA fingerprinting. Proper elucidation of the com-
plex puzzle of plant systematics is, however, often best
achieved with a combination of different types of mo-
lecular information. In many plant groups, various types
of multi-locus or single-locus markers have thus pro-
vided important pieces to the puzzle. So far, these marker
loci have seldom been placed on a genomic map (but see,
for example, [199,232]), and whether they reside in a con-
served versus a “porous” part of the genome is usually un-
known. Instead, choice of markers has mainly been based
on the feasibility of obtaining a sufficiently large number
of polymorphic bands.
Multi-locus DNA profiling methods such as AFLPs have
become the most commonly used DNA fingerprinting
tool in plant systematics, mainly in situations where DNA
sequencing produces insufficient phylogenetic resolution
Page 18
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 18 of 35
[233]. In an early plant systematic study using AFLPs, 551
polymorphic bands were obtained with three primer com-
binations for 30 accessions from 19 taxa of Solanum
section Petota and three taxa of Solanum section
Lycopersicum [213].  Ploidy level was reflected in the
profiles, with hexaploids exhibiting more bands than
tetraploids and diploids. Mating system had, as ex-
pected, a large impact, with 40 to 60% intra-specific
polymorphism detected in outcrossing taxa as compared
to only 0 to 2% in selfing taxa. AFLP methodology was
also employed to investigate phylogenetic relationships
among 43 species of the paleotropic pioneer tree genus
Macaranga [234]. About 30 of these species have a symbi-
otic relationship with specific ant partners. The result-
ing phenograms supported the monophyly of several
sections and subsectional groups within the genus, and
provided evidence for a polyphyletic origin of the ant-
plant mutualism.
Besides the two species of cultivated rice, the genus
Oryza also comprises of around 22 wild species that
have received considerable attention due to their poten-
tial importance for rice breeding. Six diploid genomes
(A, B, C, E, F and G) and four allotetraploids (BC, CD,
HJ and HK) have been identified using, among other
methods, total genomic DNA hybridization [235]. In an-
other early study on rice, 77 samples representing 23
Oryza species were analyzed with AFLP [236]. Pairwise
genetic distances showed a linear increase depending on
the taxonomic level, with 0.02 to 0.21 within species, 0.2
to 0.35 between species sharing the same genome type,
and >0.7 between species carrying different genomes.
For the subsequent analysis of phylogenetic relationships
among these genomes, more conserved markers were
developed through the identification and sequencing of
numerous rice genes [237]. Comparison of sequences for
142 such genes in six species, representing the six differ-
ent diploid genomes, allowed the reconstruction of the
rapid diversification in Oryza. In a follow-up study based
on the sequences of 106 nuclear genes, divergence times
and ancestral effective population sizes were also deter-
mined [238].
In the large and complex genus Rosa, several different
DNA-based methods have been applied for phenetic and
phylogenetic analyses, with mostly consistent results - for
example SSR [239] and AFLP [240].  Two major clades
were identified, with sections Carolinae,  Cinnamomeae
and parts of Pimpinellifoliae forming one clade and most
of the other seven commonly recognized sections forming
the other clade. As for the division into sections, Synstylae
appears to be mainly monophyletic and rather closely affil-
iated with sections Indicae and Rosa [240]. Furthermore,
section Pimpinellifoliae is apparently polyphyletic, and
R. spinosissima should be separated from the other species
in this section. In spite of its size (currently, about 50 
species are acknowledged) and hybridogenous origination,
the mainly European section Caninae (also known as
dog roses) apparently constitutes a well-circumscribed
monophyletic group. Another, very large AFLP study
was recently conducted on >900 dog rose specimens
sampled in a transect across Europe, with more than 200
non-dog rose samples analyzed for comparison [241].
Two lines of statistical analyses were applied: (1) an un-
structured model with principal coordinate analysis and
hierarchical clustering, and (2) a model with a superim-
posed taxonomic structure based on analysis of genetic
diversity using a novel approach that combines assign-
ment tests with canonical discriminant analysis. Support
was found for five of the seven subsections, including
the three major ones: Caninae, Rubigineae and Vestitae.
Within the subsections, many species overlapped consid-
erably, and geographic distances often appeared to be
at least as important as the conventional taxonomy in
explaining similarities between analyzed specimens.
Complementary information on phylogeny in Rosa
has also been obtained with DNA sequencing. Although
sharing some ITS sequence types with species in other sec-
tions thereby confirming their hybridogenous origin, the
Caninae species also have one unique ITS sequence type
which is further evidence of their monophyly [209,242].
Plant systematic studies have occasionally been con-
ducted also using SSR markers, especially when the
focus has been on genetic differentiation among closely
related taxa. For example, ten Puerto Rican populations
of the cycad genus Zamia were analyzed with 31 SSR
primer pairs [243].  These populations could be treated
either as belonging to a single polymorphic species,
Z. pumila,  or as representing three more narrowly cir-
cumscribed taxa: Z. erosa, Z. portoricensis and Z. pumila
sensu stricto.  The SSR analysis showed that Z. erosa is
strongly differentiated from the other two species, and
thus may represent an independent introduction into
Puerto Rico. The data are consistent with an allopatric
speciation scenario with Z. portoricensis being the youn-
gest taxon according to Bayesian coalescent analysis and
effective population size, and still showing considerable
admixture with Z. pumila.
Genetic relationships among 35 Arachis species from
seven sections, including 11 accessions of cultivated pea-
nut, A. hypogaea,  were analyzed on the basis of allelic
variation at 32 SSR loci [244].  A neighbor joining tree
was generated on the basis of pairwise Dice distances
between individual accessions, calculated from a bin-
ary presence/absence matrix of SSR alleles. Most
con-specific accessions grouped together on the tree,
as did species from the same section, with several ex-
ceptions that were attributed by the authors to either
homoplasy in the dataset or extensive within-species
variation.
Page 19
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 19 of 35
From the relatively few studies available, it appears
that SSR markers do have some potential not only for
species delimitation, but also for the reconstruction of gen-
etic relationships among closely related species groups that
are only a few million years old. However, SSR markers are
usually highly polymorphic and therefore multiallelic
within a species. Accordingly, the within-population com-
ponent of SSR variation is often much higher than the
between-population or between-species component [245].
It is therefore a “must” that several accessions per species
are included in any phylogenetic study that is based on
SSRs, the more the better. Optimally, genetic distances be-
tween populations (or species) rather than genetic dis-
tances between individuals should be used to generate
phenetic trees.
Phylogeography
Phylogeography aims to study the spatio-temporal his-
tory of a species on the basis of its intra-specific genetic
variation [246]. In principle, phylogeographic studies can
be based on information from either nuclear, mitochon-
drial or chloroplast DNA. In practice, organellar DNA is
usually preferred since organelle-derived markers are
more likely to retain information about biogeographical
history than nuclear markers [247].  There are several
reasons for this. First, the haploid genomes of plastids
and mitochondria exhibit a smaller effective population
size as compared with the diploid nuclear genome,
resulting in stronger substructuring of fragmented popu-
lations under genetic drift. Second, organellar genomes
are usually inherited uniparentally. In angiosperms, the
plastid DNA is generally transmitted by seeds - that is,
maternally. Given that plants can colonize a new habitat
only by seeds, plastid-derived markers have the potential
to provide information about past changes in species
distribution that is unaffected by pollen flow. Third,
intermolecular recombination is usually absent in plastid
DNA, so that individual sequence polymorphisms can
be combined into haplotypes that remain mostly un-
changed when passed to the next generation.
Evolutionary relationships between cpDNA haplotypes
are often depicted as networks [248], which can be super-
imposed on the geographic distribution of the sampled
plants. One has to keep in mind, however, that a non-
recombining DNA molecule behaves like a single gene. The
phylogeographic pattern retrieved from a plastid haplotype
network therefore only represents one out of several pos-
sible outcomes of the genealogical process [249].  This is
why phylogeographic analyses based on other genes and ge-
nomes are becoming increasingly popular. In conifers,
where plastid DNA (paternal) and mitochondrial DNA
(maternal) show contrasting modes of transmission from
parents to offspring, both genomes have often been ana-
lyzed side-by-side [250,251].  In addition, phylogeographic 
studies often employ nuclear ribosomal ITS sequences. In
most plant species, the ribosomal genes are rapidly ho-
mogenized by concerted evolution and then behave like
uniparentally inherited organellar DNA.
There is no clear division between phylogeography on
the one hand and traditional population genetics on the
other. Accordingly, the use of nuclear SSR markers to
study genetic diversity, genetic subdivision and gene flow
within and among extant species is sometimes also
called “phylogeography” [252], and there have been nu-
merous successful attempts to elucidate intra-specific
phylogeographic patterns by multi-locus DNA profiling
methods such as RAPD, ISSR and AFLP [253,254].
Multi-locus banding patterns are typically analyzed phe-
netically - that is, phenograms or networks are recon-
structed on the basis of a pair-wise similarity matrix that
is generated from a binary presence/absence matrix of
band positions. The (groups of ) genotypes depicted in
the resulting phenogram or network are then compared
with their geographic distribution [253].
The majority of plant phylogeographic studies still rely
on plastid DNA polymorphisms that can be searched for
by either PCR-RFLP, screening of length-variable plastid
microsatellites (cpSSRs),  or by comparative sequencing
of PCR-amplified non-coding DNA [255]. Unique poly-
morphisms are then combined into distinct haplotypes,
followed by the analysis of haplotype distribution and
frequencies in different geographical regions, quantifica-
tion of the genetic divergence between haplotypes, and
the evaluation of genetic relationships between haplo-
types - for example, in the form of a statistical parsi-
mony network such as TCS [256]. The use of cpSSRs is,
however, controversial, since their often high mutation
rates can cause homoplasy [257,258].
Application areas of marker-based phylogeographic
studies are diverse, and include, for example, the analysis
of postglacial re-colonization patterns of the Central
European landscape by trees and shrubs in the Quaternary
[252,259], the identification of glacial refugia [260], the re-
construction of migration routes of halophytes along
coastal and inland salty habitats [253], the investigation of
the evolutionary history of tropical trees [255] and the his-
torical biogeography of threatened species [251]. Increas-
ingly important are comparative phylogeographies that
involve numerous animals and plants from the same geo-
graphical region [261,262].  Such meta-analyses yield in-
valuable data on common evolutionary patterns across
many biota from large geographical areas.
Genetic mapping
Linkage mapping and genetic maps One prominent
application of molecular markers is the generation of
genetic maps which have been established for all major
and many minor crops and other plants (for example,
Page 20
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 20 of 35
rice [263],  barley [264],  and maize [265], to name just a
few).  A genetic map is a graphic representation of a
chromosome (or linkage group) onto which genetic ele-
ments (= loci, for example markers or genes) are aligned.
The loci are arranged based on their co-segregation during
meiosis, which depends on the frequency of recombination
events. Genetic distances between loci are measured in
centiMorgan (cM). One cM is defined as the distance that
two loci have to each other, if in 100 meiotic events the loci
are segregating only once (= 99% chance of co-segregation).
As the extent of recombination varies in different genomes,
this translates into varying physical distances. The re-
combination frequency also varies among different gen-
omic regions - for example, recombination is suppressed
near centromeres.
To estimate genetic distances among loci, the co-
segregation of genetic elements is monitored in mapping
populations or in association mapping approaches (see
below). Mapping populations usually originate from a
cross between two parental lines, which ideally can be
distinguished by a large number of polymorphisms that
are monitored in the progeny. Particularly convenient
mapping populations consist of so-called Recombinant
Inbred Lines (RILs), which are generated by selfing single-
seed descent from different sibling F2 
plants through
six or more generations. The continuous selfing causes very
high levels of homozygosity, and each RIL from a popu-
lation of RILs hence conserves one particular recombi-
national event from the F1 cross. Design and construction
of RILs have been reviewed by Pollard [266].
To identify loci that are very tightly linked with a spe-
cific trait, “fine-mapping” is performed by enriching the
density of markers in proximity of the responsible genes
or, in the best case, markers for the responsible genetic
elements themselves. The most commonly applied tech-
nique for fine-mapping is Bulked Segregant Analysis
(BSA), originally developed by Michelmore and colleagues
[267]. In a BSA, all genotypes that show a specific pheno-
type (that is, a specific trait) are pooled and screened for
polymorphisms that distinguish them from the remaining
plants. All genetic elements that do not influence the
bulk-trait are randomly distributed among all plants,
whereas all genetic elements responsible for the trait are
to be found preferentially if not only in the respective
bulk. In consequence, any difference between the bulk
and the remaining plants is likely to be linked with the
trait of interest. The source of polymorphisms can be, for
example, the metabolome, the proteome, the transcrip-
tome or the genome. The latter two have profited enor-
mously from the advent of high-throughput-sequencing
technologies and are now the most widely used sources
for genetic polymorphisms.
Different types of markers can be combined into inte-
grated maps, which become more highly resolved (that 
is, saturated) with each newly added marker. Further-
more, data from different crosses can be integrated in
the same map. For example, Wenzl and colleagues [264]
published an integrated map for barley using DArT, SSR,
RFLP and STS markers, altogether comprising 2,935 dif-
ferent loci. In the current era of genome sequencing,
genetic maps are also a versatile tool for defining the
order of assembled contigs from shotgun sequencing ap-
proaches, as has been done, for example, during the as-
sembly of the recently published chickpea genome [268].
Association mapping Association mapping (AM) aims
at linking phenotypes to genotypes, independent of the
kinship of the genotypes. The concept of AM has been
implemented in humans and model organisms for many
years (for example within the human HapMap project
that started in 2002), and is now increasingly applied for
plant genomes (see the reviews by Abdurakhmonov and
Abdukarimov [269] and Soto-Cerda and Cloutier [270]).
The major advantage of AM over linkage mapping (LM)
or QTL mapping is that no mapping population is re-
quired. The establishment of good mapping populations
is a time-consuming and costly task, especially for plants
with long generation times and hence a limited number
of meiotic recombinations. Furthermore, LM is usually
restricted to a small subset of genotypes and to those
loci that are polymorphic among these genotypes (= low
allelic richness).  In contrast, AM examines genotype-
phenotype correlations in a large germplasm and hence
monitors the historical meiotic recombination events
that accumulated in natural populations and collections
of landraces, breeding materials and varieties [270].
Association mapping is based on the occurrence of
Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) between a particular trait
and one or more alleles of a marker locus in a popula-
tion. In contrast to LM, which refers to the combined
inheritance of loci due to their close physical proximity
on the same chromosome, LD refers to the non-random
occurrence of allele combinations of loci in a population.
Thus, the reason for LD can be linkage (and in most
cases it is), but also other factors influence LD, such as
selection, mutation, mating system, population structure,
and so forth, which can result in significant LD even of
alleles that are located on different chromosomes [270].
Because of this, AM is more complex than linkage map-
ping and might be biased by various factors.
More recently, AM-based analyses have been success-
fully carried out in many crops. In rice, for example, Zhao
and colleagues [271] genotyped more than 44,000 SNPs
across 413 accessions from 82 countries. Dozens of vari-
ants could be identified that influence numerous complex
traits. In maize, a high-density analysis based on 56,110
SNPs was performed to analyze chilling tolerance in 375
inbred lines [272]. Nineteen highly significant association
Page 21
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 21 of 35
signals that explained between 5.7 and 52.5% of the
phenotypic variance observed for early growth and chloro-
phyll fluorescence parameters were identified. An AM-
based approach that was termed “landscape genomics”
aims at simultaneously examining the effects of demo-
graphic history, migration and selection in a defined geo-
graphical site (see, for example, Sork and colleagues and
references cited therein [273]).
Thanks to new, high-density genotyping methods such
as the INfinumHD assay that assesses thousands of
markers simultaneously, almost all major crops can now
be subjected to AM [91]. High-density SNP arrays that
comprise the information of several thousand loci were
recently also developed for forest trees and horticultural
plants, including white spruce, Picea glauca [274], peach
[275], apple [276] and sweet and sour cherry [277], and
are expected to greatly facilitate AM also in these plant
species. A combination of LM and AM represents a par-
ticularly powerful tool for selection. Thus, Yu and col-
leagues [278] presented a so-called “nested association
mapping” (NAS) approach in maize that involved cross-
ing of 25 different variants and 5,000 offspring, whereas
Kover and colleagues [279] performed a “Multiparent
Advanced Generation Inter-Cross” in Arabidopsis. Nine-
teen variants were crossed in a random mating scheme,
resulting in 527 F4 plants. The RILs originating from the
maize NAS recently helped to identify important genes
involved in maize kernel composition [280],  resistance
to northern leaf blight [281] and stalk strength [282]. In
apple, Khan and colleagues [283] used an AM and LM
combined approach to identify three important QTLs
for fire blight resistance.
Marker-assisted breeding and genome-wide selection
One major aim of genetic linkage analysis in crop plants
is marker-assisted breeding (see the review by Jiang
[284]).  A particularly promising current concept of
marker-assisted breeding has been termed “genomic se-
lection” (GS) or “genome-wide selection” (GWS) [285].
In contrast to the traditional marker assisted selection
(MAS) concept, where only a subset of markers is consid-
ered, in GS all available markers are evaluated simultan-
eously for the calculation of a so-called breeding value.
This is done by combining major and minor QTLs ac-
cording to Meuwissen and colleagues [286]. In this way,
QTLs with only minor positive and negative effects that
are missed in traditional MAS are also taken into consid-
eration for selection. The concept of GWS is widely used
in livestock breeding and has been discussed as a future
selection approach also for plants [287]. In their analysis
that was based on a large data set of 25 nested association
mapping populations, Guo and colleagues [285] found
better predictions using the GWS approach as compared
with MAS for flowering traits in maize (days to silking, 
days to anthesis and anthesis-silking interval).  MAS
was performed by composite interval mapping (see
the review by Zou and Zeng [288]), and GS using a “ridge
regression-best linear unbiased prediction” to calculate
breeding values.
For genotyping moderate numbers of SNP loci in hun-
dreds to thousands of samples, PCR-based approaches
provide a more flexible alternative to microarray-based
methods. Besides direct sequencing, three currently
popular methods for SNP genotyping of PCR products
are high-resolution melting (HRM) analysis, allele-
specific PCR (ASP),  and the TaqMan assay. In HRM
analysis, the PCR product is continuously heated, and
the separation of the two DNA strands is monitored in
real time [289].  Polymorphic PCR products that differ
slightly in length or sequence will have different melting
temperatures. These differences can be measured with
sensitive optics, which monitor the fluorescence-to-
signal intensity of an intercalating dye. HRM analysis
has, for example, been successfully applied to gene map-
ping in rice [290],  to cultivar identification in sweet
cherry [291], and to discriminate between closely related
chloroplast DNA haplotypes in the wild species Arenaria
ciliata and A. norvegica [292].
In ASP, the alternative alleles at a particular poly-
morphic site are amplified with allele-specific primers
that are each labelled with a different fluorochrome. The
presence of a particular allele is hence indicated by a
diagnostic fluorochrome signal. If primers of different
length are used, the ASP products can also be assessed
by gel electrophoresis. The TaqMan™ assay dates back to
the early 1990s [293]. It involves the fluorescence-based
detection and quantification of a specific probe that is
hybridized to the SNP site of interest. A light signal is
only emitted when the probe is degraded by the exonucle-
ase activity of the Taq DNA polymerase, which occurs
only when the probe has specifically bound to its target
site. The ASP and TaqMan™ assays can be assessed in
regular quantitative PCR machines while HRM requires
specific optics.
The status of traditional DNA fingerprinting: concluding
remarks
Taken together, the last two decades have witnessed a
prominent increase in the application of various DNA
markers for plant DNA fingerprinting. In the beginning,
multi-locus dominant markers, especially RFLP, RAPD,
AFLP and ISSR, were most popular, but single-locus
SSRs and eventually SNP markers rapidly caught up.
The chip-based DArT technology is also still used. We
believe that traditional multi-locus methods and their
various spin-offs will still be employed a decade from
now, but mostly for exploratory research that does not
necessarily result in published papers. Locus-specific
Page 22
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 22 of 35
SSR markers will probably remain more popular, due to
their co-dominant inheritance, ease of analysis and the
fact that new data can easily be added to already existing
files. Novel input to DNA fingerprinting was, however,
provided by an unforeseen major breakthrough in DNA
sequencing technology, which can be envisaged as the
starting point for the future of DNA fingerprinting, and
which is discussed in the following section.
The future of DNA fingerprinting
The advent of massively parallel high-throughput gen-
omic sequencing about 10 years ago was a breath-taking
step forward in the yet short history of molecular genet-
ics and genomics (see, for example, the reviews by Mardis
[294], Metzker [295], and Rothberg and Leamon [296]).
The immense speed with which DNA sequences can be
read by 454 pyrosequencing, SOLID, Illumina and other
machines also had a considerable and two-fold impact on
the development and use of molecular markers in general,
and on DNA fingerprinting in particular. On the one
hand, conventional markers such as microsatellites and
SNPs can now be discovered with reduced cost and effort
and at unprecedented rates. On the other hand, DNA
marker technologies are currently successively comple-
mented or even replaced by the sequencing process itself,
as is expressed by the term “genotyping-by-sequencing”
[87,297,298] (see also the Special Issue of Molecular
Ecology 22(11), 2013).
Discovery of nuclear microsatellites by high-throughput
DNA sequencing
Quite obviously, random high-throughput sequencing of
genomic DNA offers itself as a useful strategy to identify
all kinds of repetitive DNA in a genome, including
microsatellites. It nevertheless took several years before
this potential was realized. In one of the first reports on
the use of next-generation DNA sequencing for micro-
satellite marker development, Abdelkrim and colleagues
[299] used a 454 platform to produce 17,215 reads of
unselected, fragmented genomic DNA of the blue duck
(Hymenolaimos malacorhynchos),  a waterfowl species
endemic to New Zealand. Each read had an average size
of 243 bp, adding up to a total of approximately 4.1 Mb.
Using appropriate bioinformatic tools, microsatellites
were detected in 231 reads. The number of suitable
marker loci was, however, reduced to 24 by the necessity
to design primers on either side of the microsatellite.
Thirteen of the primer pairs displayed polymorphism,
and 13 markers were thus generated in a single sequen-
cing run.
Santana and colleagues [300] also used 454 technology
to create microsatellite markers from a fungus (the pine
pathogen Fusarium circinatum),  an insect (the wasp
Sirex noctilio) and a nematode (Deladenus siridicola). 
Two methods, ISSR-PCR and “fast isolation by AFLP of
sequences containing repeats” (FIASCO),  were used to
enrich the template DNA for microsatellites prior to se-
quencing. Altogether, 1.2 to 1.7 Mb of DNA were se-
quenced, and 873 potentially amplifiable microsatellites
were identified with sufficient flanking sequence avail-
able for primer design. A set of 28 SSR-flanking primer
pairs were developed for Fusarium circinatum. Of these,
19 yielded single fragments in the expected size range,
and 13 produced polymorphic amplicons from a set of
fungal isolates. The authors also generated a traditional
library from F. circinatum DNA enriched for microsatel-
lites by the ISSR method. Sanger sequencing of 100
clones from this library yielded only eight potentially
amplifiable microsatellites.
Again using a 454 platform, Allentoft and colleagues
[301] searched for microsatellites in an ancient DNA
source, a bone fragment of an extinct New Zealand moa
species (a flightless bird).  A total of 79,796 sequences
were obtained with an average length of 112 bp. Of 195
di-, tri- and tetranucleotide repeats present in the data
set, only one polymorphic microsatellite marker could
eventually be generated. This low yield can be accounted
for by the ancient source and therefore degraded state of
the DNA and hence short read lengths.
The above three papers were published in the same
issue of BioTechniques and indicated for the first time that
high-throughput sequencing has a strong potential to iso-
late SSR markers from non-model organisms where no
genomic information exists. The novel methods save a lot
of time, and are also cost-efficient as compared to trad-
itional enrichment cloning. For example, Csencsics and
colleagues [302] spent approximately US$5,000 to develop
microsatellite markers for the plant species Typha minima
within 6 weeks. In their study, 307 di-, tri- and tetranu-
cleotide repeats were found in a total of 76,692 sequence
reads. One hundred loci were selected for primer design,
30 primer pairs were tested and yielded 17 polymorphic
markers.
The relatively long read-lengths provided by 454 se-
quencing facilitate the identification of enough flanking
sequence on either side of the SSR for the design of PCR
primers. 454 technology was therefore initially preferred
over other next-generation sequencing approaches for
generating SSR markers. In plants, 454 sequencing was
first applied to microsatellite isolation in Typha minima
[302], Amaranthus tuberculatus [303] and Vigna radiata
[304].  Many more studies followed, and genomic shot-
gun sequencing soon replaced traditional enrichment
strategies as the method of choice for generating sets of
microsatellite markers in any organism (see the review by
Zalapa and colleagues [305]). More recently, SSR identifi-
cation from paired-end genomic sequencing using the
more economical Illumina platforms has been advocated
Page 23
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 23 of 35
by several working groups [306,307],  especially since
average lengths of Illumina reads have considerably
increased over the years. For example, Castoe and col-
leagues [306] showed in one snake and two bird species
that 454 and Illumina detect similar numbers of poten-
tially amplifiable SSRs on a read-by-read basis, but the
much lower costs per sequenced nucleotide are clearly fa-
voring Illumina.
Given that sequencing methodology is still developing
at a rapid pace, a further decrease of costs may be ex-
pected. The large amount of sequence data obtained in
even a small-scale experiment allows a top-down selec-
tion of the most promising candidates (for example, only
trinucleotide repeats, or only perfect repeats).  Enrich-
ment for microsatellite motifs prior to sequencing is
sometimes advocated [307,308],  but is probably un-
necessary in most cases [306].  The use of (bar)coded
adapters and primers for the amplification step en-
ables the parallel sequencing of multiple templates at
the same time [307,309],  which further contributes to
the efficiency of the method. Using barcoded adaptors
(also known as multiplex identifier adaptors), Takayama
and colleagues [310] were thus able to isolate a large
number of microsatellites from only 10,000 to 20,000
genomic 454 reads each of six unrelated plant species
at low cost.
Concerning the read-length of high-throughput se-
quencing platforms, a major breakthrough was recently
reached by Pacific Bioscience, whose SMRT cells pro-
duce read-lengths of up to 15 kb. Sequence quality is,
however, relatively low. It was therefore suggested to
additionally produce reads with another sequencing plat-
form (for example, Illumina) to correct the long PacBio
reads in a hybrid sequencing approach [311].  Another
alternative relies on the circularization of template mole-
cules prior to single-molecule sequencing, and multipass
sequencing of the same circular templates was reported
to generate highly accurate consensus sequences [312].
Most recently, Grohme and colleagues [313] demon-
strated for the first time the successful use of single-
molecule circular consensus sequencing on a PacBio RS
platform for discovering SSR markers in the genome of
a goose, Anser albifrons.  Whatever technology is used
for sequencing, it is essential that appropriate bioinfor-
matic tools and hardware are available to cope with the
huge numbers of sequences that have to be screened.
An additional benefit of the use of next-generation se-
quencing for SSR marker development is the large
amount of random nuclear and organellar sequence data
generated as a “by-catch” of microsatellite identification.
For example, 382 SSRs were sampled in the course of
454 sequencing of Amaranthus tuberculatus along with
a contig representing an almost complete chloroplast
genome, mitochondrial DNA fragments, transposable 
elements and numerous nuclear genes of interest [303].
Krapp and colleagues [314] assembled approximately
84% of the Dyckia marnier-lapostollei (Bromeliaceae)
chloroplast genome from only 59,624 pyrosequencing
reads. A total of 34 chloroplast microsatellites (cpSSRs)
with a minimum number of 10 A´s or T´s were also
found, and flanking primers were constructed that pro-
duced highly polymorphic amplification products in
various Dyckia species.
High-throughput genotyping-by-sequencing
The radically increased throughput in sequencing cap-acity at 50 to 100,000 times lower costs per base as com-
pared with traditional Sanger sequencing also had a
large impact on DNA fingerprinting technology itself.
High-throughput sequencing opened completely new
and unprecedently fast avenues for genotyping (up to
the highest possible resolution) the resequencing of the
entire genomes of populations of plants (WGS, for ex-
ample [315,316]).  Whereas the list of fully sequenced
plant genomes is constantly growing (for crop plants,
see Bevan and Uauy [317]),  most plant genomes are
nevertheless too large, too complex, and too rich in re-
petitive DNA to be good candidates for WGS. This is
why essentially all genotype-by-sequencing approaches
aim at reducing the complexity of genomes to a smaller
subset (“reduced representation sequencing”; for example,
see [298,318-324]).  By reducing the analyzed genome
space to a manageable size, a sufficiently high sequence
coverage can be attained that allows for the detection of
polymorphisms (mostly SNPs) with necessary confidence,
even in plants with very large genomes.
Several strategies were developed that aim to enrich
particular portions of the genome prior to sequencing.
One obvious approach is to sequence only the transcrip-
tome that is available in ESTs or cDNA libraries (for de-
tails see "Transcriptome sequencing: RNAseq and related
approaches" below).  Other techniques rely on the prior
amplification of certain genomic subsets using PCR with
selected primers (for example, with SRAP primers [321]),
or enrich certain parts of the genome by hybridization
with a pre-cast set of oligonucleotides (for example, see
[322]). In the currently most widely used technique, gen-
omic DNA is first digested with a restriction enzyme, and
only the regions on both flanking sites of the enzyme-
recognition sites are sequenced (for details see "Restriction
Enzyme Anchored Sequencing: RADseq and related
approaches" below).  This principle was first presented
by Altshuler and colleagues [325] who described it as
“reduced representation shotgun sequencing”, still using
Sanger methodology. A different version of this approach,
already involving high-throughput sequencing, was intro-
duced by van Orsouw and colleagues [323] who referred
to their technique as CRoPS (Complexity Reduction of
Page 24
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 24 of 35
Polymorphic Sequences). The most widely used term for
the concept, including its many variants, was however
suggested by Baird and colleagues [319] who coined their
approach “Restriction Site Associated DNA Sequencing” 
(RADseq). As all of these techniques aim at sequencing
restriction site-associated DNA, we will here use the more
general term “Restriction Enzyme Anchored Sequencing”
(REAS; see Figure 4).
Figure 4 Schematic outline of a typical “Restriction Enzyme Anchored Sequencing” (REAS) approach. (1) DNA from different genotypes is
digested with one or several restriction enzymes. (2) Biotinylated adapters that carry a barcode for distinguishing the different genotypes are ligated to
the restriction site. (3) A second fragmentation step can be applied, either involving random shearing, or further digestion of the sample with a second
restriction enzyme. Biotinylated fragments are then bound to a streptavidin matrix. A second adapter is ligated to the construct that is now ready for
sequencing, usually after some PCR cycles. A size selection-step can be included after the first or the second restriction digestion to further reduce the
complexity. A mix of both adapters or Y-adapters can also be ligated directly after the first or second digestion or after random shearing. (4) Samples
are sequenced and (5) sorted according to barcode, and the tag-sequences are compared for single nucleotide polymorphism detection.
Page 25
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 25 of 35
Restriction Enzyme Anchored Sequencing: RADseq and
related approaches
Depending on its recognition sequence, any given re-
striction enzyme targets only a small proportion of the
entire genome. Restriction digestion is therefore the first
(and sometimes the only) step of reducing genomic
complexity in REAS. As the restriction sites in genomes
of closely related genotypes are usually shared, ortholo-
gous genetic regions are sequenced throughout the dif-
ferent genotypes. By choosing an appropriate (pair of )
restriction enzyme(s), the extent of reduction of genome
representation can be tailored experimentally. For ex-
ample, a four-base cutter would (in a theoretical genome
with a random base distribution) cut every 256 bp, and a
six-base cutter every 4,096 bp. In order to focus the
sequencing on the non-repetitive, transcriptionally ac-
tive parts of the genome, most applications make use
of methylation-sensitive enzymes that digest only non-
methylated sites. Although different epigenetic regulation
and accompanying methylation patterns might occur in
the different genotypes of interest and hence there is the
risk of sequencing and comparing different genetic regions
in different genotypes, the advantages outweigh this risk.
One version of the many different REAS techniques is
summarized in Figure 4, as a representative example.
After digestion, an adapter is ligated to the restriction
site, which can directly be used for sequencing on the
desired high-throughput platform. The adapter contains
a sample-specific barcode sequence which permits the
simultaneous “multiplexed” high-throughput sequencing
of numerous samples. The adapter can be biotinylated at
the opposite end of the ligation site (as in Figure 4) or
contain other modifications that inhibit concatemeriza-
tion of the adapters. After barcoding, the DNA can be
either further digested with another restriction enzyme,
as in “Double Digest RADseq” [326] or can be randomly
sheared to reach the optimal size for the desired se-
quencing platform. The latter approach was chosen in
the original RADseq paper [319].  A second, platform-
specific adapter is then ligated to the opposite end of
the adapter-DNA fragment. A further reduction of com-
plexity can be achieved by size-selection of the digested
DNA. In this case, a frequently cutting restriction enzyme
is used, as was proposed by Elshire and colleagues [320]
who called their technique “genotyping-by-sequencing”
and by Andolfatto and colleagues [318],  who used the
term “multiplexed shotgun genotyping”.
The primary data comprise the sequence information
of the region flanking the restriction site to which the
adapters were ligated. These restriction site-associated
DNA sequences are referred to as “tags”, or “RAD tags”.
Sequencing can be performed either by single end- or by
paired-end sequencing. The latter is usually more cost
efficient and facilitates mapping of the sequenced region 
to known related genomes [327,328].  By far the largest
part of the restriction sites will usually represent ortholo-
gous loci throughout the different genomes. The tagged
sequences can then directly be aligned and compared,
allowing for the identification of SNPs or indels. The RAD
sequencing approach is different from AFLPs or CAPS
markers, which focus on differences in the recognition
sites themselves. The genome space that is analyzed by an
REAS is hence much bigger as compared to procedures
that are based on restriction-site polymorphisms only.
However, absence versus presence of restriction sites in
the different organisms can also be exploited.
Provided that the genome under investigation is not
too large, and an adequate sequence coverage is ob-
tained, each particular RAD tag is resequenced many
times. The data obtained from an REAS experiment can
therefore be exploited for identifying huge numbers of
SNP markers [329,330]. REAS data can also be directly
used for generating linkage maps from a segregating
population [331],  or the polymorphic DNA sequences
can be annotated to a reference genome, for genomic
localization of the newly identified markers [92].  The
RAD tags can also be annotated to genomes of plants
with high levels of synteny as a cross-reference. This is a
big advantage compared to many other DNA finger-
printing techniques, as, when a reference genome is
available, the polymorphisms can often directly be local-
ized, which facilitates, for example, fine mapping of
QTL. The newly discovered SNPs and other polymor-
phisms can also be used as markers for fingerprinting or
mapping in subsequent steps - for example, in microar-
rays or CAPS [330].  Several programs are available for
the analyses of the data, such as “RADtools”,  inaugu-
rated by Baxter and colleagues [332],  “Stacks” [333],
“UNEAK” [334],  “TASSEL” [335] and “Rainbow” [336].
To determine points of chromosomal recombination, a
Hidden Markov Model was implemented by Andolfatto
and colleagues [318].
Numerous applications of REAS have recently been
described in plants (see the review by Poland and Rife
[337]).  For example, in artichoke, Cynara cardunculus,
Scaglione and colleagues [330] discovered approximately
34,000 SNPs and nearly 800 indels from 9.7 million
reads, corresponding to 1,000 Mb of sequence. Bus and
colleagues [329] sequenced more than 113,000 RAD
tags and identified more than 20,000 SNPs and indels
in the allotetraploid rapeseed, Brassica napus.  Yang
and colleagues [338] used RADseq in a BSA to identify
markers for anthracnose disease resistance in Lupinus
angustifolius.  Finally, Pfender and colleagues [331] used
RADseq to genotype 193 F1 individuals from a cross be-
tween stem-rust resistant and susceptible parental lines of
Lolium perenne and found several major QTLs for rust
resistance.
Page 26
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 26 of 35
Transcriptome sequencing: RNAseq and related approaches
Another widely used application of high-throughput
sequencing for the discovery of polymorphisms is the
sequencing of cDNA in an approach coined RNAseq
(sequencing of transcribed regions).  RNAseq is basic-
ally EST sequencing without prior cloning and on
high-throughput sequencing machines. The technique
and its applications in plants were recently reviewed
by Martin and colleagues [88], and an “RNAseq tutorial”
was presented by Wolf [339].  Several advantages make
transcriptome sequencing very appealing. (1) After de
novo assembly or annotation, the protein sequence as well
as its variants are directly revealed. These polymorphisms
represent the ideal markers for gene identification in
a mapping approach, as the gene itself and not a co-
segregating, anonymous genomic region is marked.
(2) The method reduces the complexity of a genome to
its transcriptionally active parts and thus allows the com-
parison of very large genomes. (3) RNAseq simultaneously
allows both the determination of a genotype, and the as-
sessment of quantitative gene expression, which permits
the analysis of expression QTLs. This concept was de-
scribed by Harper and colleagues [340] as “associative
transcriptomics”.  These authors used transcriptome se-
quencing in Brassica napus to correlate differences in
gene sequences and gene expression on the one hand
with trait variation on the other. The downside of the
RNAseq approach is that, in order to be able to sequence
a transcript, it must be expressed under the given circum-
stances - that is, in the investigated tissue - and at the time
point of RNA isolation. Another problem is the uneven
distribution of the transcript species, which either requires
very deep sequencing, or normalization prior to sequen-
cing. This problem especially concerns rare transcripts,
such as those coding for transcription factors or other
regulatory elements.
RNAseq has also been used in BSA. For example,
Trick and colleagues [341] fine-mapped a cloned grain
protein content gene, GPC-B1, in wheat, whereas Liu
and colleagues [342] were able to directly locate, identify
and clone the long-searched gene for glossy3 (gl3),
which proved to be a putative myb transcription factor.
A high-throughput sequencing-based, reduced complex-
ity analysis strategy for plant transcriptomes was re-
cently presented by Kahl and colleagues [343] who used
an Illumina platform to sequence only the 3′-UTRs of
the transcripts with Massive Analysis of cDNA Ends. As
3′-UTRs are the most polymorphic regions of a tran-
script, they provide a rich source of molecular markers.
This strategy allows the sequencing of a larger number
of genotypes in a multiplexed assay at sufficient cover-
age, when compared to RNAseq, but additionally reveals
quantitative gene expression values for each transcript.
To describe this concept, the term “TranSNiPtomics” 
was invented [343].  Unlike REAS, the technique does
not depend on restriction enzymes, but targets a region
of 100 to 500 bp upstream of the poly-A tail of each
transcript molecule. The approach was recently success-
fully applied to fine-map an introgressed gene for yellow
dwarf virus disease from H. bulbosum into barley [344].
Outlook
The large-scale identification of SNPs and SSRs via high-
throughput sequencing approaches is now becoming
routine, and highly multiplexed SNP-based genotyping-
by-sequencing methods have already been used for
numerous applications in many crop plants and model
species. This is especially true for genetic mapping, as has
been outlined in Genetic mapping. A steadily growing
number of studies is also taking care of non-model wild
species, where no reference genome is available [345,346].
In the field of population genetics, for example, the ability
to sample the genome at much higher densities than ever
before overcomes the limitations of traditional marker
methodology, allowing for the first time the evalu-
ation of genetic variation patterns across the whole gen-
ome [347,348]. The results and insights gained from such
“population genomic” approaches will have an enormous
impact on the fields of ecology and conservation, as was
highlighted in a recent special issue of Molecular Ecology
(see [349] and other papers in the same volume). Plant
systematists will benefit from what may be called “next
generation phylogenetics” [350],  since plant phylogenies
can now be set up on the basis of fully sequenced plastid
genomes [351] and/or multiple sets of nuclear genes
[352]. New and potentially useful nuclear markers can be
identified by sequence comparisons over large taxonomic
distances [353], and direct sequence analysis of barcoded
individuals may resolve orthology problems in polyploid
phylogenetics [352].  Finally, better-resolved phylogenies
will help to elucidate species boundaries and species rela-
tionships in recent radiations (see the review by Harrison
and Kidner [354]).
Where do we go from here? Most certainly, the full
technological capabilities are still far from being attained,
and “next-next-generation” single-molecule sequencing is
currently replacing some of the pioneering methods such
as 454 and SOLiD, which are already on the brink of
extinction. Further improvements and innovations of se-
quencing methodology can be expected, and will soon
allow for cost-effective genotyping-by-sequencing of any
non-model plant species. Even whole-genome sequencing
might become feasible for certain applications, such as the
analyses of somaclonals or mutation screening. However,
obtaining complete genomic sequence data for all individ-
uals included in a study would be unnecessary in most sit-
uations, and only inflate the costs. The tremendously huge
data sets generated by next-generation sequencing need to
Page 27
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 27 of 35
be handled and stored, and bioinformatics has already be-
come a real challenge. An important question will there-
fore have to be asked at the onset of each study - that
is, how to allocate the finite number of resources be-
tween (1) sequence coverage (that is, the number of times
that a particular nucleotide is sequenced),  (2) sampling
density (that is, the number of individuals analyzed), and
(3) the fraction of the genome that is subjected to sequen-
cing [355].  We envisage that sequencing efforts will
normally be confined to the necessary minimum also
in the future, and that DNA fingerprints generated
with an adequately tailored set of markers, obtained by
low coverage sequencing of a well-selected representation
of a genome, will remain the method of choice for most
application areas in plant genotype identification, popula-
tion genetics, relatedness studies and mapping. We there-
fore expect that the term “DNA fingerprinting”,  once
created by Alec Jeffreys for describing the unequivocal
identification of human individuals by minisatellite
hybridization, will survive in the long run, even in
the era of brute force DNA sequencing.
Abbreviations
AFLP: Amplified fragment length polymorphism; AM: Association mapping;
ASP: Allele-specific PCR; bp: Basepairs; BSA: Bulked Segregant Analysis;
CAPS: Cleaved amplified polymorphic sequences; cDNA: copied DNA;
cM: centiMorgan; cpDNA: chloroplast DNA; cpSSR: chloroplast simple
sequence repeat; CRoPS: Complexity Reduction of Polymorphic Sequences;
DAMD: Direct amplification of minisatellite DNA; DArT: Diversity Arrays
Technology; EST: Expressed sequence tag; FIASCO: Fast isolation by AFLP of
sequences containing repeats; GS: Genomic selection; GWS: Genome-wide
selection; HRM: High-resolution melting; IBD: Isolation-by-distance;
IRAP: Inter-retrotransposon amplified polymorphism; ISSR: Inter-simple
sequence repeat; ITS: Internal transcribed spacer; LD: Linkage Disequilibrium;
LM: Linkage mapping; LTR: Long terminal repeat; MAC-PR: Microsatellite DNA
allele counting - peak ratios; MADCE: Microsatellite allele dose and
configuration establishment; MAS: Marker-assisted selection;
mtDNA: Mitochondrial DNA; NAS: Nested association mapping;
PCR: Polymerase chain reaction; PDO: Protected denomination of origin;
QTL: Quantitative trait loci; RAD: Restriction Site Associated DNA;
RADseq: Restriction Site Associated DNA Sequencing; RAPD: Random
amplified polymorphic DNA; rDNA: Ribosomal DNA; REAS: Restriction Enzyme
Anchored Sequencing; REMAP: Retrotransposon-microsatellite amplified
polymorphism; RFLP: Restriction fragment length polymorphism;
RGAP: Resistance gene-analog polymorphism; RIL: Recombinant Inbred Line;
RNAseq: Sequencing of transcribed regions; SAMPL: Selective amplification of
polymorphic microsatellite loci; SCAR: Sequence characterized amplified
region; SGS: Spatial genetic structure; SNP: Single nucleotide polymorphism;
SRAP: Sequence-related amplified polymorphism; S-SAP: Sequence-specific
amplification polymorphism; SSR: Simple sequence repeat; STR: Synthetic
tandem repeat; TRAP: Target region amplification polymorphism;
UTR: Untranslated region; WGS: Whole genome sequencing.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
HN, KW and BR participated in the writing of the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Sina Möller for providing unpublished data on the
genotyping of Vinca minor, and for help with preparing Figure 3. We also
acknowledge the comments of two anonymous referees who helped to
improve the paper. 
Author details
1Department of Plant Breeding–Balsgård, Swedish University for Agricultural
Sciences, Fjälkestadsvägen 459, Kristianstad 29194, Sweden. 2Plant Molecular
Systematics, Institute of Biology, University of Kassel, Kassel 34109, Germany.
3GenXPro GmbH, Altenhöferallee 3, Frankfurt 60438, Germany.
Received: 3 September 2013 Accepted: 2 December 2013
Published: 3 January 2014
References
1.  Hamrick JL, Godt MJW: Allozyme diversity in plant species. In Plant
Population Genetics, Breeding and Genetic Resources. Edited by Brown AHD,
Clegg MT, Kahler AL, Weir BS. Sunderland: Sinauer Associates; 1989:43–63.
2.  Tanksley SD, Young ND, Paterson AH, Bonierbale MW: RFLP mapping in
plant breeding: new tools for an old science. Bio/Technology 1989,
7:257–264.
3.  Hubbard M, Kelly J, Rajapakse S, Abbott A, Ballard R: Restriction fragment
length polymorphisms in rose and their use for cultivar identification.
HortScience 1992, 27:172–173.
4.  Palmer JD, Herbon LA: Plant mitochondrial DNA evolves rapidly in
structure, but slowly in sequence. J Mol Evol 1988, 28:87–97.
5.  Mower JP, Touzet P, Gummow JS, Delph LF, Palmer JD: Extensive variation
in synonymous substitution rates in mitochondrial genes of seed plants.
BMC Evol Biol 2007, 7:135.
6.  Jeffreys AJ, Wilson V, Thein SL: Hypervariable “minisatellite” regions in
human DNA. Nature 1985, 314:67–73.
7.  Jeffreys AJ, Wilson V, Thein SL: Individual-specific “fingerprints” of human
DNA. Nature 1985, 316:76–79.
8.  Jeffreys AJ, Morton DB: DNA fingerprinting of dogs and cats. Anim Genet
1987, 18:1–15.
9.  Burke T, Bruford MW: DNA fingerprinting in birds. Nature 1987, 327:149–152.
10. Dallas JF: Detection of DNA “fingerprints” of cultivated rice by
hybridization with a human minisatellite DNA probe. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1988, 85:6831–6835.
11. Ryskov AP, Jincharadze AG, Prosnyak MI, Ivanov PL, Limborska SA: M13
phage DNA as a universal marker for DNA fingerprinting of animals,
plants and microorganisms. FEBS Letters 1988, 233:388–392.
12. Rogstad SH, Patton JC II, Schaal BA: M13 repeat probe detects DNA
minisatellite-like sequences in gymnosperms and angiosperms. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1988, 85:9176–9178.
13. Rogstad SH, Nybom H, Schaal BA: The tetrapod DNA fingerprinting M13
repeat probe reveals genetic diversity and clonal growth in quaking
aspen (Populus tremuloides, Salicaceae). Pl Syst Evol 1991, 175:115–123.
14. Nybom H, Schaal BA: DNA "fingerprints" reveal genotypic distributions in
natural populations of blackberries and raspberries (Rubus, Rosaceae).
Am J Bot 1990, 77:883–888.
15. Antonius K, Nybom H: DNA fingerprinting reveals significant amounts of
genetic variation in a wild raspberry Rubus idaeus population. Mol Ecol
1994, 3:177–180.
16. Nybom H, Schaal BA, Rogstad SH: DNA "fingerprints" can distinguish
cultivars of blackberries and raspberries. Acta Hortic 1989, 262:305–310.
17. Nybom H: DNA fingerprints in sports of 'Red Delicious' apples.
HortScience 1990, 25:1641–1642.
18. Weising K, Weigand F, Driesel A, Kahl G, Zischler H, Epplen JT: Polymorphic
simple GATA/GACA repeats in plant genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 1989,
17:10128–10128.
19. Weising K, Kaemmer D, Weigand F, Epplen JT, Kahl G: Oligonucleotide
fingerprinting reveals various probe-dependent levels of informativeness
in chickpea (Cicer arietinum). Genome 1992, 35:436–442.
20. Kaemmer D, Afza R, Weising K, Kahl G, Nowak FJ: Oligonucleotide and
amplification fingerprinting of wild species and cultivars of banana
(Musa spp.). Bio/Technol 1992, 10:1030–1035.
21. Vosman B, Arens P, Ruskortekaas W, Smulders MJM: Identification of highly
polymorphic DNA regions in tomato. Theor Appl Genet 1992, 85:239–244.
22. Kaemmer D, Weising K, Kahl G, Beyermann B, Börner T, Epplen JT:
Oligonucleotide fingerprinting of tomato DNA. Plant Breed 1995,
114:12–17.
23. Ramakishana W, Lagu MD, Gupta VS, Ranjekar PK: DNA fingerprinting in
rice using oligonucleotide probes specific for simple repetitive DNA
sequences. Theor Appl Genet 1994, 88:402–406.
Page 28
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 28 of 35
24. Schmidt T, Boblenz K, Metzlaff M, Kaemmer D, Weising K, Kahl G: DNA
fingerprinting in sugar beet (Beta vulgaris) – identification of double
haploid breeding lines. Theor Appl Genet 1993, 85:653–657.
25. Van Houten WHJ, Van Heusden AW, Rouppe Van Der Voort J, Raijmann L,
Bachmann K: Hypervariable DNA fingerprint loci in Microseris pymaea
(Asteraceae, Lactuceae). Bot Acta 1991, 104:252–255.
26. Weising K, Nybom H, Wolff K, Meyer W: DNA Fingerprinting in Plants and
Fungi. Boca Raton: CRC press; 1995.
27. Weising K, Nybom H, Wolff K, Kahl G: DNA Fingerprinting in Plants: Principles,
Methods and Applications. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis/CRC press; 2005.
28. Weising K, Beyermann B, Ramser J, Kahl G: Plant DNA fingerprinting
with radioactive and digoxigenated oligonucleotide probes complementary
to simple repetitive DNA sequences. Electrophoresis 1991,
12:159–169.
29. Parent JG, Pagé D: Identification of raspberry cultivars by nonradoactive
DNA fingerprinting. HortScience 1992, 27:1108–1110.
30. Rogstad SH: Surveying plant genomes for variable number of tandem
repeat loci. Molecular Evolution: Producing the Biochemical Data 1993,
224:278–294 [Methods in Enzymology, vol 224.].
31. Rogstad SH: Inheritance in turnip of variable number tandem-repeat
genetic-markers revealed with synthetic repetitive DNA probes.
Theor Appl Genet 1994, 89:824–830.
32. Kumar A, Rogstad SH: A hierarchical analysis of minisatellite DNA
diversity in Gambel oak (Quercus gambelii Nutt.; Fagaceae). Mol Ecol
1998, 7:859–869.
33. Nybom H, Schaal BA: DNA "fingerprints" applied to paternity analysis in
apples (Malus x domestica). Theor Appl Genet 1990, 79:763–768.
34. Kraft T, Nybom H, Werlemark G: Rubus vestervicensis (Rosaceae) - its hybrid
origin revealed by DNA fingerprinting. Nord J Bot 1995, 15:237–242.
35. Nybom H: Evaluation of interspecific crossing experiments in
facultatively apomictic blackberries (Rubus subgen. Rubus) using DNA
fingerprinting. Hereditas 1995, 122:57–65.
36. Nei M, Li W-H: Mathematical model for studying genetic variation in
terms of restriction endonucleases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1979,
76:5269–5273.
37. Tzuri G, Hillel J, Lavi U, Haberfeld A, Vainstein A: DNA fingerprint analysis of
ornamental plants. Plant Sci 1991, 76:91–97.
38. Vainstein A, Hillel J, Lavi U, Tzuri G: Assessment of genetic relatedness in
carnation by DNA fingerprint analysis. Euphytica 1991, 56:225–229.
39. Nybom H, Hall HK: Minisatellite DNA "fingerprints" can distinguish Rubus
cultivars and estimate their degree of relatedness. Euphytica 1991,
53:107–114.
40. Nybom H, Rogstad SH: DNA "fingerprints" detect genetic variation in Acer
negundo. Pl Syst Evol 1990, 173:49–56.
41. Rogstad SH, Wolff K, Schaal BA: Geographical variation in Asimina triloba
Dunal (Annonaceae) revealed by the M13 DNA fingerprinting probe.
Am J Bot 1991, 78:1391–1396.
42. Wolff K, Schaal BA, Rogstad SH: Population and species variation of
minisatellite DNA in Plantago. Theor Appl Genet 1994, 87:733–740.
43. Keane B, Pelikan S, Toth GP, Smith MK, Rogstad SH: Genetic diversity of
Typha latifolia (Typhaceae) and the impact of pollutants examined with
tandem-repetitive DNA probes. Am J Bot 1999, 86:1226–1238.
44. Lim HW, Pelikan S, Rogstad SH: Genetic diversity among populations and
size classes of buckeyes (Aesculus: Hippocastanaceae) examined with
multilocus VNTR probes. Pl Syst Evol 2002, 230:125–141.
45. Nybom H: Applications of DNA fingerprinting in plant breeding. In DNA
Fingerprinting: Approaches and Applications. Edited by Burke T, Dolph G,
Jeffreys AJ, Wolff R. Basel: Birkhäuser; 1991:294–311.
46. Nybom H: Applications of DNA fingerprinting in plant population
studies. In DNA Fingerprinting: State of the Science. Edited by Pena SDJ,
Chakraborty R, Epplen JT, Jeffreys AJ. Basel: Birkhäuser; 1993:293–309.
47. Rogstad SH: Assessing genetic diversity in plants with synthetic tandem
repetitive DNA probes. In Genomes of Plants and Animals: 21st Stadler
Genetics Symposium. Edited by Gustafson JP, Flavell RB. New York: Plenum
Press Publ. Corp; 1996:1–14.
48. Weising K, Kahl G: Hybridization-based microsatellite fingerprinting of
plants and fungi. In Markers: Protocols, Applications, and Overviews. Edited
by Caetano-Anollés G, Gresshoff PM. New York: Wiley-VCH; 1998:27–54.
49. Saiki RK, Gelfand DH, Stoffel S, Scharf SJ, Higuchi R, Horn GT, Mullis KB, Erlich
HA: Primer-directed enzymatic amplification of DNA with a thermostable
DNA polymerase. Science 1988, 239:487–491. 
50. Welsh J, McClelland M: Fingerprinting genomes using PCR with arbitrary
primers. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 18:7213–7218.
51. Williams JGK, Kubelik AR, Livak KJ, Rafalski JA, Tingey SV: DNA
polymorphisms amplified by arbitrary primers are useful as genetic
markers. Nucleic Acids Res 1990, 18:6231–6235.
52. Caetano-Anollés G, Bassam BJ, Gresshoff PM: High resolution DNA
amplification fingerprinting using very short arbitrary oligonucleotide
primers. Bio/Technology 1991, 9:553–557.
53. Zabeau M, Vos P: Selective restriction fragment amplification: a general
method for DNA fingerprinting. European Patent Office, publication
0 534 858 A1, bulletin 93/13.
54. Vos P, Hogers R, Bleeker M, Reijans M, van de Lee T, Hornes M, Frijters A,
Pot J, Peleman J, Kuiper M, Zabeau M: AFLP: a new technique for DNA
fingerprinting. Nucleic Acids Res 1995, 23:4407–4414.
55. Gupta M, Chyi YS, Romero-Severson J, Owen JL: Amplification of DNA
markers from evolutionary diverse genomes using single primers of
simple-sequence repeats. Theor Appl Genet 1994, 89:998–1006.
56. Zietkiewicz E, Rafalski A, Labuda D: Genome fingerprinting by simple
sequence repeat (SSR)-anchored polymerase chain reaction
amplification. Genomics 1994, 20:176–183.
57. Li G, Quiros CF: Sequence-related amplified polymorphism (SRAP), a new
marker system based on a simple PCR reaction: its application to mapping
and gene tagging in Brassica. Theor Appl Genet 2001, 103:455–461.
58. Li G, McVetty PBE, Quiros CF: SRAP molecular marker technology in plant
science. In Plant Breeding from Laboratories to Fields. Edited by Andersen SB.
Rijeka, Croatia: InTech; 2013. DOI: 10.5772/54511.
59. Hu J, Vick BA: Target region amplification polymorphism: a novel marker
technique for plant genotyping. Plant Mol Biol Rep 2003, 21:289–294.
60. Witsenboer H, Vogel J, Michelmore RW: Identification, genetic localization,
and allelic diversity of selectively amplified microsatellite polymorphic
loci in lettuce and wild relatives (Lactuca spp.). Genome 1997, 40:923–936.
61. Zhou Z, Bebeli PJ, Somers DJ, Gustafson JP: Direct amplification of
minisatellite-region DNA with VNTR core sequences in the genus Oryza.
Theor Appl Genet 1997, 95:942–949.
62. Chen XM, Line RF, Leung H: Genome scanning for resistance-gene
analogs in rice, barley, and wheat by high-resolution electrophoresis.
Theor Appl Genet 1998, 97:345–355.
63. Jaccoud D, Peng K, Feinstein D, Kilian A: Diversity arrays: a solid state
technology for sequence information independent genotyping.
Nucleic Acids Res 2001, 29:e25.
64. Lezar S, Myburg AA, Berger DK, Wingfield MJ, Wingfield BD: Development
and assessment of microarray-based DNA fingerprinting in Eucalyptus
grandis. Theor Appl Genet 2004, 109:1329–1336.
65. Kilian A, Wenzl P, Huttner E, Carling J, Xia L, Blois H, Caig V, Heller-Uszynska K,
Jaccoud D, Hopper C, Aschenbrenner-Kilian M, Evers M, Peng K, Cayla C, Hok P,
Uszynski G: Diversity Arrays Technology: a generic genome profiling
technology on open platforms. Meth Mol Biol 2012, 888:67–89.
66. James KE, Schneider H, Ansell SW, Evers M, Robba L, Uszynski G, Pedersen
N, Newton AE, Russell SJ, Vogel J, Kilian A: Diversity Arrays Technology
(DArT) for pan-genomic evolutionary studies of non-model organisms.
PLoS One 2008, 3:e1682.
67. Schulman AH: Molecular markers to assess genetic diversity. Euphytica 2007,
158:313–321.
68. Kalendar R, Grob T, Regina M, Suoniemi A, Schulmann A: IRAP and REMAP:
two new retrotransposon-based DNA fingerprinting techniques.
Theor Appl Genet 1999, 98:704–711.
69. Provan J, Thomas WTB, Forster BP, Powell W: Copia-SSR: a simple marker
technique which can be used on total genomic DNA. Genome 1999,
42:363–366.
70. Waugh R, McLean K, Flavell AJ, Pearce SR, Kumar A, Thomas BBT, Powell W:
Genetic distribution of Bare-1-like retrotransposable elements in the
barley genome revealed by sequence-specific amplification polymorphisms
(S-SAP). Mol Gen Genet 1997, 253:687–694.
71. Casa A, Brouwer C, Nagel A, Wang L, Zhang Q, Kresovich S, Wessler SR: The
MITE family Heartbreaker (Hbr): molecular markers in maize. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2000, 97:10083–10089.
72. Park KC, Kim NH, Cho YS, Kang KH, Lee JK, Kim N-S: Genetic variations of
AA genome Oryza species measured by MITE-AFLP. Theor Appl Genet
2003, 197:203–209.
73. Selkoe KA, Toonen RJ: Microsatellites for ecologists: a practical guide to
using and evaluating microsatellite markers. Ecol Lett 2006, 9:615–629.
Page 29
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 29 of 35
74. Guichoux E, Lagache L, Wagner S, Chaumeil P, Léger P, Lepais O,
Lepoittevin C, Malausa T, Revardel E, Salin F, Petit RJ: Current trends in
microsatellite genotyping. Mol Ecol Resources 2011, 11:591–611.
75. Akkaya MS, Bhagwat AA, Cregan PB: Length polymorphisms of simple
sequence repeat DNA in soybean. Genetics 1992, 132:1131–1139.
76. Squirrell J, Hollingsworth PM, Woodhead M, Russell J, Lowe AJ, Gibby M,
Powell W: How much effort is required to isolate nuclear microsatellites
from plants? Mol Ecol 2003, 12:1339–1348.
77. Tang S, Okashah RA, Cordonnier-Pratt MM, Pratt LH, Johnson VE, Taylor CA,
Arnold ML, Knapp SJ: EST and EST-SSR marker resources for Iris. BMC Plant
Biol 2009, 9:72.
78. Thiel T, Michalek W, Varshney RK, Graner A: Exploiting EST databases for
the development and characterization of gene-derived SSR-markers in
barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). Theor Appl Genet 2003, 106:411–422.
79. Pashley CH, Ellis JR, McCauley DE, Burke JM: EST databases as a source
for molecular markers: lessons from Helianthus. J Hered 2006,
97:381–388.
80. Wöhrmann T, Weising K: In silico mining for simple sequence repeat (SSR)
loci in a pineapple expressed sequence tag (EST) database and cross-
species amplification of EST-SSR markers across Bromeliaceae. Theor Appl
Genet 2011, 123:635–647.
81. Varshney RK, Graner A, Sorrells ME: Genic microsatellite markers in plants:
principles, methods, and applications. Trends Biotechnol 2005, 23:48–55.
82. Paran I, Michelmore RW: Development of reliable PCR-based markers
linked to downy mildew resistance genes in lettuce. Theor Appl Genet
1993, 85:985–993.
83. Bautista R, Crespillo R, Cánovas FM, Claros MG: Identification of olive-tree
cultivars with SCAR markers. Euphytica 2002, 129:33–41.
84. Turkec A, Sayar M, Heinze B: Identification of sweet cherry cultivars
(Prunus avium L.) and analysis of their genetic relationships by
chloroplast sequence-characterised amplified regions (cpSCAR). Genet Res
Crop Evol 2006, 53:1635–1641.
85. Konieczny A, Ausubel FM: A procedure for mapping Arabidopsis
mutations using co-dominant ecotype-specific PCR-based markers. Plant
J 1993, 4:403–410.
86. Appleby N, Edwards D, Batley J: New technologies for ultra-high through-
put genotyping in plants. Methods Mol Biol 2009, 513:19–39.
87. Davey JW, Hohenlohe PA, Etter PD, Boone JQ, Catchen JM, Blaxter ML:
Genome-wide genetic marker discovery and genotyping using next-
generation sequencing. Nature Rev Genet 2011, 12:499–510.
88. Martin LB, Fei Z, Giovannoni JJ, Rose JK: Catalyzing plant science research
with RNA-seq. Front Plant Sci 2013, 4:66.
89. Picoult-Newberg L, Ideker TE, Pohl MG, Taylor SL, Donaldson MA, Nickerson
DA, Boyce-Jacino M: Mining SNPs from EST databases. Genome Res 1999,
9:167–174.
90. Ganal MW, Altmann T, Röder MS: SNP identification in crop plants. Curr
Opin Plant Biol 2009, 12:1–7.
91. Ganal MW, Polley A, Graner EM, Plieske J, Wieseke R, Luerssen H, Durstewitz
G: Large SNP arrays for genotyping in crop plants. J Biosci 2012,
37:821–828.
92. Nelson JC, Wang S, Wu Y, Li X, Antony G, White FF, Yu J: Single-nucleotide
polymorphism discovery by high-throughput sequencing in sorghum.
BMC Genomics 2011, 12:352.
93. Dumolin-Lapègue S, Pemonge MH, Petit RJ: An enlarged set of consensus
primers for the study of organelle DNA in plants. Mol Ecol 1997,
6:393–397.
94. Shaw J, Lickey EB, Schilling EE, Small RL: Comparison of whole chloroplast
genome sequences to choose noncoding regions for phylogenetic
studies in angiosperms: the tortoise and the hare III. Am J Bot 2007,
94:275–288.
95. Weising K, Gardner RC: A set of conserved PCR primers for the analysis of
simple sequence repeat polymorphisms in chloroplast genomes of
dicotyledonous angiosperms. Genome 1999, 42:9–19.
96. Nybom H: Comparison of different nuclear DNA markers for estimating
intraspecific genetic diversity in plants. Mol Ecol 2004, 13:1143–1155.
97. Nybom H, Weising K: DNA-based identification of clonally propagated
cultivars. Plant Breed Rev 2010, 34:221–295.
98. Jones ES, Sullivan H, Bhattramaki D, Smith JSC: A comparison of simple
sequence repeat and single nucleotide polymorphism marker
technologies for the genotypic analysis of maize (Zea mays L.). Theor
Appl Genet 2007, 115:361–371. 
99. Hoffmann P, Blaich R, Forneck A: Retrotransposon-based mutations in
clones of ‘Pinot’ cultivars. Acta Hortic 2009, 827:83–86.
100. Hysing S-C, Säll T, Nybom H, Liljeroth E, Merker A, Orford S, Koebner RMD:
Temporal diversity changes among 198 Nordic bread wheat landraces
and cultivars detected by retrotransposon-based S-SAP analysis. Plant
Genet Resour Charact Utilizat 2008, 6:113–125.
101. Wegscheider E, Benjak A, Forneck A: Clonal variation in Pinot noir
revealed by S-SAP involving universal retrotransposon-based sequences.
Am J Enol Vitic 2009, 60:104–109.
102. Sorkheh K, Shiran B, Gradziel TM, Epperson BK, Martínez-Gomez P, Asadi E:
Amplified fragment length polymorphism as a tool for molecular
characterization of almond germplasm: genetic diversity among
cultivated genotypes and related wild species of almond, and its
relationship with agronomic traits. Euphytica 2007, 156:327–344.
103. Koopman WJM, Kuiper I, Klein-Geltink DJA, Sabatino GJH, Smulders MJM:
Botanical DNA evidence in criminal cases: knotgrass (Polygonum aviculare L.)
as a model species. Forensic Sci Internat Genet 2012, 6:366–374.
104. Steinger T, Korner C, Schmid B: Long-term persistence in a changing
climate: DNA analysis suggests very old ages of clones of alpine Carex
curvula. Oecologia 1996, 105:94–99.
105. Hollingsworth ML, Bailey JP: Evidence for massive clonal growth in the
invasive weed Fallopia japonica (Japanese knotweed). Bot J Linn Soc
2000, 133:463–472.
106. Xu CY, Zhang WJ, Fu CZ, Lu BR: Genetic diversity of alligator weed in
China by RAPD analysis. Biodivers Conserv 2003, 12:637–645.
107. Ren MX, Zhang QG: Clonal diversity and structure of the invasive aquatic
plant Eichhornia crassipes in China. Aquatic Bot 2007, 87:242–246.
108. Hämmerli A, Reusch TBH: Inbreeding depression influences genet size
distribution in a marine angiosperm. Mol Ecol 2003, 12:619–629.
109. Pfeiffer T, Klahr A, Peterson A, Levichev IG, Schnittler M: No sex at all?
Extremely low genetic diversity in Gagea spathacea (Liliaceae) across
Europe. Flora 2012, 207:372–378.
110. van der Hulst RGM, Mes THM, Den Nijs JCM, Bachmann K: Amplified
fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) markers reveal that population
structure of triploid dandelions (Taraxacum officinale) exhibits both
clonality and recombination. Mol Ecol 2000, 9:1–8.
111. Majeský L, Vasut RJ, Kitner M, Trávnicek B: The pattern of genetic variability
in apomictic clones of Taraxacum officinale indicates the alternation of
asexual and sexual histories of apomicts. PLoS One 2012, 7:e41868.
112. Paun O, Greilhuber J, Temsch E, Hörandl E: Patterns, sources and
ecological implications of clonal diversity in apomictic Ranunculus
carpaticola (Ranunculus auricomus complex, Ranunculaceae). Mol Ecol
2006, 15:897–910.
113. Paun O, Hörandl E: Evolution of hypervariable microsatellites in apomictic
polyploid lineages of Ranunculus carpaticola: directional bias at
dinucleotide loci. Genetics 2006, 174:387–398.
114. Drummond EBM, Vellend M: Genotypic diversity effects on the
performance of Taraxacum officinale populations increase with time and
environmental favorability. PLOS One 2012, 7:e30314.
115. McLeod KA, Scascitelli M, Vellend M: Detecting small-scale genotype-
environment interactions in apomictic dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)
populations. J Evol Biol 2012, 25:1667–1675.
116. De Andres MT, Cabezas JA, Cervera MT, Borrego J, Martínez-Zapater JM,
Jouve N: Molecular characterization of grapevine rootstocks maintained
in germplasm collections. Am J Enol Viticult 2007, 58:75–86.
117. Cipriani G, Marrazzo MT, Di Gaspero G, Pfeiffer A, Morgante M, Testolin R: A
set of microsatellite markers with long core repeat optimized for grape
(Vitis spp.) genotyping. BMC Plant Biol 2008, 8:127.
118. Song QJ, Quigley CV, Carter TE, Nelson RL, Boerma HR, Strachan J, Cregan
PB: A selected set of trinucleotide simple sequence repeat markers for
soybean cultivar identification. Plant Varieties Seeds 1999, 12:207–220.
119. Zhang DP, Mischke S, Goenaga R, Hemeida AA, Saunders JA: Accuracy and
reliability of high-throughput microsatellite genotyping for cacao clone
identification. Crop Sci 2006, 46:2084–2092.
120. Vélez MD, Ibánez J: Evaluation of the uniformity and stability of
microsatellite markers in grapevine. Acta Hortic 2009, 827:163–168.
121. Bracci T, Sebastiani L, Busconi M, Fogher C, Belaj A, Trujillo I: SSR markers
reveal the uniqueness of olive cultivars from the Italian region of Liguria.
Scientia Hortic 2009, 122:209–215.
122. Cabezas JA, Ibánez J, Lijavetzky D, Vélez D, Bravo G, Rodríguez V, Carreno I,
Jermakow AM, Carreno J, Ruiz-García L, Thomas MR, Martinez-Zapater JM:
Page 30
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 30 of 35
A 48 SNP set for grapevine cultivar identification. BMC Plant Biol
2011, 11:153.
123. Fujii H, Shamada T, Nonaka K, Kita M, Kuniga T, Endo T, Ikoma Y, Omura M:
High-throughput genotyping in Citrus accessions using an SNP
genotyping array. Tree Genet Genom 2013, 9:145–153.
124. Chebotar S, Röder MS, Korzun V, Saal B, Weber WE, Börner A: Molecular studies
on genetic integrity of open-pollinating species rye (Secale cereale L.) after
long-term genebank maintenance. Theor Appl Genet 2003, 107:1469–1476.
125. Van Hintum TJL, van de Wiel CCM, Visser DL, Van Treuren R, Vosman B: The
distribution of genetic diversity in a Brassica oleracea gene bank
collection related to the effects of regeneration as measured with AFLPs.
Theor Appl Genet 2007, 114:777–786.
126. Kopecký D, Bartos J, Christelová P, Cernoch V, Kilian A, Dolezel J: Genomic
constitution of Festuca x Lolium hybrids revealed by the DArTFest array.
Theor Appl Genet 2011, 122:355–363.
127. Nelson RL: Managing self-pollinated germplasm collections to maximize
utilization. Plant Genet Resour Charact Utilizat 2011, 9:123–133.
128. Chao S, Zhang W, Akhunov E, Sherman J, Ma Y, Luo MC, Dubcovsky J:
Analysis of gene-derived SNP marker polymorphism in US wheat
(Triticum aestivum L.) cultivars. Mol Breeding 2009, 23:23–33.
129. Franks T, Botta R, Thomas MR: Chimerism in grapevines: implications for
cultivar identity, ancestry and genetic improvement. Theor Appl Genet
2002, 104:192–199.
130. Moncada X, Hinrichsen P, Pelsy F, Medinoglu D: Microsatellite markers as
reproducible tools to identify chimerical polymorphisms in ‘Cabernet
Sauvignon’. Acta Hortic 2009, 827:259–264.
131. Regner F, Hack R, Hanak K, Santiago JL: Variability in the cultivar ‘Gruener
Veltliner’. Acta Hortic 2009, 827:245–252.
132. Castro I, Leal F, Guedes-Pinto H, Eiras Dias J, Veloso M, Pinto-Carnide O:
Genomic variability in grapevine cultivars assessed by molecular
markers. Acta Hortic 2009, 827:187–192.
133. Venturi S, Dondini L, Donini P, Sansavini S: Retrotransposon
characterisation and fingerprinting of apple clones by S-SAP markers.
Theor Appl Genet 2006, 112:440–444.
134. Zhao G, Dai H, Chang L, Ma Y, Sun H, He P, Zhang Z: Isolation of two
novel complete Ty1-copia retrotransposons from apple and
demonstration of use of derived S-SAP markers for distinguishing bud
sports of Malus domestica cv. Tree Fuji Genet Genom 2010, 6:149–159.
135. Bretó MP, Ruiz C, Pina JA, Asíns MJ: The diversification of Citrus clementina
Hort. ex Tan., a vegetatively propagated crop species. Mol Phylogenet Evol
2001, 21:285–293.
136. Liao Z-K, Zhang Q-M, Liu W-G, Ding W-P, Wang C-M: Identification of Citrus
mutants by APLP technique. J Fruit Sci 2006, 23:486–488.
137. Gomes S, Martins-Lopes PJ, Lima-Brito J, Meirinhos J, Lopes A, Martins A,
Guedes-Pinto H: Evidence for clonal variation in ‘Verdeal-Transmontana’
olive using RAPD, ISSR and SSR markers. J Hortic Sci Biotechnol 2008,
83:395–400.
138. Martins-Lopes P, Gomes S, Lima-Brito J, Lopes J, Guedes-Pinto H: Assessment
of clonal genetic variability in Olea europaea L. ‘Cobrançosa’ by molecular
markers. Scientia Hortic 2009, 123:82–89.
139. Guimaraes NCC, Torga PP, De Resende EC, Chalfun A, Paiva E, Paiva LV:
Identification of somaclonal variants in ‘Prata Ana’ banana using
molecular and cytogenetic techniques [In Portuguese]. Ciencia e
Agrotecnologia 2009, 33:448–454.
140. Sheidai M, Aminpoor H, Noormohammadi Z, Farahani F: RAPD analysis of
somaclonal variation in banana (Musa acuminata L.) cultivar Valery.
Acta Biol Szeged 2008, 52:307–311.
141. Perrini R, Alba V, Ruta C, Morone-Fortunato I, Blanco A, Montemurro C: An
evaluation of a new approach to the regeneration of Helichrysum italicum
(Roth) G. Don, and the molecular characterization of the variation
among sets of differently derived regenerants. Cell Molec Biol Lett 2009,
14:377–394.
142. Al-Kaabi HH, Zaid A, Shephard H, Ainsworth C: AFLP variation in tissue
culture-derived date palm (Phoenix dactylifera L.) plants. Acta Hortic 2007,
736:135–159.
143. Osipova ES, Lysenko EA, Troitsky AV, Dolgikh YI, Shamina ZB, Gostimskii SA:
Analysis of SCAR marker nucleotide sequences in maize (Zea mays L.)
somaclones. Plant Science 2011, 180:313–322.
144. Carrier G, Le Cunff L, Dereeper A, Legrand D, Sabot F, Bouchez O, Audeguin
L, Boursiquot JM, This P: Transposable elements are a major cause of
somatic polymorphism in Vitis vinifera L. PLoS One 2012, 7:e32973. 
145. Yoon CK: Botanical witness for the prosecution. Science 1993, 260:894–895.
146. Korpelainen H, Virtanen V: DNA fingerprinting of mosses. J Forensic Sci
2003, 48:804–807.
147. Virtanen V, Korpelainen H, Kostamo K: Forensic botany: usability of
bryophyte material in forensic studies. Forensic Sci Int 2007, 172:161–163.
148. Rodriguez-Plaza P, Gonzalez R, Moreno-Arribas MV, Polo MC, Bravo G,
Martínez-Zapater JM, Martínez MC, Cifuentes A: Combining microsatellite
markers and capillary gel electrophoresis with laser-induced fluorescence
to identify the grape Vitis vinifera cultivar of musts. Eur Food Res Technol
2006, 223:625–631.
149. Faria MA, Nunes E, Oliveira MBPP: Relative quantification of Vitis vinifera
L. cultivars in musts by microsatellite DNA analysis. Eur Food Res Technol
2008, 227:845–850.
150. Spaniolas S, Tsachaki M, Bennett MJ, Tucker GA: Toward the authentication
of wines of Nemea denomination of origin through cleaved amplified
polymorphic sequence (CAPS)-based assay. J Agric Food Chem 2008,
56:7667–7671.
151. Martins-Lopes P, Gomes S, Santos E, Guedes-Pinto H: DNA markers for
Portuguese olive oil fingerprinting. J Agric Food Chem 2008,
56:11786–11791.
152. Montemurro C, Pasqualone A, Simeone R, Sabetta W, Blanco A: AFLP
molecular markers to identify virgin olive oils from single Italian
cultivars. Eur Food Res Technol 2008, 226:1439–1444.
153. Archak S, Lakshminarayanareddy V, Nagaraju J: High-throughput multiplex
microsatellite marker assay for detection and quantification of adulteration
in Basmati rice (Oryza sativa). Electrophoresis 2007, 28:2396–2405.
154. Melchlade D, Foroni I, Corrado G, Santangelo I, Rao R: Authentication of
the ‘Annurca’ apple in agro-food chain by amplification of microsatellite
loci. Food Biotechnol 2007, 21:33–43.
155. Yamamoto T, Kimura T, Hayashi T, Ban Y: DNA profiling of fresh and
processed fruits in pear. Breed Sci 2006, 56:165–171.
156. Ding G, Zhang DZ, Feng ZY, Fan WJ, Ding XY, Li XX: SNP, ARMS and SSH
authentication of medicinal Dendrobium officinale Kimura et Migo and
application for identification of Fengdou drugs. Biol Pharmaceut Bull 2008,
31:553–557.
157. Nybom H, Weising K: DNA profiling of plants. In Medicinal Plant Biotechnology.
Edited by Kayser O, Quax WJ. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH Publishers; 2007:73–95.
158. Sarwat M, Nabi G, Das S, Srivastava PS: Molecular markers in medicinal
plant biotechnology: past and present. Crit Rev Biotechnol 2012, 32:74–92.
159. Kumar LD, Kathirvei M, Rao GV, Nagaraju J: DNA profiling of disputed chilli
samples (Capsicum annum) using ISSR-PCR and FISSR-PCR marker assays.
Forensic Sci Int 2001, 116:63–68.
160. Gilmore S, Peakall R, Robertson J: Short tandem repeat (STR) DNA markers
are hypervariable and informative in Cannabis sativa: implications for
forensic investigations. Forensic Sci Internat 2003, 131:65–74.
161. Köhnemann S, Nedele J, Schwotzer D, Morzfeld J, Pfeiffer H: The validation
of a 15 STR multiplex PCR for Cannabis species. Int J Legal Med 2012,
126:601–606.
162. Höltken AM, Schröder H, Wischnewski N, Degen B, Magel E, Fladung M:
Development of DNA-based methods to identify CITES-protected timber
species: a case study in the Meliaceae family. Holzforschung 2012,
66:97–104.
163. Nybom H, Bartish IV: Effects of life history traits and sampling strategies
on genetic diversity estimates obtained with RAPD markers in plants.
Persp Plant Evol Ecol Syst 2000, 3:93–114.
164. Gabrielsen TM, Bachmann K, Jakobsen KS, Brochmann C: Glacial survival
does not matter: RAPD phylogeography of Nordic Saxifraga oppositifolia.
Mol Ecol 1997, 6:831–842.
165. Williams DA, Muchugu E, Overholt WA, Cuda JP: Colonization patterns of
the invasive Brazilian peppertree, Schinus terebinthifolius, in Florida.
Heredity 2007, 98:284–293.
166. Forrest CN, Ottewell KM, Whelan RJ, Ayre DJ: Tests for inbreeding and
outbreeding depression and estimation of population differentiation
in the bird-pollinated shrub Grevillea mucronulata. Ann Bot 2011,
108:185–195.
167. Fahima T, Sun GL, Beharav A, Krugman T, Beiles A, Nevo E: RAPD polymorphism
in wild emmer wheat populations, Triticum dicoccoides, in Israel. Theor Appl
Genet 1999, 98:434–447.
168. Torres E, Iriondo JM, Escudero A, Pérez C: Analysis of within-population
spatial genetic structure in Antirrhinum microphyllum (Scrophulariaceae).
Am J Bot 2003, 90:1688–1695.
Page 31
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 31 of 35
169. Meeus S, Honnay O, Jacquemyn H: Strong differences in genetic structure
across disjunct, edge, and core populations of the distylous forest herb
Pulmonaria officinalis (Boraginaceae). Am J Bot 2012, 99:1809–1818.
170. Pandey M, Rajora OP: Higher fine-scale genetic structure in peripheral
than in core populations of a long-lived and mixed-mating conifer –
eastern white cedar (Thuja occidentalis L.). BMC Evol Biol 2012, 12:48.
171. Volis S, Zaretsky M, Shulgina I: Fine-scale spatial genetic structure in a
predominantly selfing plant: role of seed and pollen dispersal. Heredity
2010, 105:384–393.
172. Ennos RA: Estimating the relative rates of pollen and seed migration
among plant populations. Heredity 1994, 72:250–259.
173. Beebee T, Rowe G: An Introduction to Molecular Ecology. Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 2004.
174. Barluenga M, Austerlitz F, Elzinga JA, Texeira S, Goudet J, Bermasconi G:
Fine-scale spatial genetic structure and gene dispersal in Silene latifolia.
Heredity 2011, 106:13–24.
175. Fievet V, Touzet P, Arnaud J-F, Cuguen J: Spatial analysis of nuclear and
cytoplasmic DNA diversity in wild sea beet (Beta vulgaris ssp. maritima)
populations: do marine currents shape the genetic structure? Mol Ecol
2007, 16:1847–1864.
176. White GM, Boshier DH, Powell W: Genetic variation within a fragmented
population of Swietenia humilis Zucc. Mol Ecol 1999, 8:1899–1909.
177. Aldrich PR, Hamrick JL: Reproductive dominance of pasture trees in a
fragmented tropical forest mosaic. Science 1998, 281:103–105.
178. Quinteros-Casaverde N, Flores-Negrón CF, Williams DA: Low genetic
diversity and fragmentation in a wind-pollinated tree, Polylepis multijuga
Plige (Rosaceae) in the high Andes. Conserv Genet 2012, 13:593–603.
179. Gerber S, Mariette S, Streiff R, Bodénès C, Kremer A: Comparison of
microsatellites and amplified fragment length polymorphism markers for
parentage analysis. Mol Ecol 2000, 9:1037–1048.
180. Streiff R, Ducousso A, Lexer C, Steinkellner H, Gloessl J, Kremer A: Pollen
dispersal inferred from paternity analysis in a mixed oak stand of
Quercus robur L. and Q. petraea (Matt.) Liebl. Mol Ecol 1999, 8:831–841.
181. Gaiotto FA, Grattapaglia D, Vencovsky R: Genetic structure, mating system,
and long distance gene flow in heart of palm (Euterpe edulis Mart.).
J Hered 2003, 94:399–406.
182. Ziegenhagen B, Scholz F, Madaghiele A, Vendramin GG: Chloroplast
microsatellites as markers for paternity analysis in Abies alba. Can J Forest
Res 1998, 28:317–321.
183. Korecký J, Klápste J, Lstiburek M, Kobliha J, Nelson CD, El-Kassaby YA: Comparison
of genetic parameters from marker-based relationship, sibship, and
combined models in Scots pine multi-site open-pollinated tests.
Tree Genet Genom 2013. 9:1227–1235. doi:10.1007/s11295-013-0630-z.
184. Soleimani VD, Baum BR, Johnson DA: Analysis of genetic diversity in
barley cultivars reveals incongruence between S-SAP, SNP and pedigree
data. Genet Resour Crop Evol 2007, 54:83–97.
185. Coart E, Vekemans X, Smulders MJM, Wagner I, Van Huylenbroeck J, Van
Bockstaele E, Roldán-Ruiz I: Genetic variation in the endangered wild
apple (Malus sylvestris (L.) Mill.) in Belgium as revealed by amplified
fragment length polymorphism and microsatellite markers. Mol Ecol
2003, 12:845–857.
186. Coart E, Van Glabeke S, De Loose M, Larsen AS, Roldán-Ruiz I: Chloroplast
diversity in the genus Malus: new insights into the relationship between
the European wild apple (Malus sylvestris (L.) Mill.) and the domesticated
apple (Malus domestica Borkh.). Mol Ecol 2006, 15:2171–2182.
187. Patocchi A, Fernández-Fernández F, Evans K, Gobbin D, Rezzonico F,
Boudichevskaia A, Dunemann F, Stankiewicz-Kosyl M, Mathis-Jeanneteau F,
Durel CE, Gianfranceschi L, Vosta F, Toller C, Cova V, Mott D, Komjanc M,
Barbaro E, Kodde L, Rikkerink E, Gessler C, van de Weg WE: Development
and test of 21 multiplex PCRs composed of SSRs spanning most of the
apple genome. Tree Genet Genom 2009, 5:211–223.
188. Escribano P, Viruel MA, Hormaza JL: Comparison of different methods to
construct a core germplasm collection in woody perennial species with
simple sequence repeat markers. A case study in cherimoya (Annona
cherimola, Annonaceae), an underutilized subtropical fruit tree species.
Ann Appl Biol 2008, 153:25–32.
189. Escribano P, Viruel MA, Hormaza JL: Establishment of a core collection to
optimise the conservation of cherimoya (Annona cherimola Mill.) genetic
resources using SSR information. Acta Hortic 2009, 814:67–70.
190. Le Cunff L, Fournier-Level A, Laucou V, Vezzulli S, Lacombe T, Adam-Blondon
A-F, Boursiquot JM, This P: Construction of nested genetic core collections to 
optimize the exploitation of natural diversity in Vitis vinifera L. subsp. sativa.
BMC Plant Biol 2008, 8:31.
191. Rieseberg LH: The role of hybridisation in evolution: old wine in new
skin. Am J Bot 1995, 82:944–953.
192. Arnold ML, Bennett BD, Zimmer EA: Natural hybridisation between Iris
fulva and Iris hexagona: pattern of ribosomal DNA variation. Evolution
1990, 44:1512–1521.
193. Nason JD, Ellstrand NC, Arnold ML: Patterns of hybridization and
introgression in populations of oaks, manzanitas and irises. Am J Bot
1992, 79:101–111.
194. Arnold ML: Iris nelsonii (Iridaceae): origin and genetic composition of a
homoploid hybrid species. Am J Bot 1993, 80:577–583.
195. Rieseberg LH: Homology among RAPD fragments in interspecific
comparisons. Mol Ecol 1996, 5:99–105.
196. Yatabe Y, Kane NC, Scotti-Saintagne C, Rieseberg LH: Rampant gene
exchange across a strong reproductive barrier between the annual
sunflowers, H. annuus and H. petiolaris. Genetics 2007, 175:1883–1893.
197. Whitney KD, Randell RA, Rieseberg LH: Adaptive introgression of adaptive
herbivore traits in the weedy sunflower Helianthus annuus. Am Nat 2006,
167:794–807.
198. Whitney KD, Randell RA, Rieseberg LH: Adaptive introgression of abiotic
tolerance traits in the sunflower Helianthus annuus. New Phytol 2010,
187:230–239.
199. Scascitelli M, Whitney KD, Randell RA, King M, Buerkle CA, Rieseberg LH:
Genome scan of hybridizing sunflowers from Texas (Helianthus annuus
and H. debilis) reveals asymmetric patterns of introgression and small
islands of genomic differentiation. Mol Ecol 2010, 19:521–541.
200. Dumolin-Lapègue S, Demesure B, Fineschi S, Le Corre V, Petit RJ:
Phylogeographic structure of white oaks throughout the European
continent. Genetics 1997, 146:1475–1487.
201. McKinnon GE, Vaillancourt RE, Jackson HD, Potts BM: Chloroplast sharing in
the Tasmanian eucalypts. Evolution 2001, 55:703–711.
202. Bänfer G, Moog U, Fiala B, Mohamed M, Weising K, Blattner FR: A chloroplast
genealogy of myrmecophytic Macaranga species (Euphorbiaceae) in
Southeast Asia reveals hybridization, vicariance and long-distance dispersals.
Mol Ecol 2006, 15:4409–4424.
203. Tsitrone A, Kirkpatrick M, Levin DA: A model for chloroplast capture.
Evolution 2003, 57:1776–1782.
204. Harris SA, Robinson JP, Juniper BE: Genetic clues to the origin of the
apple. Trends Genet 2002, 18:426–430.
205. Richards CM, Volk GM, Reilley AA, Henk AD, Lockwood DR, Reeves PA,
Forsline PL: Genetic diversity and population structure in Malus sieversii,
a wild progenitor species of domesticated apple. Tree Genet Genomes
2009, 5:339–347.
206. Cornille A, Gladieaux P, Smulders MJM, Roldán-Ruiz I, Lauren F, Le Cam B,
Nersesyan A, Clavel J, Olonova M, Feugey L, Gabrielyan I, Zhang XG,
Tenaillon MI, Giraud T: New insight into the history of domesticated
apple: secondary contribution of the European wild apple to the
genome of cultivated varieties. PLoS Genetics 2012, 8:e1002703.
207. Muranishi S, Tamaki I, Setsuko S, Tomaru N: Asymmetric introgression
between Magnolia stellata and M. salicifolia at a site where the two
species grow sympatrically. Tree Genet Genomes 2013. 9:1005–1015.
doi:10.1007/s11295-013-0612-1.
208. Beck JB, Allison JR, Pryer KM, Windham MD: Identifying multiple origins of
polyploid taxa: a multilocus study of the hybrid cloak fern (Astrolepis
integerrima; Pteridaceae). Am J Bot 2012, 99:1857–1865.
209. Ritz CM, Schmuths H, Wissemann V: Evolution by reticulation: European
dogroses originated by multiple hybridization across the genus Rosa.
J Hered 2005, 96:4–14.
210. Nair AS, Teo CH, Schwarzacher T, Heslop-Harrison P: Genome classification
of banana cultivars from South India using IRAP markers. Euphytica 2005,
144:285–290.
211. Ning A-P, Xu L-B, Lu Y, Huang B-Z, Ge X-J: Genome composition and genetic
diversity of Musa germplasm from China revealed by PCR-RFLP and SSR
markers. Scientia Hortic 2007, 114:281–288.
212. Sales EK, Butardo NG, Paniagua HG, Jansen H, Dolezei J: Assessment of
ploidy and genome constitution of some Musa balbisiana cultivars using
DArT markers. Philippine J Crop Sci 2011, 36:11–18.
213. Kardolus JP, Van Eck HJ, Van den Berg RG: The potential of AFLPs in
biosystematics: a first application in Solanum taxonomy (Solanaceae).
Plant Syst Evol 1998, 210:87–103.
Page 32
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 32 of 35
214. Korbecka G, Rymer PD, Harris SA, Pannell JR: Solving the problem of
ambiguous paralogy for marker loci: microsatellite markers with diploid
inheritance in allohexaploid Mercurialis annua (Euphorbiaceae). J Hered
2010, 101:504–511.
215. Fu Y-B, Peterson GW, Richards KW, Tarn TR, Percy JE: Genetic diversity of
Canadian and exotic potato germplasm revealed by simple sequence
repeat markers. Am J Potato Res 2009, 86:38–48.
216. Cosendai AC, Rodewald J, Hörandl E: Origin and distribution of
autopolyploids via apomixis in the alpine species Ranunculus kuepferi
(Ranunculaceae). Taxon 2011, 60:355–364.
217. Esselink GD, Nybom H, Vosman B: Assignment of allelic configuration in
polyploids using the MAC-PR (Microsatellite DNA Allele Counting - Peak
Ratios) method. Theor Appl Genet 2004, 109:402–408.
218. Nybom H, Esselink DG, Werlemark G, Vosman B: Microsatellite DNA marker
inheritance indicates preferential pairing between highly homologous
genomes in polyploid and hemisexual dog-roses Rosa L. sect. Caninae.
Heredity 2004, 92:139–150.
219. Nybom H, Esselink GD, Werlemark G, Leus L, Vosman B: Unique genomic
configuration revealed by microsatellite DNA in polyploid dogroses.
Rosa sect. Caninae. J Evol Biol 2006, 19:635–648.
220. Babaei A, Tabaei-Aghdaei SR, Khosh-Khui M, Omidbaigi R, Naghavi MR, Esse-
link GD, Smulders MJM: Microsatellite analysis of Damask rose (Rosa
damascena Mill.) accessions from various regions in Iran reveals multiple
genotypes. BMC Plant Biol 2007, 7:12.
221. Catalán P, Segarra-Moragues JG, Palop-Esteban M, Moreno C, González-Candelas F:
A Bayesian approach for discriminating among alternative inheritance
hypotheses in plant polyploids: the allotetraploid origin of genus
Borderea (Dioscoreaceae). Genetics 2006, 172:1939–1953.
222. Van Dijk T, Noordijk Y, Dubos T, Bink MCAM, Meulenbroek BJ, Visser RGF,
van de Weg E: Microsatellite allele dose and configuration establishment
(MADCE): an integrated approach for genetic studies in allopolyploids.
BMC Plant Biol 2012, 12:25.
223. Liao W-J, Zhu B-R, Zeng Y-F, Zhang D-Y: TETRA: an improved program for
population genetic analysis of allotetraploid microsatellite data. Mol Ecol
Resources 2008, 8:1260–1262.
224. Clark LV, Jasieniuk M: POLYSAT: an R package for polyploid microsatellite
analysis. Mol Ecol Resources 2011, 11:562–566.
225. Voorrips R, Gort G, Vosman B: Genotype calling in tetraploid species from
bi-allelic marker data using mixture models. BMC Bioinformatics 2011,
12:172.
226. Gidskehaug L, Kent M, Hayes BJ, Lien S: Genotype calling and mapping of
multisite variants using an Atlantic salmon iSelect SNP array.
Bioinformatics 2011, 27:303–310.
227. Bruvo R, Michiels NK, D'Souza TG, Schulenburg H: A simple method for the
calculation of microsatellite genotype distances irrespective of ploidy
level. Mol Ecol 2004, 13:2101–2106.
228. Obbard DJ, Harris SA, Pannell JR: Simple allelic-phenotype diversity and
differentiation statistics for allopolyploids. Heredity 2006, 97:296–303.
229. Assoumane A, Zoubeirou AM, Rodier-Goud M, Favreau B, Bezançon G,
Verhaegen D: Highlighting the occurrence of tetraploidy in Acacia senegal
(L.) Willd. and genetic variation patterns in its natural range revealed by
DNA microsatellite markers. Tree Genet Genom 2013, 9:93–106.
230. Lexer C, Widmer C: The genic view of plant speciation: recent progress
and emerging questions. Phil Trans R Soc 2008, B363:3023–3036.
231. Strasburg JL, Sherman NA, Wright KM, Moyle LC, Willis JH, Rieseberg LH:
What can patterns of differentiation across plant genomes tell us about
adaptation and speciation? Phil Trans Roy Soc Series B 2012, 367:364–373.
232. Scotti-Saintagne C, Mariette S, Porth I, Goicoechea PG, Barreneche T,
Bodénès C, Burg K, Kremer A: Genome scanning for interspecific
differentiation between two closely related oak species [Quercus robur
L. and Q. petraea (Matt.) Liebl.]. Genetics 2004, 168:1615–1626.
233. Despres L, Gielly L, Redoutet B, Taberlet P: Using AFLP to resolve
phylogenetic relationships in a morphologically diversified plant species
complex when nuclear and chloroplast sequences fail to reveal
variability. Mol Phylogenet Evol 2003, 27:185–196.
234. Bänfer G, Fiala B, Weising K: AFLP analysis of phylogenetic relationships
among myrmecophytic species of Macaranga (Euphorbiaceae) and their
allies. Pl Syst Evol 2004, 249:213–231.
235. Aggarwal RK, Brar DS, Khush GS: Two new genomes in the Oryza complex
identified on the basis of molecular divergence analysis using total
genomic DNA hybridization. Mol General Genet 1997, 254:1–12. 
236. Aggarwal RK, Brar DS, Nandi S, Huang N, Khush GS: Phylogenetic relationships
among Oryza species revealed by AFLP markers. Theor Appl Genet 1999,
98:1320–1328.
237. Zou XH, Zhang FM, Zhang JG, Zang LL, Tang L, Wang L, Sang T, Ge S:
Analysis of 142 genes resolves the rapid diversification of the rice genus.
Genome Biol 2008, 9:R49.
238. Zou XH, Yang Z, Doyle JJ, Ge S: Multilocus estimation of divergence
times and ancestral effective population sizes of Oryza species and
implications for the rapid diversification of the genus. New Phytol
2013, 198:1155–1164.
239. Scariot V, Akkak A, Botta R: Characterization and genetic relationships of
wild species and old garden roses based on microsatellite analysis. J Am
Soc Hort Sci 2006, 131:66–73.
240. Koopman WJM, Vosman B, Sabatino GJH, Visser D, Van Huylenbroeck J,
De Riek J, De Cock K, Wissemann V, Ritz CM, Maes B, Werlemark G,
Nybom H, Debener T, Linde M, Smulders MJM: AFLP markers as a tool
to reconstruct complex relationships in the genus Rosa (Rosaceae).
Am J Bot 2008, 95:353–366.
241. De Riek J, De Cock K, Smulders MJM, Nybom H: AFLP-based population
structure analysis as a means to validate the complex taxonomy of
dogroses (Rosa section Caninae). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2013, 67:547–559.
242. Kovarik A, Werlemark G, Leitch AR, Souckova-Skalicka K, Lim KY, Khaitová L,
Koukalova B, Nybom H: The asymmetric meiosis in pentaploid dogroses
(Rosa sect. Caninae) is associated with a skewed distribution of rRNA
gene families in the gametes. Heredity 2008, 101:359–367.
243. Meerow AW, Francisco-Ortega J, Calonje M, Griffith MP, Ayala-Silva T,
Stevenson DW, Nakamura K: Zamia (Cycadales: Zamiaceae) on Puerto
Rico: asymmetric genetic differentiation and the hypothesis of multiple
introductions. Am J Bot 2012, 99:1828–1839.
244. Koppolu R, Upadhyaya HD, Dwivedi SL, Hoisington DA, Varshney RK:
Genetic relationships among seven sections of genus Arachis studied by
using SSR markers. BMC Plant Biol 2010, 10:15.
245. Richard M, Thorpe RS: Can microsatellites be used to infer phylogenies?
Evidence from population affinities of the Western Canary Island Lizard
(Gallotia galloti). Mol Phylogenet Evol 2001, 20:351–360.
246. Avise JC: Phylogeography: The History and Formation of Species. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press; 2000.
247. Schaal BA, Hayworth DA, Olsen KM, Rauscher JT, Smith WA: Phylogeographic
studies in plants: problems and prospects. Mol Ecol 1998, 7:465–474.
248. Posada D, Crandall KA: Intraspecific gene genealogies: trees grafting into
networks. Trends Ecol Evol 2001, 16:37–45.
249. Lascoux M, Palmé AE, Cheddadi R, Latta RG: Impact of the Ice Ages on the
genetic structure of trees and shrubs. Phil Trans R Soc Lond 2004,
B359:197–207.
250. Burban C, Petit RJ: Phylogeography of maritime pine inferred with
organelle markers having contrasted inheritance. Mol Ecol 2003,
12:1487–1495.
251. Marchelli P, Baier C, Mengel C, Ziegenhage B, Gallo LA: Biogeographic
history of the threatened species Araucaria araucana (Molina) K. Koch
and implications for conservation: a case study with organellar DNA
markers. Conserv Genet 2010, 11:951–963.
252. Cornille A, Giraud T, Bellard C, Tellier A, Le Cam B, Smulders MJM,
Kleinschmit J, Roldán-Ruiz I, Gladieux P: Postglacial recolonization history
of the European crabapple (Malus sylvestris Mill.), a wild contributor to
the domesticated apple. Mol Ecol 2013, 22:2249–2263.
253. Kadereit JW, Arafeh R, Somogyi G, Westberg E: Terrestrial growth and
marine dispersal? Comparative phylogeography of five coastal plant
species at a European scale. Taxon 2005, 54:861–876.
254. Schönswetter P, Tribsch A, Niklfeld H: Phylogeography of the high Alpine
cushion plant Androsace alpina (Primulaceae) in the European Alps.
Plant Biol 2003, 5:623–630.
255. Guicking D, Blattner FR, Fiala B, Slik F, Mohamed M, Weising K: Comparative
chloroplast DNA phylogeography of two tropical pioneer tree species,
Macaranga gigantea and M. pearsonii (Euphorbiaceae). Tree Genet
Genomes 2011, 7:573–585.
256. Clement M, Posada D, Crandall KA: TCS: a computer program to estimate
gene genealogies. Mol Ecol 2000, 9:1657–1659.
257. Collevatti RG, Grattapaglia D, Hay JD: Evidences for multiple maternal
lineages of Caryocar brasiliense populations in the Brazilian Cerrado
based on the analysis of chloroplast DNA sequences and microsatellite
haplotype variation. Mol Ecol 2003, 12:105–115.
Page 33
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 33 of 35
258. Vachon N, Freeland JR: Phylogeographic inferences from chloroplast DNA:
quantifying the effects of mutations in repetitive and non-repetitive
sequences. Mol Ecol Resources 2011, 11:279–285.
259. Grivet D, Petit RJ: Chloroplast DNA phylogeography of the hornbeam in
Europe: evidence for a bottleneck at the outset of postglacial
colonization. Cons Genet 2003, 4:47–56.
260. Valtuena FJ, Preston CD, Kadereit JW: Phylogeography of a Tertiary
relict plant, Meconopsis cambrica (Papaveraceae),  implies the
existence of northern refugia for a temperate herb. Mol Ecol 2012,
21:1423–1437.
261. Shafer ABA, Cullingham CI, Coté SC, Coltman DW: Of glaciers and refugia:
a decade of study sheds new light on the phylogeography of
northwestern North America. Mol Ecol 2010, 19:4589–4621.
262. Soltis DE, Morris AB, McLachlan JS, Manos PS, Soltis PS: Comparative
phylogeography of unglaciated eastern North America. Mol Ecol 2006,
15:4261–4293.
263. Harushima Y, Yano M, Shomura A, Sato M, Shimano T, Kuboki Y, Yamamoto T,
Lin SY, Antonio BA, Parco A, Kajiya H, Huang N, Yamamoto K, Nagamura Y,
Kurata N, Khush GS, Sasaki T: A high-density rice genetic linkage map with
2275 markers using a single F2 population. Genetics 1998, 148:479–494.
264. Wenzl P, Li H, Carling J, Zhou M, Raman H, Paul E, Hearnden P, Maier C,
Xia L, Caig V, Ovesná J, Cakir M, Poulsen D, Wang J, Raman R, Smith KP,
Muehlbauer GJ, Chalmers KJ, Kleinhofs A, Huttner E, Kilian A: A high-density
consensus map of barley linking DArT markers to SSR. RFLP and STS loci
and agricultural traits. BMC Genomics 2006, 7:206.
265. Gore MA, Chia JM, Elshire RJ, Sun Q, Ersoz ES, Hurwitz BL, Peiffer JA,
McMullen MD, Grills GS, Ross-Ibarra J, Ware DH, Buckler ES: A first-generation
haplotype map of maize. Science 2009, 326:1115–1117.
266. Pollard DA: Design and construction of recombinant inbred lines.
Methods Mol Biol 2012, 871:31–39.
267. Michelmore RW, Paran I, Kesseli RV: Identification of markers linked to
disease-resistance genes by bulked segregant analysis: a rapid method
to detect markers in specific genomic regions by using segregating
populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991, 88:9828–9832.
268. Varshney RK, Song C, Saxena RK, Azam S, Yu S, Sharpe AG, Cannon S, Baek J,
Rosen BD, Tar'an B, Millan T, Zhang X, Ramsay LD, Iwata A, Wang Y, Nelson W,
Farmer AD, Gaur PM, Soderlund C, Penmetsa RV, Xu C, Bharti AK, He W,
Winter P, Zhao S, Hane JK, Carrasquilla-Garcia N, Condie JA, Upadhyaya HD,
Luo MC, Thudi M, Gowda CL, Singh NP, Lichtenzveig J, Gali KK, Rubio J,
Nadarajan N, Dolezel J, Bansal KC, Xu X, Edwards D, Zhang G, Kahl G,
Gil J, Singh KB, Datta SK, Jackson SA, Wang J, Cook DR: Draft genome
sequence of chickpea (Cicer arietinum) provides a resource for trait
improvement. Nature Biotechnol 2013, 31:240–246.
269. Abdurakhmonov IY, Abdukarimov A: Application of association mapping
to understanding the genetic diversity of plant germplasm resources.
Int J Plant Genomics 2008, 2008:574927.
270. Soto-Cerda BJ, Cloutier S: Association Mapping in Plant Genomes. In Genetic
Diversity in Plants. Mahmut Çalişkan: InTech; 2012. DOI: 10.5772/33005.
271. Zhao K, Tung CW, Eizenga GC, Wright MH, Ali ML, Price AH, Norton GJ,
Islam MR, Reynolds A, Mezey J, McClung AM, Bustamante CD, McCouch SR:
Genome-wide association mapping reveals a rich genetic architecture of
complex traits in Oryza sativa. Nat Commun 2011, 2:467.
272. Strigens A, Freitag NM, Gilbert X, Grieder C, Riedelsheimer C, Schrag TA,
Messmer R, Melchinger AE: Association mapping for chilling tolerance in
elite flint and dent maize inbred lines evaluated in growth chamber and
field experiments. Plant Cell Environ 2013, 36:1871–1887.
273. Sork VL, Aitken SN, Dyer RJ, Eckert AJ, Legendre P, Neale DB: Putting the
landscape into the genomics of trees: approaches for understanding
local adaptation and population responses to changing climate.
Trees Genet Genomes 2013, 9:901–911.
274. Pavy N, Gagnon F, Rigault P, Blais S, Deschênes A, Boyle B, Pelgas B,
Deslauriers M, Clément S, Lavigne P, Lamothe M, Cooke JE, Jaramillo-Correa JP,
Beaulieu J, Isabel N, Mackay J, Bousquet J: Development of high-density SNP
genotyping arrays for white spruce (Picea glauca) and transferability to
subtropical and nordic congeners. Ecol Resour 2013, 13:324–336.
275. Verde I, Bassil N, Scalabrin S, Gilmore B, Lawley CT, Gasic K, Micheletti D,
Rosyara UR, Cattonaro F, Vendramin E, Main D, Aramini V, Blas AL, Mockler
TC, Bryant DW, Wilhelm L, Troggio M, Sosinski B, Aranzana MJ, Arús P,
Iezzoni A, Morgante M, Peace C: Development and evaluation of a 9 K
SNP array for peach by internationally coordinated SNP detection and
validation in breeding germplasm. PLoS One 2012, 7:e35668. 
276. Chagné D, Crowhurst RN, Troggio M, Davey MW, Gilmore B, Lawley C,
Vanderzande S, Hellens RP, Kumar S, Cestaro A, Velasco R, Main D, Rees JD,
Iezzoni A, Mockler T, Wilhelm L, Van de Weg E, Gardiner SE, Bassil N, Peace C:
Genome-wide SNP detection, validation, and development of an 8 K SNP
array for apple. PLoS One 2012, 7:e31745.
277. Peace C, Bassil N, Main D, Ficklin S, Rosyara UR, Stegmeir T, Sebolt A,
Gilmore B, Lawley C, Mockler TC, Bryant DW, Wilhelm L, Iezzoni A:
Development and evaluation of a genome-wide 6 K SNP array for
diploid sweet cherry and tetraploid sour cherry. PLoS One 2012, 7:e48305.
278. Yu J, Holland JB, McMullen MD, Buckler ES: Genetic design and statistical
power of nested association mapping in maize. Genetics 2008, 178:539–551.
279. Kover PX, Valdar W, Trakalo J, Scarcelli N, Ehrenreich IM, Purugganan MD,
Durrant C, Mott R: A multiparent advanced generation inter-cross to
fine-map quantitative traits in Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS Genet 2009,
5:e1000551.
280. Cook JP, McMullen MD, Holland JB, Tian F, Bradbury P, Ross-Ibarra J,
Buckler ES, Flint-Garcia SA: Genetic architecture of maize kernel composition
in the nested association mapping and inbred association panels.
Plant Physiol 2012, 158:824–834.
281. Poland JA, Bradbury PJ, Buckler ES, Nelson RJ: Genome-wide nested
association mapping of quantitative resistance to northern leaf blight in
maize. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011, 108:6893–6898.
282. Peiffer JA, Flint-Garcia SA, De Leon N, McMullen MD, Kaeppler SM, Buckler ES:
The genetic architecture of maize stalk strength. PLoS One 2013, 8:e67066.
283. Khan MA, Zhao YF, Korban SS: Identification of genetic loci associated
with fire blight resistance in Malus through combined use of QTL and
association mapping. Physiol Plant 2013, 148:344–353.
284. Jiang G-L: Molecular markers and marker-assisted breeding in plants.
In Plant Breeding from Laboratories to Fields. Edited by Andersen SB. InTech;
2013 DOI: 10.5772/52583.
285. Guo Z, Tucker DM, Lu J, Kishore V, Gay G: Evaluation of genome-wide
selection efficiency in maize nested association mapping populations.
Theor Appl Genet 2012, 124:261–275.
286. Meuwissen TH, Hayes BJ, Goddard ME: Prediction of total genetic value
using genome-wide dense marker maps. Genetics 2001, 157:1819–1829.
287. Cabrera-Bosquet L, Crossa J, Von Zitzewitz J, Serret MD, Araus JL: High-
throughput phenotyping and genomic selection: the frontiers of crop
breeding converge. J Integr Plant Biol 2012, 54:312–320.
288. Zou W, Zeng ZB: Statistical Methods for Mapping Multiple QTL. Int J Plant
Genomics 2008, 2008:286561.
289. Reed GH, Kent JO, Wittwer CT: High-resolution DNA melting analysis for
simple and efficient molecular diagnostics. Pharmacogenomics 2007,
8:597–608.
290. Li J, Wang X, Dong R, Yang Y, Zhou J, Yu C, Cheng Y, Yan C, Chen J:
Evaluation of high-resolution melting for gene mapping in rice. Plant Mol
Biol Rep 2011, 29:979–985.
291. Ganopoulos I, Tsaballa A, Xanthopoulou A, Madesis P, Tsaftaris A: Sweet
cherry cultivar identification by high-resolution-melting (HRM) analysis
using gene-based SNP markers. Plant Mol Biol Rep 2013, 31:763–768.
292. Dang X-D, Kelleher CT, Howard-Wiiliams E, Meade CV: Rapid identification
of chloroplast haplotypes using High Resolution Melting analysis.
Mol Ecol Resources 2012, 12:894–908.
293. Holland PM, Abramson RD, Watson R, Gelfand DH: Detection of specific
polymerase chain reaction product by utilizing the 5′–3′ exonuclease
activity of Thermus aquaticus DNA polymerase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1991, 88:7276–7280.
294. Mardis ER: Next-generation DNA sequencing methods. Annu Rev Genomics
Hum Genet 2008, 9:387–402.
295. Metzker ML: Sequencing technologies – the next generation. Nature Rev
Genet 2010, 11:31–46.
296. Rothberg JM, Leamon JH: The development and impact of 454
sequencing. Nature Biotechnol 2008, 26:1117–1124.
297. Byrne S, Czaban A, Studer B, Panitz F, Bendixen C, Asp T: Genome wide
allele frequency fingerprints (GWAFFs) of populations via genotyping by
sequencing. PLoS One 2013, 8:e57438.
298. Davey JW, Cezard T, Fuentes-Utrilla P, Eland C, Gharbi K, Blaxter ML: Special
features of RAD sequencing data: implications for genotyping. Mol Ecol
2013, 11:3151–3164.
299. Abdelkrim J, Robertson BC, Stanton J-AL, Gemmell NJ: Fast, cost-effective
development of species-specific microsatellite markers by genomic
sequencing. BioTechniques 2009, 46:185–192.
Page 34
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1 
Page 34 of 35
300. Santana QC, Coetzee MPA, Steenkamp ET, Mlonyeni OX, Hammond GNA,
Wingfield MJ, Wingfield BD: Microsatellite discovery by deep sequencing
of enriched genomic libraries. BioTechniques 2009, 46:217–223.
301. Allentoft ME, Schuster SC, Holdaway RN, Hale ML, McLay E, Oskam C, Gilbert TP,
Spencer P, Willerslev E, Bunce M: Identification of microsatellites from
an extinct moa species using high-throughput (454) sequence data.
BioTechniques 2009, 46:195–200.
302. Csencsics D, Brodbeck S, Holderegger R: Cost-effective, species-specific
microsatellite development for the endangered dwarf bulrush (Typha
minima) using next generation sequencing technology. J Hered 2010,
101:789–793.
303. Lee R, Thimmapuram J, Thinglum KA, Gong G, Hernandez AG, Wright CL,
Kim RW, Mikel MA, Tranel PJ: Sampling the waterhemp (Amaranthus
tuberculatus) genome using pyrosequencing technology. Weed Sci 2009,
57:463–469.
304. Tangphatsornruang S, Somta P, Uthaipaisanwong P, Chanprasert J,
Sangsakru D, Seehalak W, Sommanas W, Trangoonrung S, Srinives P:
Characterization of microsatellites and gene contents from genome
shotgun sequences of mungbean (Vigna radiata (L.) Wilczek). BMC Plant
Biol 2009, 9:137.
305. Zalapa JE, Cuevas H, Zhu H, Steffan S, Senalik D, Zeldin E, McCown B,
Harbut R, Simon P: Using next-generation sequencing approaches to
isolate simple sequence repeat (SSR) loci in the plant sciences. Am J Bot
2012, 99:193–208.
306. Castoe TA, Poole AW, De Koning APJ, Jones KL, Tomback DF, Oyler-
McCance SJ, Fike JA, Lance SL, Streicher JW, Smith EN, Pollock DD: Rapid
microsatellite identification from Illumina paired-end genomic sequencing
in two birds and a snake. PLoS One 2012 7:e30953.
307. Jennings TN, Knaus BJ, Mullins TD, Haig SM, Cronn RC: Multiplexed
microsatellite recovery using massively parallel sequencing. Mol Ecol
Resources 2011, 11:1060–1067.
308. Lepais O, Bacles CFE: Comparison of random and SSR-enriched shotgun
pyrosequencing for microsatellite discovery and single multiplex PCR
optimization in Acacia harpophylla F. Muell. Ex Benth. Mol Ecol Resources
2011, 11:711–724.
309. Binladen J, Gilbert MTP, Bollback JP, Panitz F, Bendixen C, Nielsen R,
Willerslev E: The use of coded PCR primers enables high-throughput
sequencing of multiple homolog amplification products by 454 parallel
sequencing. PLoS One 2007, 2:e97.
310. Takayama K, López P, König C, Kohl G, Novak J, Stuessy TF: A simple and
cost-effective approach for microsatellite isolation in non-model plant
species using small-scale 454 pyrosequencing. Taxon 2011, 60:1442–1449.
311. Koren S, Schatz MC, Walenz BP, Martin J, Howard JT, Ganapathy G, Wang Z,
Rasko DA, McCombie WR, Jarvis ED, Phillippy AM: Hybrid error correction
and de novo assembly of single-molecule sequencing reads.
Nature Biotechnol 2012, 30:693–700.
312. Travers KJ, Chin C-S, Rank DR, Eid JS, Turner SW: A flexible and efficient
template format for circular consensus sequencing and SNP detection.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010, 38:e159.
313. Grohme MA, Soler RF, Wink M, Frohme M: Microsatellite marker discovery
using single molecule real-time circular consensus sequencing on the
Pacific Biosciences RS. BioTechniques 2013, 55:253–256.
314. Krapp F, Wöhrmann T, Pinangé D, Benko-Iseppon A, Huettel B, Weising K:
A set of plastid microsatellite loci for the genus Dyckia (Bromeliaceae)
derived from 454 pyrosequencing. Am J Bot Primer Notes & Protocols 2012
99:e470–e473.
315. Cao J, Schneeberger K, Ossowski S, Günther T, Bender S, Fitz J, Koenig D,
Lanz C, Stegle O, Lippert C, Wang X, Ott F, Müller J, Alonso-Blanco C, Borgwardt
K, Schmid KJ, Weigel D: Whole-genome sequencing of multiple Arabidopsis
thaliana populations. Nat Genet 2011, 43:956–963.
316. Huang X, Feng Q, Qian Q, Zhao Q, Wang L, Wang A, Guan J, Fan D, Weng Q,
Huang T, Dong G, Sang T, Han B: High-throughput genotyping by
whole-genome resequencing. Genome Res 2009, 19:1068–1076.
317. Bevan MW, Uauy C: Genomics reveals new landscapes for crop
improvement. Genome Biol 2013, 14:206.
318. Andolfatto P, Davison D, Erezyilmaz D, Hu TT, Mast J, Sunayama-Morita T,
Stern DL: Multiplexed shotgun genotyping for rapid and efficient genetic
mapping. Genome Res 2011, 21:610–617.
319. Baird NA, Etter PD, Atwood TS, Currey MC, Shiver AL, Lewis ZA, Selker EU,
Cresko WA, Johnson EA: Rapid SNP discovery and genetic mapping using
sequenced RAD markers. PLoS ONE 2008, 3:e3376. 
320. Elshire RJ, Glaubitz JC, Sun Q, Poland JA, Kawamoto K, Buckler ES, Mitchell SE:
A robust, simple genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS) approach for high
diversity species. PLoS One 2011, 6:e19379.
321. Li W, Zhang J, Mou Y, Geng J, McVetty PB, Hu S, Li G: Integration of Solexa
sequences on an ultradense genetic map in Brassica rapa L. BMC Genomics
2011, 12:249.
322. Uitdewilligen JG, Wolters AM, D'hoop BB, Borm TJ, Visser RG, Van Eck HJ: A
next-generation sequencing method for genotyping-by-sequencing of
highly heterozygous autotetraploid potato. PLoS One 2013, 8:e62355.
323. van Orsouw NJ, Hogers RC, Janssen A, Yalcin F, Snoeijers S, Verstege E,
Schneiders H, van der Poel H, Van Oeveren J, Verstegen H, Van Eijk MJ:
Complexity reduction of polymorphic sequences (CRoPS): a novel
approach for large-scale polymorphism discovery in complex genomes.
PLoS One 2007, 2:e1172.
324. Van Tassell CP, Smith TP, Matukumalli LK, Taylor JF, Schnabel RD, Lawley CT,
Haudenschild CD, Moore SS, Warren WC, Sonstegard TS: SNP discovery and
allele frequency estimation by deep sequencing of reduced
representation libraries. Nature Methods 2008, 5:247–252.
325. Altshuler D, Pollara VJ, Cowles CR, Van Etten WJ, Baldwin J, Linton L, Lander ES:
A SNP map of the human genome generated by reduced representation
shotgun sequencing. Nature 2000, 407:513–516.
326. Peterson BK, Weber JN, Kay EH, Fisher HS, Hoekstra HE: Double Digest
RADseq: an inexpensive method for de novo SNP discovery and
genotyping in model and non-model species. PLoS One 2012, 7:e37135.
327. Etter PD, Johnson E: RAD paired-end sequencing for local de novo
assembly and SNP discovery in non-model organisms. Meth Mol Biol
2012, 888:135–151.
328. Willing E-M, Hoffmann M, Klein JD, Weigel D, Dreyer C: Paired-end RAD-seq
for de-novo assembly and marker design without available reference.
Bioinformatics 2011, 27:2187–2193.
329. Bus A, Hecht J, Huettel B, Reinhardt R, Stich B: High-throughput polymorphism
detection and genotyping in Brassica napus using next-generation RAD
sequencing. BMC Genomics 2012, 13:281.
330. Scaglione D, Acquadro A, Portis E, Tirone M, Knapp SJ, Lanteri S: RAD tag
sequencing as a source of SNP markers in Cynara cardunculus L.
BMC Genomics 2012, 13:3.
331. Pfender WF, Saha MC, Johnson EA, Slabaugh MB: Mapping with RAD
(restriction-site associated DNA) markers to rapidly identify QTL for stem
rust resistance in Lolium perenne. Theor Appl Genet 2011, 122:1467–1480.
332. Baxter SW, Davey JW, Johnston JS, Shelton AM, Heckel DG, Jiggins CD,
Blaxter ML: Linkage mapping and comparative genomics using next-
generation RAD sequencing of a non-model organism. PLoS ONE 2011,
6:e19315.
333. Catchen J, Amores A, Hohenlohe P, Cresko W, Postlethwait J: Stacks: building
and genotyping loci de novo from short-read sequences. Genes, Genomes,
Genetics 2011, 1:171–182.
334. Lu F, Lipka AE, Glaubitz J, Elshire R, Cherney JH, Casler MD, Buckler ES,
Costich DE: Switchgrass genomic diversity, ploidy, and evolution: novel
insights from a network-based SNP discovery protocol. PLoS Genet 2013,
9:e1003215.
335. Bradbury PJ, Zhang Z, Kroon DE, Casstevens TM, Ramdoss Y, Buckler ES:
TASSEL: software for association mapping of complex traits in diverse
samples. Bioinformatics 2007, 23:2633–2635.
336. Chong Z, Ruan J, Wu C-I: Rainbow: an integrated tool for efficient clustering
and assembling RAD-seq reads. Bioinformatics 2012, 28:2732–2737.
337. Poland JA, Rife TW: Genotyping-by-sequencing for plant breeding and
genetics. The Plant Genome 2012, 5:92–102.
338. Yang H, Tao Y, Zheng Z, Li C, Sweetingham M, Howieson J: Application of
next-generation sequencing for rapid marker development in molecular
plant breeding: a case study on anthracnose disease resistance in
Lupinus angustifolius L. BMC Genomics 2012, 13:318.
339. Wolf JBW: Principles of transcriptome analysis and gene expression
quantification: an RNA-seq tutorial. Mol Ecol Resources 2013,
13:559–572.
340. Harper AL, Trick M, Higgins J, Fraser F, Clissold L, Wells R, Hattori C, Werner
P, Bancroft I: Associative transcriptomics of traits in the polyploid crop
species Brassica napus. Nature Biotechnol 2012, 30:798–802.
341. Trick M, Adamski NM, Mugford SG, Jiang CC, Febrer M, Uauy C: Combining
SNP discovery from next-generation sequencing data with bulked
segregant analysis (BSA) to fine-map genes in polyploid wheat.
BMC Plant Biol 2012, 12:14.
Page 35
Nybom et al. Investigative Genetics 2014, 5:1
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/5/1/1
342. Liu S, Yeh C-T, Tang HM, Nettleton D, Schnable PS: Gene mapping via
bulked segregant RNA-seq (BSR-seq). PloS One 2012, 7:e36406.
343. Kahl G, Molina C, Rotter B, Jüngling R, Frank A, Krezdorn N, Hoffmeier K,
Winter P: Reduced representation sequencing of plant stress
transcriptomes. J Plant Biochem Biotechnol 2012, 21(Suppl 1):119–127.
344. Ruge-Wehling B, Wojacki J, Fischer K, Rotter B, Wehling P: Introgression of
an effective resistance against BYDV from Hordeum bulbosum to
cultivated barley [in German]. Tagungsband der 63. Jahrestagung der
Vereinigung der Pflanzenzüchter und Saatgutkaufleute Österreichs 19-21
November 2012. Raumberg-Gumpenstein, Austria. Resistenz gegen
biotischen Stress in der Pflanzenzüchtung 2013:3–6.
345. Ekblom R, Galindo J: Applications of next generation sequencing in
molecular ecology of non-model organisms. Heredity 2010, 107:1–15.
346. Seeb JE, Carvalho G, Hauser L, Naish K, Roberts S, Seeb LW: Single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) discovery and applications of SNP genotyping in
nonmodel organisms. Mol Ecol Resour 2011, 11(Suppl 1):1–8.
347. Lasky JR, Des Marais DL, McKay JK, Richards JH, Juenger TE, Keitt TH:
Characterizing genomic variation of Arabidopsis thaliana: the roles of
geography and climate. Mol Ecol 2012, 21:5512–5529.
348. Stölting KN, Nipper R, Lindtke D, Caseys C, Waeber S, Castiglione S, Lexer C:
Genomic scan for single nucleotide polymorphisms reveals patterns of
divergence and gene flow between ecologically divergent species.
Mol Ecol 2013, 22:842–855.
349. Narum SR, Buerkle CA, Davey JW, Miller MR, Hohenlohe PA: Genotyping-by-
sequencing in ecological and conservation genomics. Mol Ecol 2013,
22:2841–2847.
350. McCormack JE, Faircloth BC: Next-generation phylogenetics takes root.
Mol Ecol 2013, 22:19–21.
351. Givnish TJ, Ames M, McNeal JR, McKain MR, Steele PR, DePamphilis CW,
Graham SW, Pires JC, Stevenson DW, Zomlefer WB, Briggs BG, Duvall MR,
Moore MJ, Heaney JM, Soltis DE, Soltis PS, Thiele K, Leebens-Mack JH:
Assembling the tree of the monocotyledons: plastome sequence
phylogeny and evolution of Poales. Ann Missouri Bot Gard 2010,
97:584–616.
352. Griffin P, Robin C, Hoffmann A: A next-generation sequencing method for
overcoming the multiple gene copy problem in polyploid phylogenetics,
applied to Poa grasses. BMC Biol 2011, 9:19.
353. Duarte JM, Wall PK, Edger PP, Landherr LL, Ma H, Pires JC, Leebens-Mack J,
DePamphilis CW: Identification of shared single-copy nuclear genes in
Arabidopsis, Populus, Vitis, and Oryza and their phylogenetic utility across
various taxonomic levels. BMC Evol Biol 2010, 10:61.
354. Harrison N, Kidner CA: Next-generation sequencing and systematics: what
can a billion base pairs of DNA sequence data do for you? Taxon 2011,
60:1552–1566.
355. Buerkle CA, Gompert Z: Population genomics based on low coverage
sequencing: how low should we go? Mol Ecol 2013, 22:3028–3035.
doi:10.1186/2041-2223-5-1
Cite this article as: Nybom et al.: DNA fingerprinting in botany: past,
present, future. Investigative Genetics 2014 5:1. 
Page 35 of 35
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
