BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction
Transcript
  You are widely considered the founding father of DNA fingerprinting in general and forensic DNA identification in particular. Could you briefly describe what led you to the discovery of DNA fingerprinting?
  At what point, and what were the indicators, that led you to realise the full potential of your new discovery?
  In addition to forensics, which other fields were immediately impacted by the discovery of DNA fingerprinting?
  In addition to forensics, which fields do you think have been impacted the most by the discovery of DNA fingerprinting?
  What was the reason to eventually move away from using minisatellites in DNA identification?
  Most of your scientific career was outside of DNA fingerprinting; can you summarise the most important outcomes of your research on the molecular basis of human genetic recombination?
  You’re extremely passionate about genetics and its impact on society, as well as conveying science to the general public including today’s youth. Can you describe your motivations in this regard, and any particularly memorable experiences?
  Forensic DNA databases are an instrumental tool for developing investigative leads. Do you see any downside to their use?
  If you were to construct legislation on forensic DNA databases, what constraints would you put in place?
  How do you see science and technology of forensic DNA applications moving forward in the next five to ten years?
Competing interest
Page 1
Jeffreys Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:21
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/21
QUESTION AND ANSWER  Open Access
The man behind the DNA fingerprints: an
interview with Professor Sir Alec Jeffreys
Alec J Jeffreys
Abstract
In this interview we talk with Professor Sir Alec Jeffreys about DNA fingerprinting, his wider scientific career, and the
past, present and future of forensic DNA applications.
The podcast with excerpts from this interview is available at: [URL: "http://www.biomedcentral.com/biome/alec-jeffreys"] http://www.biomedcentral.com/biome/alec-jeffreys.
Introduction
Professor Sir Alec Jeffreys studied biochemistry and
genetics at The University of Oxford, UK. Following an
EMBO Postdoctoral Fellowship at the University of
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, where he was one of the
first to discover split genes, he moved in 1977 to the
Department of Genetics at the University of Leicester
where he held the positions of Professor of Genetics
and Royal Society Wolfson Research Professor until
September 2012 when he retired from research.
Professor Jeffreys’ research at Leicester focussed on ex-
ploring human DNA diversity and the mutation pro-
cesses that create this diversity. He was one of the first
to discover inherited variation in human DNA, then
went on to invent DNA fingerprinting, showing how it
can be used to resolve issues of identity and kinship and
beginning the field of forensic DNA.
Transcript
You are widely considered the founding father of DNA
fingerprinting in general and forensic DNA identification
in particular. Could you briefly describe what led you to
the discovery of DNA fingerprinting?
Pure accident and academic curiosity, simple as that. If
you wind the clock back to 1977–1978, the very first
tools were emerging that enabled us to start exploring
genetic variation in DNA sequences between people. That
was restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
technology, which was incredibly archaic and ex-
tremely tedious. I think we had our first RFLP in
1978. The issue then was that the markers that we
Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:ajj@leicester.ac.uk"] ajj@leicester.ac.uk
Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK 
were picking up were single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) with very limited variability. So we felt that there
was going to be considerable mileage for basic human
genetics in developing markers that were much more var-
iable between people. Intuitively, I felt that the sort of
sequences you should be looking for would be tandem re-
peat DNA–what we now call minisatellites.
We started a research programme, I guess in about
1980, to try and isolate human minisatellites from the
genome, and after all sorts of false starts we accidentally
stumbled upon the fact that there is a short sequence
shared amongst a considerable number of human mi-
nisatellites. That sequence then opened up the possibility
of mass isolation of highly variable tandem repeat
markers.
The driving force behind all this work was first of all
academic curiosity, more than anything else. But sec-
ondly, a desire to be able to develop genetics markers far
more informative than SNPs, for general use in the hu-
man medical genetics community. The last thing on our
mind was forensic identification. That never occurred to
us, and I think not to anybody else in the field at that
time. Forensic DNA simply wasn’t on anybody’s radar.
In September 1984, we did the key experiment, which
was to test whether a hybridisation probe, consisting of
the little shared sequence tandem-repeated, could ef-
fectively detect multiple minisatellites in human DNA.
That, completely by accident, led to what proved to be
the world’s first DNA fingerprint–essentially a com-
pletely individual specific pattern. It was only after we
got that first DNA fingerprint, or set of fingerprints, that
the penny dropped that we’d accidentally stumbled
upon a method for individual identification, and also
for looking at family relationships. I think the penny
© 2013 Jeffreys; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication
waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise
stated.
Page 2
Jeffreys Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:21
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/21 
Page 2 of 7
On that Monday, in the afternoon, we’d got our ideas
together to the point where I was actually running round
the lab pricking my finger and leaving blood spots all
over the place–a sort of mock “scene of crime”, shall we
say–because at that point we had no idea whether DNA
even survived in forensic samples, never mind if it was
amenable to DNA fingerprint analysis. So that Monday
was pretty exciting.
In addition to forensics, which other fields were
immediately impacted by the discovery of DNA
fingerprinting?
I think the big one was the entire field of molecular
ecology: going out into the wild, using DNA fingerprint-
ing to examine the genetic structure of wild populations.
If you stop and think about it, that lies right at the heart
of Darwinian evolution. Darwinian evolution is essen-
tially survival of the fittest offspring. To understand that
properly you have to know relationships: offspring of
whom? Who are the parents? Very quickly there were
colleagues of mine, particularly in the bird field, that
took on DNA fingerprinting very actively indeed. They
came up with fascinating observations, such as how the
house sparrow indulges in spouse swapping, as revealed
simply by looking at parentage of fledglings in a nest.
Figure 1 Professor Sir Alec Jeffreys (picture taken by Colin
Brooks, courtesy University of Leicester).
dropped within about a minute of developing that first
x-ray film. So this was a very exciting moment where,
literally, my entire life changed in the space of about
60 seconds.
At what point, and what were the indicators, that led you
to realise the full potential of your new discovery?
It was pretty well instant. It was around about nine
o’clock on a Monday morning that we got this result in.
Within the hour we could see things like paternity
testing, determining whether twins are identical or not
and forensic investigations. We could even see the
potential for non-human applications because on that
first DNA fingerprint experiment we had included sev-
eral non-human species. Most worked very nicely as
well, so the potential was there for investigating wild-
life crime and the genetic structure and biodiversity of
wild populations. The one application I didn’t spot,
and that was spotted by my wife that evening, was the
potential use in immigration disputes where there are
doubts about claimed family relationships. I have to
say well done to my wife Sue because the very first
casework ever taken on using DNA fingerprinting was
an immigration dispute. 
In addition to forensics, which fields do you think have
been impacted the most by the discovery of DNA
fingerprinting?
Paternity testing, there’s absolutely no question about it.
If you look at the status of paternity testing before DNA
arrived on the scene, it was all determined by a battery
of blood group and enzyme markers. They were quite ef-
fective and you could get indications of certainty up to
roughly 99–99.9%. But of course, that means that there
would be a significant error rate and if you happen to be
the non-father who fails to be excluded as father of the
child, that man unjustifiably would be required to
give maintenance support for an individual who is
not his child. That would have happened in a signifi-
cant number of cases.
What was the reason to eventually move away from
using minisatellites in DNA identification?
The whole method was based upon taking microgram
quantities of human DNA, chopping it up with a restric-
tion enzyme, running it through a gel, doing a Southern
blot, and then hybridising with a radioactive or chemilu-
minescent probe. That really became the gold standard
in forensic labs worldwide right up until the 1990s (and
was also the technology employed by commercial labs
round the world), but it required significant amounts of
DNA and it was very slow and tedious, with limited sen-
sitivity. So quite often you would start with a sample
Page 3
Jeffreys Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:21
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/21 
Page 3 of 7
and it might be a week or two before you got a result
back. There was an urgent need to come up with some
sort of technology that would speed the whole process
up and also enable automation much more effectively.
Of course, the solution came with the development of
user-friendly PCR in 1988. It was immediately apparent
that that was going to be the way forward. The real
question was: what marker could you test, or what set of
markers would you choose in forensic identifications?
There were a number of options. Short minisatellites
could be quite effectively amplified in their entirety and
typed, and there were a number of groups around the
world that pursued that line of enquiry. We developed a
system that combined SNPs with minisatellites. Minisa-
tellites contain repeat units that are, not identical; there
are single nucleotide variations within the repeat array.
That enables you to encode a minisatellite allele, not in
terms of length, but in terms of the arrangement of re-
peats along the array. I have to say I’m very proud we
developed quite a neat method for reading out these
digital signatures of a minisatellite allele from DNA,
using PCR. Mitochondrial DNA of course was very
much in the focus, but being a maternally inherited
marker, it failed to discriminate between close maternal
relatives.
Another possibility was SNPs. Those are still very
much in the frame, particularly with the advent of the
latest sequencing platforms and SNP-typing platforms
that can type huge numbers of SNPs at a time. But going
back to the SNP-based PCR systems that were developed
in the early 1990s, they were effective but based on ex-
clusion rather than inclusion, having little power of
discrimination.
The final system was a new type of marker first dis-
covered almost immediately following the availability of
PCR, namely microsatellites or short tandem repeats
(STRs), where you absolutely require PCR to be able to
type variation. Those were the way forward and, in fact,
we got involved almost immediately in a programme
first of all to isolate more of these markers, but secondly
to actually deploy these in real forensic casework. One
case we took on was the so-called Cardiff “body in a car-
pet” case, where someone had bought a house in Cardiff,
dug up the patio, and found a carpet bound up with wire
with a skeleton inside. That’s a clear sign of foul play,
there’s no question about that. The $64,000 question was:
who was the victim?
The skull was used as a basis for a facial reconstruc-
tion that was put out on UK TV, and someone phoned
in and said “It looks rather like Karen Price,” who was a
girl who had gone missing about ten years previously.
Armed with that very provisional identification, a col-
league and I were asked to attempt a bone DNA ana-
lysis to compare DNA from the skeletal remains with 
those of Karen Price’s mother and father. That’s what
we did, and got a positive result with a level of cer-
tainty better than 99.9% that these really were the re-
mains of Karen Price. That proved to be important
evidence in the trial, which led to a  double
conviction.
The other case, which we initiated about the same
time, was the identification of skeletal remains of Josef
Mengele, the Auschwitz concentration camp doctor, that
had been exhumed in 1985 from a gravesite in Brazil.
Once again, the key question for this major war criminal
was: was the identification correct or not? We were
asked by a German prosecutor to carry out a full DNA
analysis, comparing the remains with DNA from Men-
gele’s wife and son. And again using PCR and a battery of
microsatellite markers, we got a positive identification
with a level of certainty better than 99.9%.
That information, together with a lot of other informa-
tion involving very careful investigation of facial features
from the skull, and matching those with photographs of
Mengele, allowed the prosecutors to come to the con-
clusion that it was a positive identification and the case
against Mengele was closed. That was an important con-
tribution in that the war crimes investigation against
Mengele had been dragging on for about 40 years and
was probably the biggest investigation ever mounted
against an individual.
Most of your scientific career was outside of DNA
fingerprinting; can you summarise the most important
outcomes of your research on the molecular basis of
human genetic recombination?
Well, I always describe my career as a fairly logical pro-
gression from developing tools for detecting single-copy
DNA sequences back in the mid-1970s right the way
through to the latest recombination work, and then
along that linear track there’s a huge great loop coming
out the side and that’s forensic DNA, which started in
1984 and, for me personally, finished by the early-to-
mid-1990s. My real interest was always in the funda-
mental biology of DNA.
Probably the most important thing I ever did was,
following my DPhil in Oxford, to spend two years in
Amsterdam in the mid-1970s with Richard Flavell. We
attempted to isolate a mammalian gene, which had
never been done before; we had no idea what genes
looked like. It was during that work that we developed
Southern blot methods sensitive enough to detect single-
copy genes. So we could actually see a mammalian gene
for the first time, by direct experimental analysis. That led,
in 1977, to one of the first descriptions of introns in genes.
Then in 1977 I moved to Leicester and was faced with a
very interesting career choice: do I carry on with the in-
tron work? I knew that was not going to be sustainable
Page 4
Jeffreys Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:21
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/21 
Page 4 of 7
since there was going to be an army of very well-
resourced labs moving into that field. So I decided to
combine the ability to detect single-copy gene sequences
with my exposure to basic human genetics as a doctoral
student. Put the two together and see if you can find
RFLPs. Within less than a year of arriving in Leicester, I’d
set up a lab and was getting our first RFLPs coming off
the line. That I think was a very important contribution.
Also, I was very proud of the fact that I used what
proved to be an incredibly small survey to come up with
the first estimate of the total number of SNPs in the hu-
man genome. The number we came up with was 30 mil-
lion. A friend of mine, Peter Little, pointed out that I’d
messed up the calculation (we’re all human),  and the
real number was 15 million. Of course, that was pretty
much spot on the number of SNPs that have now
been revealed through genome sequencing. That was
the first estimate of how many SNPs you might find
in human DNA.
Then we moved on to the minisatellite work and the
applications. But behind that forensic work, we still kept
a very active programme going of asking very basic
questions. Minisatellites are fantastically variable; some
of these have, if you use the right discrimination system,
millions, if not billions, of different alleles worldwide.
That variability means one thing only: that they must
have a high rate of germline instability and are mutating
very rapidly, adding and losing repeat units and creating
new alleles.
The obvious question then was: what is the mecha-
nism of tandem repeat instability? The two broad possi-
bilities were, first, instability driven by aberrations in
DNA replication or repair; and second, recombination
at either mitosis or meiosis. So we set about first of all
directly measuring mutation rates of human minisatel-
lites, and we succeeded in that I think in the late 1980s.
So for the first time, you could directly measure a germ-
line mutation rate in humans.
Then the question was, what is the process? Using the
detailed structural information we could get on minisa-
tellite alleles before and after mutation, it became very
clear that the dominant mutation process was meiotic
recombination, leading to transfers of repeat units from
one allele to another, in a sort of gene-conversion-like
process.
The next question was, if the driver is meiotic recom-
bination, is the instability an intrinsic feature of a mini-
satellite repeat array, or is it driven by some external
element which is forcing the array to become unstable?
We wanted to know if we could detect genuine, regular
meiotic crossover events. So we developed a whole raft
of single DNA molecule methods whereby we could pan
huge numbers (millions) of sperm for what were likely
to be very rare events going on near minisatellites. That 
went very well and led to the first full molecular descrip-
tion of a meiotic recombination hotspot. In fact, for the
minisatellite we were investigating, there was a hotspot
located right next to the minisatellite, about a kilobase
and a half wide.
Now, hotspots had been hypothesised in human DNA
for decades previously, with DNA diversity evidence sug-
gesting that there might be a focussing of DNA recom-
bination events preferentially in hotspot regions, but this
was a first, clear demonstration of exactly what a hotspot
looked like: a bell-shaped curve of recombination activity
near this minisatellite. The intriguing thing was that the
hotspot was not inside the minisatellite, but centred next
door to the minisatellite. That, along with a number of
other lines of evidence, suggested it was that hotspot that
was driving instability in the minisatellite. In other words,
the minisatellite was acting as if it was a parasite of mei-
otic recombination hotspot activity.
Now we knew that there was a connection between
minisatellites and recombination, the next question was
are the sort of hotspots that you see near minisatellites a
more general feature of the human genome or some-
thing obscure only found in minisatellites? We then em-
barked in the year 2000 on a systematic analysis of this,
using again some challenging single-sperm techniques to
directly measure male recombination frequencies at in-
tervals across selected areas of the human genome, the
main focus being on a region within the major histo-
compatibility complex. And what that showed was that
recombination hotspots ‘rule the roost’;  that the great
majority of meiotic recombination events in human DNA
focus into hotspots and that these hotspots have a huge
impact on patterns of human DNA diversity. Between the
hotspots, DNA rarely recombines. There are very strong
associations between all markers within these regions and
they behave as so-called haplotype blocks, blocks of
markers that have historically not been reshuffled by mei-
otic recombination. Rather curiously, even though recom-
bination is an astonishingly important process in terms of
driving human DNA diversity, most of the human genome
seems to not be aware it’s in a sexual organism and is not
subjected to meiotic recombination reshuffling.
The next questions were based on the properties of re-
combination hotspots. We quickly discovered that there
were some odd things going on in these hotspots. In
particular, they had a propensity to destroy themselves.
If a mutation arises in a hotspot that downregulates the
initiation of recombination in the hotspot, then the mu-
tation will tend to be over transmitted to recombinant
progeny and will sweep through a population. This was
meiotic drive, with the meiotic drive element being a
single-base variant, which had this ability to sweep
through a population and shut down a recombination
hotspot. Other people had noticed similar things in
Page 5
Jeffreys Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:21
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/21 
Page 5 of 7
other organisms, including Rosie Redfield who first
articulated what was going to be a big problem: how
do hotspots exist if they commit suicide? This was
the so-called hotspot conversion paradox, which remained
unresolved for a good number of years.
The next and final phase of my research life was facing
the big question of what on Earth is specifying hotspots
and how come they can survive in the face of this sui-
cidal tendency. The answer to that came in 2010, from
three labs who independently identified a gene called
PRDM9 as the likely specifier of hotspot locations in the
human and the mouse genomes. Having seen this, we
immediately thought: “we can take people with different
PRDM9 genotypes and find out if people with variant
versions of PRDM9 differ in their hotspot recombination
activity from people carrying the standard European al-
lele”. It very quickly became apparent that yes they did
and PRDM9 really was the major specifier of recombin-
ation hotspot activity and location, and did so by virtue
of a tandem repeat zinc finger array within the protein
recognising a short DNA sequence motif associated with
hotspots that had been noted by bioinformaticians.
Of course, this was very exciting for me because the
PRDM9 gene contained within it a classic minisatellite
coding for this tandem-repeat zinc finger array. So I’d
come suddenly full circle, right the way back into the
world of minisatellites. The hotspot conversion paradox
is then in principle neatly solved. Hotspots don’t hang
around, they don’t persist; they do commit suicide, but
are being continuously topped up by mutations within
this minisatellite creating new versions of PRDM9 that
can recognise new sequence motifs and specify new sets
of hotspots.
The final act of my career was to directly analyse levels
of instability at the PRDM9 minisatellite to see whether
the theory would work, and the answer is that the model
most certainly does work; PRDM9 alleles cannot survive
more than maybe a million years or so before vanishing.
In other words, the recombination landscape itself, right
across the genome, is highly turbulent.
The final little twist to the story was that PRDM9
influences not only recombination hotspot activity, but
also unequal crossing-over events, which was another
major research programme in my laboratory; we showed
for one particular class of unequal crossover event that
generates pathological rearrangements in the human
genome that again these events only occur in people
with the appropriate PRDM9 allele, in other words, a
different type of PRDM9 variant can act as protective
against these de novo rearrangements. So we have
PRDM9 controlling hotspot locations and influencing at
least some classes of unequal crossover in the human
genome, but it also turned out that the PRDM9 protein
influences the instability of its own coding sequence, 
which was really bizarre. You then have this scenario
where you can in theory have PRDM9 variants appearing
in a population that heavily destabilise their coding se-
quence, leading to an explosion of new mutations and
sudden burst of new PRDM9 variants out there in the
population. But actually–as it turns out from simulation
work–this is a highly self-limiting process, so you wind up
with a totally bizarre situation whereby the level of diver-
sity of PRDM9 in the population tends to be determined
mainly by the instability of the least unstable variants in
the population, not the most mutable variants. At that
point, I felt it was time to retire, so I retired.
You’re extremely passionate about genetics and its
impact on society, as well as conveying science to the
general public including today’s youth. Can you describe
your motivations in this regard, and any particularly
memorable experiences?
The motivation is just one of excitement; essentially, if
you cannot sell science on the back of rape, murder and
mayhem, which is basically the story of forensic DNA,
you might as well give up. I give talks to schoolchildren,
lay audiences and so on, and it really is an easy sell. The
important thing is that you can get a lot of the basic sci-
ence across on the back of casework. My feeling is that
if I can enthuse one school child to get excited about
science and maybe follow a career in science in the fu-
ture, that makes it all worthwhile. I find it enormously
satisfying just to see an audience get switched on by this
sort of forensic DNA work.
The downside is that if you ask kids what they want to
do then they’ll say they want to be a forensic scientist.
Sadly, there are rather limited opportunities in the foren-
sic science field for new employment. For example,
we’ve seen the present government wind up the entire
Forensic Science Service. There is virtually no public
sector presence in forensic science now; virtually all the
testing is done in the commercial sector. Every kid wants
to be a forensic scientist out there doing forensic DNA,
but if that enthusiasm can be diverted to enthusiasm
more generally for chemistry or biology that’s absolutely
terrific.
In terms of notable public engagements, I’ve done a lot
of TV and radio appearances. For example, I think one of
my favourite occasions was the Daily Mirror Pride of
Britain ceremony, where I received a lifetime achievement
award. Most awardees would have a guest appearance,
and for mine they found Kirk Bloodsworth, who was the
first person to be exonerated by DNA in the United States.
He was convicted of the rape and murder of a 9-year-old
girl around the same time that we came up with our first
DNA fingerprint. He was convicted and wound up on
Death Row facing execution in the gas chamber. He hap-
pened to read about DNA and thought “This is a possible
Page 6
Jeffreys Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:21
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/21 
Page 6 of 7
way forward”, and after a great battle he eventually got the
DNA testing results in and was exonerated. They later
identified the true perpetrator. Meeting him was a really
emotional moment.
Forensic DNA databases are an instrumental tool for
developing investigative leads. Do you see any downside
to their use?
In short, yes. DNA databases are spreading very actively.
Most major countries have implemented a national
criminal intelligence DNA database, and the first of course
was the UK with a database, which, per capita, still
remains the largest in the world. It has been very actively
populated over the years, starting in 1995. It has had a
very significant impact in the fight against crime; for
example, if you can find a crime scene DNA sample, in
better than 50 per cent of cases this will give a match on
the database and a lead towards a prime suspect. That can
short circuit a huge amount of police investigation.
On the downside, there are some specialist applica-
tions, for example familial searching where you may
have a crime scene sample where you don’t get a full
match in the database but instead a partial match, per-
haps pointing to a relative of the true perpetrator. I
think there are some ethical issues that still haven’t been
fully resolved, bearing in mind that familial searching is
not to my knowledge governed by any legislation. It’s
pretty much a free-for-all as to whether you want to do
it or not.
I think the bigger issue was a change in the UK law
back in 2003 that allowed police to obtain and retain
DNA from anybody they arrested, irrespective of whe-
ther there was subsequent charging or conviction. Now
that led to roughly one and a half innocent people being
added to the database. That became blatantly discrimin-
atory. I’ve seen claims of in excess of 80 per cent of ju-
venile male blacks in the UK now residing on the
database. This is basically branding an entire section of
society as ‘if they’re not a criminal now, they’re going to
be criminal in the future’.  Anyway, that retention was
declared illegal a number of years ago by the European
Court of Human Rights and also by the UK Supreme
Court, and legislation in the UK has been implemented
to remove these innocents from the database. The only
exception is in the case of people arrested with respect
to very serious crimes, such as rape and murder, where I
think there is a reasonable argument for retaining, in a
time-limited fashion, their DNA profiles.
If you were to construct legislation on forensic DNA
databases, what constraints would you put in place?
Well I would be pretty content with keeping things
much as they are at the moment, so that the police can
retain a database from convicted individuals. If you’re 
convicted of a crime, you owe it to society to have your
DNA retained so that in the event of re-offending you’re
picked up quickly. And it should be on a limited set of
genetic markers that carry little information on you as
an individual, in particular in terms of future disease
liability.
But for the police to switch platform to routinely se-
quencing the entire human genome would raise massive
issues in genetic privacy, basic questions about who
owns your genome. I take the very simple view that my
genome is my personal property and is not up for grabs
nor is available for free and open viewing by any orga-
nisation. There are many tensions between genetic priv-
acy and the state’s desire to minimise crime and to
maximise health, and I think we’re still very much at
the beginning of that debate.
How do you see science and technology of forensic DNA
applications moving forward in the next five to ten years?
I never engage in crystal ball gazing because you just
don’t know what’s around the corner. If I’d answered this
question on blood groups in 1980, my answer would’ve
been 100% incorrect because we would never have seen
DNA fingerprinting coming over the horizon.
First of all, will next-generation sequencing impact fo-
rensic investigation? Will there be a wholesale move
away from the current STR-based typing systems to
something far more sophisticated reflecting modern
technology rather than technology that is now about
20 years old? My guess is probably no. It's fairly straight-
forward to take STR evidence to court. You can explain
what the profiles look like and get the jury to interpret,
but taking a few terabytes worth of DNA sequence infor-
mation to court and throwing that at a jury will encoun-
ter problems. However, you can see future specialised
applications of next-generation sequencing; for example,
in the event of bioterrorism it would be possible to
search the scene for evidence of a known biological
weapon or biological agent that can be weaponised.
Another big area is the notion of predicting phenotype
from DNA sequence variation. That’s particularly im-
portant for police when they have a crime scene DNA
sample and no suspect. This is a vast area that ranges
from trying to predict phenotypes such as hair and eye
colour from DNA sequences all the way through to an-
cestry predictions and taking DNA variants and trying to
determine the geographical origins of an individual.
These applications are all looking pretty good at present.
There are some interesting new developments in the
field that appear to be able to carry out really quite fine
geographical discriminations. For example, it seems to
be quite possible to distinguish people from the Orkney
Islands from the rest of the UK. This is an area that
I think is absolutely fascinating for genealogy, since
Page 7
Jeffreys Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:21
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/21
everybody wants to know their origins and family his-
tory. But whether this is appropriate for police work,
again there are ethical issues about genetic privacy that
may come into play here. For example, if you’re looking
at genes that control facial features, I think we can abso-
lutely guarantee that some of the key genetic variants
will carry congenital abnormality risk information with
them. Should the police be accessing that type of infor-
mation? If they do get that information, what should
they do? If they’ve identified someone who's brought
into a crime scene investigation, are the police required
to say “OK, yes, we’ve brought you in to this investiga-
tion, we can actually acquit you of this crime, but by the
way you carry ‘x’ mutation and you should be aware that
your family’s at risk of ‘x’ disease”.
That really raises some pretty serious questions about
who should have access to this sort of information. I see
that sort of phenotypic prediction developing a lot, but I
think probably largely driven by academic curiosity ra-
ther than by an overarching need to develop sophis-
ticated phenotypic predictions for police investigation
work. The alternative, of course, in police investigations
is to just stick everybody on the DNA database. The
United Arab Emirates enacted legislation for exactly that
quite some time ago for the mandatory databasing of the
entire 10 million population. This is a very interesting
social experiment and I’ll be very interested to see how
it plays out.
Competing interest
AJ has no competing financial interests to declare.
Received: 30 October 2013 Accepted: 30 October 2013
Published: 18 November 2013
doi:10.1186/2041-2223-4-21
Cite this article as: Jeffreys: The man behind the DNA fingerprints: an
interview with Professor Sir Alec Jeffreys. Investigative Genetics
2013 4:21. 
Page 7 of 7
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
