BOOKMARKS:
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Author details
Page 1
Kayser et al. Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:19
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/19
EDITORIAL
A tribute to DNA fingerprinting
Manfred Kayser1*, Antti Sajantila2,3 and Bruce Budowle3,4 
Open Access
September 2012 marked the 28th anniversary of an
experiment that translated into the forerunner of a
technology that impacts society worldwide till today, as
well as the official retirement of the remarkable scientist
who is widely known for this milestone discovery. That is,
DNA fingerprinting invented, coined, further developed,
and for the first time practically applied by Sir Alec
Jeffreys, which changed forensic science for the better
and forever. Sir Alec’s fame transcends forensic science,
other scientific disciplines, and just as significant the lay
public. His invention has promulgated one of the most
successful scientific tools in solving and fighting crime,
identifying missing persons and victims of mass disasters,
and - just as important - in helping exonerate those
innocent people who have been wrongly associated
with a crime. Although most of his research career
was outstanding beyond forensic DNA analysis, Sir
Alec is widely considered by the apt moniker “The
Founding Father of Forensic DNA Identification”.
To contribute to the affirmation and acknowledgement
that Sir Alec’s discovery of DNA fingerprinting has
had on a wide range of scientific disciplines, we the
Editors-in-Chief, thought it would be important and
timely to devote a special series of review articles in
Investigative Genetics on DNA fingerprinting, its past,
present and future. We are pleased to have distinguished
experts in forensics, anthropology, zoology, botany, and
microbiology who contributed treatises on how Sir
Alec’s discovery and subsequent developments of DNA
fingerprinting have impacted - and continue to influence -
their fields. All these scholars witnessed the nascent
days of DNA fingerprinting and used – together with
numerous colleagues worldwide - various similarly-based
molecular genetic strategies to address a wide range of
research questions in their respective fields. Mark Jobling,
Investigative Genetics’ regular columnist and professor at
the same University of Leicester’s Department of Genetics
that Sir Alec resided for 35 years, contributed a Guest
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:m.kayser@erasmusmc.nl"] m.kayser@erasmusmc.nl
1Department of Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus MC University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
Editorial to summarize the story of DNA fingerprinting in
greater detail.
We remember well the original International DNA
fingerprinting Conferences held on five continents from
1990 to 1999 (Bern, Switzerland in 1990; Belo Horizonte,
Brazil in 1992; Hyderabad, India in 1994; Melbourne,
Australia in 1996; and Port Elizabeth, South Africa in
1999). These conferences, initially organized by Sir Alec
and colleagues, were unique and extremely valuable
because scientists from different scientific backgrounds
were brought together with a common interest in genetic-
ally characterizing and differentiating organisms, strains,
or species by means of DNA fingerprinting. We recall the
lively interactions and how it helped us and many others
to gain a foothold in molecular genetics, and at the same
time to learn how useful DNA fingerprinting is to address
various open questions in the life sciences. Although this
International DNA fingerprinting Conference series came
to an end within a decade, the science and technology of
DNA fingerprinting continued and was rapidly and fully
absorbed by various life science disciplines. Predictably
there was the necessary end of this exciting conference
series; it had served its purpose of establishing DNA
fingerprinting as a routine tool across life sciences. Yet,
the end was unfortunate because this particular venue
for vibrant exchange of science and technology within
and across disciplines was gone. Especially in a scien-
tific world where inter-disciplinary work has become
increasingly important and at the same time more chal-
lenging because of the necessary drive for levels of
specialization, it can be difficult to find a common lan-
guage even among biological scientists.
Sir Alec’s scientific interest in human genomic dynamics
was much beyond DNA fingerprinting. In fact, he made
numerous groundbreaking discoveries on the processes of
mutation and recombination - two important pathways of
creating and maintaining genetic diversity - and regularly
published them in the highest ranked scientific journals.
To keep focus, these notable scientific achievements
that likely will provide the fodder for generations of
scientists cannot be the target of this special article
series; perhaps future ones in this or more specialized
© 2013 Kayser et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication
waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise
stated.
Page 2
Kayser et al. Investigative Genetics 2013, 4:19
http://www.investigativegenetics.com/content/4/1/19
journals will be devoted to that part of his enormous
research achievements.
We hope that with this special article series on DNA
fingerprinting Investigative Genetics will attract many
readers, some who may read these articles with a nostalgic
touch, others to gain a perspective on how a single
discovery could have such a strong impact on science
and society so quickly as DNA fingerprinting did, and
those who seek the motivation to commit themselves
to science with the same verve as Sir Alec Jeffreys has.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
All authors contributed to the manuscript preparation. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Author details
1Department of Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus MC University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 2Department of Forensic
Medicine, Hjelt Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. 3Institute of
Applied Genetics, Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University
of North Texas Health Science Center, Ft. Worth, TX, USA. 4Center of
Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research (CEGMR), King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
Received: 17 September 2013 Accepted: 17 September 2013
Published: 18 November 2013
doi:10.1186/2041-2223-4-19
Cite this article as: Kayser et al.: A tribute to DNA fingerprinting.
Investigative Genetics 2013 4:19. 
Page 2 of 2
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
