Page 1
doi:10.5598/imafungus.2018.09.01.12  IMA FUNGUS · 9(1): 185–198 (2018) 
ARTICLE Sequence-based nomenclature: a reply to Thines et al. and Zamora et al. 
DQG SURYLVLRQV IRU DQ DPHQGHG SURSRVDO ³IURP WKH ÀRRU´ WR DOORZ '1$
sequences as types of names
Robert Lücking1, Paul M. Kirk2 and David L. Hawksworth3
1Botanischer Garten und Botanisches Museum, Freie Universität Berlin, Königin-Luise-Straße 6-8, D-14195 Berlin, Germany; corresponding author
e-mail: r.luecking@bgbm.org
2State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China; Biodiversity Informatics &
Spatial Analysis, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 3DS, UK
3Comparative Plant and Fungal Biology, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 3DS, UK; Department of Life Sciences, The
Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London SW7 5BD, UK; Jilin Agricultural University, Chanchung, Jilin province, 130118 China
Abstract: We reply to two recently published, multi-authored opinion papers by opponents of sequence-
based nomenclature, namely Zamora et al. (,0$ )XQJXV 9: 167–175,2018) and Thines et al. (,0$ )XQJXV 9:
177–183, 2018). While we agree with some of the principal arguments brought forward by these authors, we
address misconceptions and demonstrate that some of the presumed evidence presented in these papers
has been wrongly interpreted. We disagree that allowing sequences as types would fundamentally alter the
nature of types, since a similar nature of abstracted features as type is already allowed in the Code (Art. 
40.5), namely an illustration. We also disagree that there is a high risk of introducing artifactual taxa, as
WKLV ULVN FDQ EH TXDQWL¿HG DW ZHOO EHORZ    FRQVLGHULQJ WKH YDULRXV W\SHV RI KLJK WKURXJKSXW VHTXHQFLQJ
errors. Contrary to apparently widespread misconceptions, sequence-based nomenclature cannot be based
on similarity-derived OTUs and their consensus sequences, but must be derived from rigorous, multiple
alignment-based phylogenetic methods and quantitative, single-marker species recognition algorithms, using
original sequence reads; it is therefore identical in its approach to single-marker studies based on physical
types, an approach allowed by the Code. We recognize the limitations of the ITS as a single fungal barcoding
marker, but point out that these result in a conservative approach, with “false negatives” surpassing “false
positives”; a desirable feature of sequence-based nomenclature. Sequence-based nomenclature does not
aim at accurately resolving species, but at naming sequences that represent unknown fungal lineages so that
these can serve as a means of communication, so ending the untenable situation of an exponentially growing
QXPEHU RI XQODEHOHG IXQJDO VHTXHQFHV WKDW ¿OO RQOLQH UHSRVLWRULHV 7KH ULVNV DUH RXWZHLJKHG E\ WKH JDLQV
obtained by a reference library of named sequences spanning the full array of fungal diversity. Finally, we
elaborate provisions in addition to our original proposal to amend the Code that would take care of the issues
brought forward by opponents to this approach. In particular, taking up the idea of the Candidatus status of
invalid, provisional names in prokaryote nomenclature, we propose a compromise that would allow valid
publication of voucherless, sequence-based names in a consistent manner, but with the obligate designation
as “nom. seq.” (nomen sequentiae). Such names would not have priority over specimen- or culture-based
QDPHV XQOHVV HLWKHU HSLW\SL¿HG ZLWK D SK\VLFDO W\SH RU DGRSWHG IRU SURWHFWLRQ RQ WKH UHFRPPHQGDWLRQ RI D
committee of the ,QWHUQDWLRQDO &RPPLVVLRQ RQ WKH 7D[RQRP\ RI )XQJL following evaluation based on strict
quality control of the underlying studies based on established rules or recommendations. 
Key words: 
Aspergillus
Daldinia
Fusarium
IMC11
International Commission on
the Taxonomy of Fungi
ITS barcoding marker
Morchella
nom. seq.
Penicillium
Article info: Submitted: 30 May 2018; Accepted: 8 June 2018; Published: 11 June 2018.
BACKGROUND
Prior to the 19th International Botanical Congress in Shenzen
,%&  LQ-XO\  D¿UVWSURSRVDOWRIRUPDOO\ DGRSWQDPHV
based on sequence types for so-called “dark matter fungi” was
put forward (Hawksworth et al. 2016). This proposal received
moderate attention in the mycological community (Hibbett et
al. 2016, Grube et al. 2017, Seifert 2017, Hibbett 2018, Ryberg 
& Nilsson 2018) and was rejected by the Nomenclatural
Section at IMC 2017 but with the formation of a Special
Committee to look into the matter across all groups covered
by the Code (Hawksworth et al. 2017). That Committee is
charged with reporting to the 20th Congress in Rio de Janeriro
LQ  :LWK WKH GHFLVLRQ WKDW QRPHQFODWXUDO UXOHV VSHFL¿F
to Fungi are now under the responsibility of the International
Mycological Congresses (IMCs) and form a separate chapter
© 2018 International Mycological Association
You are free to share - to copy, distribute and transmit the work, under the following conditions:
Attribution: <RX PXVW DWWULEXWH WKH ZRUN LQ WKH PDQQHU VSHFL¿HG E\ WKH DXWKRU RU OLFHQVRU EXW QRW LQ DQ\ ZD\ WKDW VXJJHVWV WKDW WKH\ HQGRUVH \RX RU \RXU XVH RI WKH ZRUN
Non-commercial: <RX PD\ QRW XVH WKLV ZRUN IRU FRPPHUFLDO SXUSRVHV
No derivative works: <RX PD\ QRW DOWHU WUDQVIRUP RU EXLOG XSRQ WKLV ZRUN
For any reuse or distribution, you must make clear to others the license terms of this work, which can be found at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/legalcode. Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get
permission from the copyright holder. Nothing in this license impairs or restricts the author’s moral rights.
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 1  185
Page 2
Lücking et al.
ARTICLE
in the Code (Hawksworth et al. 2017, Turland et al. 2018), this
matter in so far as it relates to fungi can be decided on at an
International Mycological Congress. The original proposal was
consequently published in revised form for consideration by the
upcoming 11th International Mycological Congress (IMC11) in
San Juan, Puerto Rico in July 2018 (Hawksworth et al. 2018),
with a supporting positional paper on how to address potential
challenges of this approach (Lücking & Hawksworth 2018). The
mycological community has rather passionately responded to
this second proposal, and since then, an intense discussion
has developed including two opposingt papers in this issue, 
one by some members of the International Commission on
the Taxonomy of Fungi (ICTF) and another with 412 authors
(Thines et al. 2018, Zamora et al. 2018). While our co-author
on the two proposals, David Hibbett, has responded separately
in this issue to Seifert’s (2017) editorial on sequence-based
nomenclature (Hibbett 2018), here we provide a reply to the
WZR PXOWL DXWKRUHG SDSHUV DV ZH FRQVLGHU D FODUL¿FDWLRQ RI
certain misconceptions and incorrectly interpreted evidence
regarding the original proposal and the nature of sequence-
based nomenclature is required as a basis for informed debate
in Puerto Rico.
RESPONSES
Part I. Reply to Zamora et al. “Considerations
and consequences of allowing DNA sequence
data as types of fungal taxa”
Species versus DNA sequences
We agree with what is outlined by Zamora et al. (2018: 169) on
this matter in practically every detail. However, the arguments
put forward highlight the limitations of a single marker
for species delimitations, an issue that applies generally
to DNA sequencing methods and to all markers (as those
authors correctly state), and is not unique to the approach of
sequence-based nomenclature. Therefore, it cannot stand as
an argument against sequence-based nomenclature, while
the same approach is regularly allowed for specimen-based
nomenclature. The Code does not require new species to
be based on multiple markers, or indeed any molecular data
at all. A polyphasic approach to species delimitation, using
multiple markers and an array of phenotypic characters, is
certainly the desired “gold standard”. Yet, however complex
evolutionary processes may be, in most groups of fungi, 
species are reasonably well-delimited using either a single
barcoding marker (be it ITS or another locus) or a maximum
of two to three combined markers (see below in Reply to
Thines et al. Point 1).
For practical reasons, in a given group, sequence-based
nomenclature has to be executed with a single marker, 
WR HQIRUFH FRQJUXHQFH DQG DYRLG SDUDOOHO FODVVL¿FDWLRQV
(Lücking & Hawksworth 2018: 153), and in lieu of reasons for
alternative loci (e.g. in Aspergillus, Fusarium, Penicillium; see
below), the locus of choice is the ITS fungal barcoding marker, 
if not for the simple reason that almost all environmental fungal
meta-barcoding sequences in the Sequence Read Archive
(SRA) correspond to ITS – and there are now more than a
billion (!) of them (Lücking & Hawksworth 2018: 144). Being 
fully aware of the limitations of using ITS as the single marker
to perform sequence-based nomenclature, we reiterate here
(and below) two important aspects of this approach:
%  Sequence-based nomenclature does not aim at accurately
resolving species, simply because in a substantial
number of cases it cannot do that. Sequence-based
nomenclature aims at naming sequences that represent
unknown fungal lineages so that these sequences can
serve as proper references and the untenable situation
of an exponentially growing number of unlabeled fungal
VHTXHQFHV WKDW ¿OO RQOLQH UHSRVLWRULHV PD\ EH OLPLWHG DQG
stop making taxonomic assessments of newly generated
VHTXHQFH GDWD LQFUHDVLQJO\ PRUH GLI¿FXOW )LJ 
%  Being aware of the limitations of using ITS as a single
PDUNHU ZLWK WKH ULVNV RI LQVXI¿FLHQW UHVROXWLRQ LQ VRPH
lineages (“false negatives”) or hypervariability in others
(“false positives”), we consider these risks outweighed
by the gains obtained by a reference library of named
sequences facilitating communication across the full
array of fungal diversity.
Impact on nomenclatural types
Zamora et al. (2018: 170) state: “An acceptance of the proposal
would fundamentally alter the meaning of nomenclatural
types. This is because instead of using a physical object as
the type of a name, we would just use information from a
character of the organism as the type.” We disagree. Firstly, 
there is no fundamental change to the meaning of types, since
precisely in fungi it is already possible to use an illustration
of a character as type “ LI WKHUH DUH WHFKQLFDO GLI¿FXOWLHV
of preservation or if it is impossible to preserve a specimen
that would show the features attributed to the taxon ...” (Art. 
40.5). This provision was used to establish the lichenicolous
genus Lawreymyces, with seven species, using images of
the ITS sequences (Hawksworth 2017, Lücking & Moncada
2017), the latter triggering the Nomenclatural Section of the
Shenzen IBC to insert a new example in the Code making
clear that such images of DNA sequences are “not depictions
of features of the organism” (Turland et al. 2018: Art. 40.5
Ex. 6).  While we disagree with this decision, as a DNA
VHTXHQFH LV D IHDWXUH RI DQ RUJDQLVP ZH ¿QG LW KDUG WR DUJXH
that a drawing of, for example spore characters, is allowable
as a type but a DNA sequence is not. Both forms of types
are conceptually similar in nature as they are impressions
of features and are not photographic images of physical
structures; to have a sequence type would not therefore be
D IXQGDPHQWDO FKDQJH LQ RXU RSLQLRQ ,W LV GLI¿FXOW WR DUJXH
that an illustration is more diagnostic than a DNA sequence, 
DV H[HPSOL¿HG E\ WKH QHZ FK\WULG Fimicolochytrium jonesii 
based on an illustration as type, but the authors themselves
acknowledged that morphological characters in this case
are “... not completely accurate in assigning chytrids to the
correct genus or species, thus emphasizing the importance
of molecular characters for identifying these taxa.” (Simmons
& Longcore 2012: 1229).
Zamora et al. (2018: 170) rightfully argue that even for
fungi only known from sequences, it is not necessary to
designate the sequence as type, since conceptually the
underlying sample contains the type and there are also
186  IMA FUNGUS
Page 3
VOLUME 
9 
· 
NO. 
1 
Sequence-
based 
nomenclature 
– 
a 
reply 
to 
issues 
raised Fig. 1. BLAST result of an unnamed sequence (GenBank accession HM069408) representing an unnamed species of Archaeorhizomyces (Rosling et al. 2011). The BLAST result gives no clue as to the
phylogenetic relationships of this sequence. 
ARTICLE 187
Page 4
Lücking et al.
ARTICLE
Box 1
Candidatus names (extracted from ICPN Appendix 11)
“(3) A name of an organism in the status of Candidatus consists of the word Candidatus, followed by a “vernacular
HSLWKHW´ WKDW FRQVLVWV RI HLWKHU D JHQXV QDPH ZLWK D VSHFL¿F HSLWKHW RU RQO\ D JHQXV QDPH RU RQO\ D VSHFL¿F
epithet. ... the word Candidatus, but not the vernacular epithet is printed in italics.”
“ $ &DQGLGDWXV QDPH LV E\ GH¿QLWLRQ D SUHOLPLQDU\ QDPH DQG WKHUHIRUH KDV QR VWDQGLQJ LQ SURNDU\RWH
nomenclature.”
“ $ OLVW LQ WKH IRUP RI D FRGL¿HG UHFRUG RI RUJDQLVPV RI WKH VWDWXV &DQGLGDWXV LV NHSW E\ WKH -XGLFLDO &RPPLVVVLRQ
RI WKH ,&63 LQ FRRSHUDWLRQ ZLWK WKH (GLWRULDO %RDUG RI WKH ,-6(0 DQG LV SXEOLVKHG LQ WKDW MRXUQDO LQ DSSURSULDWH
intervals.”
techniques that can make fungal structures containing the
target sequences visible, and none of these require changes
to the Code. We do not only agree, but all these possibilities
were evaluated previously (Lücking & Hawksworth 2018: 
146ff, Table 1). The proposal to allow the actual sequence as
type is based on three arguments: 
%  Even if there is a specimen or culture as type, if
sequence data are available, the relationships of the
taxon will always be evaluated based on sequence data. 
Sequences from types (Schoch et al.  2014),  not the
SK\VLFDO W\SHV WKHPVHOYHV ¿[ WKH DSSOLFDWLRQ RI D QDPH LQ
a phylogenetic framework, so type sequences essentially
serve as proxies for physical types and from there, the
step to have sequences as actual types is small. 
%  Fungi known from sequences only can be validly described
under the current Code using a physical type, such as
the underlying sample, as has been done with Piromyces
cryptodigmaticus )OLHJHURYi et al. in Kirk 2012). However, 
this approach is not optimal as the type is ambiguous and
just serves as a formality, whereas the species name will
be evaluated based on its type sequence. Even a FISH
type (e.g. as a permanent slide), while visualizing the
actual fungus, for practical purposes is useless as a type
in terms of assessment or reproducibility of characters.
%  In voucherless fungi, a sequence type has several
advantages over other forms of types, including broad
accessibility and unlimited long-term storage of multiple
copies without quality loss. This does not apply if the type
is the underlying sample, DNA extract, or FISH type.
Impact on names of taxa and future taxonomic
studies
The arguments in this section largely correspond to points (6) 
and (9) of Thines et al. (2018) and are addressed below, with
reference to Lücking & Hawksworth (2018: 152f).
Reliability and extent of data
The arguments in this section largely correspond to points (2) 
to (6) of Thines et al. (2018) and are addressed below, with
reference to Lücking & Hawksworth (2018: 148ff).
Candidate names
Zamora et al. (2018) propose to alternatively consider the
approach of so-called “candidate names” as suggested in the
,QWHUQDWLRQDO &RGH RI 1RPHQFODWXUH RI 3URNDU\RWHV (ICNP; 
Parker et al. 2015) for archaea and bacteria that cannot
EH FXOWXUHG DQG VR GR QRW IXO¿O  WKH UHTXLUHPHQWV IRU YDOLG
description under that Code. We appreciate this suggestion
as a constructive alternative. The ICNP has three provisions
for candidate names (Box 1).
While this concept could be applied to the case of
voucherless fungi known only from sequences, there is one
aspect which we consider detrimental to the idea of avoiding
“chaos”, as so vehemently advocated by the opponents of
sequence-based nomenclature. The Candidatus names are
invalid and have no standing under the prokaryote code. 
Further, for those unfamiliar with this system, this causes
confusion as the italicized word “Candidatus” at the start of
the species name gives the impression that these are taxa in a
genus Candidatus, as in “Candidatus Liberibacter africanus” 
and “Candidatus Brocadia anammoxidans"; the nuances of
type faces are not easily appreciated by editors and non-
specialists and can be found all italicized in the literature.
With such a provision in fungal nomenclature, there would
be no rules as to how to coin names beyond “Candidatus”,
or any system to which authors should adhere in such
nomenclatural acts. We fear this would generate more
confusion than adoption of any formal sequence nomenclature, 
including the notion that parts of the mycological community
could simply choose to ignore these names. Validity of names
is an indispensable component of an ideal sequence-based
nomenclature, since only then nomenclatural acts can be
formally evaluated and judged against agreed rules.
7KH LGHD RI XVLQJ D XQLTXH SUH¿[ VXFK DV ³'1$´ IRU
sequence-based fungal taxa and the provision that such
names have no priority over specimen- or culture-based
names are analogous to the Candidatus concept and
essentially have the same effect (see below under point 9).
Another potentially useful approach similar in concept to the
Candidatus concept would be to develop rules for sequence-
based names separately, perhaps in a Code of Practice
agreed by the ICTF, rather than to change the Articles relating
to types. That way, while formally binding, sequence-based
nomenclature could be regulated outside the main body of
the Code, with the possibility of including provision as to how
sequence-based names are to be derived and evaluated.
There is an established nomenclatural practice, already
familiar to many mycologists, to append a notation after a
name to indicate nomenclatural status, such as “nom. inval.”,
“nom. illegit.”, “nom. nud.”, “nom. nov.”, “nom. cons.”, “nom. 
sanct.”, or “nom. prov.”. The use of provisional names (“nom.
188  IMA FUNGUS
Page 5
Sequence-based nomenclature – a reply to issues raised
prov.”) is analogous to the Candidatus concept in that it is
used when an author wishes to have more material before
formally validating a taxon name, but wants to have a label
to discuss it. However, this has the disadvantage that this
could encourage an explosion of invalid unregulated names. 
We suggest that a more acceptable alternative would be the
use of an addition “nom. seq.” (“nomen sequentiae”) after any
sequence-based name in a parallel manner, but ruling that
such names would then be validly published but not have
priority over names based on physical types (specimens or
cultures), or illustrations.
Part II. Reply to Thines et al. “Ten reasons why
a sequence-based nomenclature is not useful
for fungi anytime soon”
1. The resolution of barcoding loci, especially
ITS, varies among different groups
The authors correctly point out that the variation of the
fungal barcoding marker ITS is not uniform at the same
hierarchical level, in particular species, among different
groups of fungi. Lücking & Hawksworth (2018: 150f, Box 4) 
never claimed that this would be the case, and discussed this
problem in detail. Principally, there can be three outcomes: 
(a) ITS-based clades principally correspond to species-
level clades; (b) ITS-based clades only resolve (generally
monophyletic) species complexes (underestimation of actual
species richness or “false negative”); or (c) ITS-based clades
FRUUHVSRQG WR LQIUDVSHFL¿F OLQHDJHV RYHUHVWLPDWLRQ RI DFWXDO
species richness or “false positive”).
In many fungi in which ITS phylogenies have been placed
in the context of multi-locus approaches and/or phenotype
variation, the ITS barcoding locus works reasonably well
for species delimitation (e.g. Roy et al. 1998, Geml et al.
2006, Weir et al. 2012, Gomes et al. 2013, Walter et al. 
2013, Moncada et al. 2014, Lücking et al. 2014a, 2017, Del
Prado et al. 2016). Even in Oomycota, besides cox1 and
cox2, ITS is routinely used for species delimitation (Thines
& Kummer 2013). There are, however, also cases in which
ITS only resolves species complexes (“false negatives”),
including in genera such as Aspergillus, Fusarium, Morchella,
Penicillium,  and Pseudocercospora;  in these instances, 
additional barcoding markers such as calmodulin (CAL),
ȕ WXEXOLQ %HQ$ RU WUDQVODWLRQ HORQJDWLRQ IDFWRU DOSKD 
(TEF1) have been proposed (Crous et al. 2013, Samson et
al. 2014, Visagie et al. 2014, O’Donnell et al. 2015, Richard
et al. 2015). In contrast, highly variable ITS within a species
(potentially leading to “false positives”), such as in the lichen-
forming Cetraria aculeata )HUQiQGH]0HQGR]D et al. 2011),
appears to be rare (and is also subject to interpretation of the
species concept applied), which means that sequence-based
nomenclature using the ITS barcoding locus would tend to be
conservative, certainly a desirable attribute.
In spite of the many studies available, Thines et al. 
(2018: 178) cite a single paper (Stadler et al. 2014a, cited
as “b”) for their argument of potentially conserved ITS and its
presumed subpar performance compared to other markers: 
“7KH ,76 UHJLRQV DUH UDWKHU FRQVHUYHG LQ PDQ\ VSHFLHV
groups, in particular within the Sordariomycetes and other 
classes of Ascomycota (Stadler et al. 2014b).” We examined
the cited study, a polyphasic revision of the genus Daldinia 
(Xylariaceae), and found the following statements:
%  (p. 23) “The preliminary molecular phylogeny of Daldinia 
SUHVHQWHG KHUH LV H[FOXVLYHO\ EDVHG RQ ,76 U'1$ JHQH
sequence data.” The study relied on ITS as a single
marker, even if presumably inappropriate.
%  (p. 23) “Finally, most taxa of xylarioid Xylariaceae ... were
RPLWWHG VLQFH WKHLU ,76 UHJLRQV VHTXHQFHV >VLF@ ZHUH
found to contain too many DNA portions that could not be
aligned with certainty.” This points to variable, rather than
conserved, ITS; in most Fungi, ITS is not well alignable
between genera but more or less readily between species, 
and according to these authors, Xylariaceae do not seem
to be an exception.
%  (p. 27) “With few exceptions, the molecular phylogeny
EDVHG RQ ,76 QU'1$ GDWD ODUJHO\ VXSSRUWV WKLV FRQFHSW
and in one case (D. andina) the molecular data even gave
hints where to place the respective fungus.”. This phrase
refers to infrageneric divisions of Daldinia predicted by
phenotype features including natural products, i.e. there
is a high level of congruence between ITS data and
phenotype features.
%  (p. 132) “The species groups outlined in this monograph
were mostly recognised as reasonably well supported
JURXSLQJV E\ WKH ,76 U51$ JHQH SK\ORJHQ\”  The
authors recognized species complexes based on ITS
and proceeded in establishing new taxa, such as Daldinia
starbaeckii, within these complexes, based for instance
on variation of ascospore size and chemical products, 
although the ITS did not provide any such separation, for
instance from D. eschscholtzii.
Thines et al. (2018: 178) use these results as argument
for conserved ITS in Daldinia,  although in the absence
RI HYLGHQFH IURP RWKHU PDUNHUV ZH ¿QG WKLV LV D FLUFXODU
conclusion; also, in other groups of Fungi, analogous variation
KDV EHHQ LQWHUSUHWHG DV LQWUDVSHFL¿F H J FKHPLFDO YDULDWLRQ
in species of Usnea (Mark et al. 2016). Therefore, until more
markers are analyzed, such as in the genera cited above, we
FDQQRW DJUHH ZLWK WKLV VSHFL¿F H[DPSOH DQG FRQVLGHU RWKHU
better studied genera such as Fusarium more appropriate
H[DPSOHV RI FRQVHUYHG ,76 +RZHYHU WR FRQVLGHU LQVXI¿FLHQW
resolution a failure of the concept of a barcoding marker is
LQ RXU YLHZ LOO GH¿QHG 6SHFLHV DUH QRW ¿[HG HQWLWLHV LQ WLPH
but emerge, evolve, and speciate, or become extinct. This
process does not happen overnight but may take geological
time spans; therefore, we cannot expect that the ITS, or any
other marker, will resolve clades in the same way across
all taxa, a point elaborated by Zamora et al. (2018: 169; 
see above). Species complexes that radiated recently are
likely to exhibit low resolution, and ancient species already
in the process of subsequent speciation are likely to have
highly variable ITS. That does not mean that ITS undergoes
different evolutionary mechanisms in different clades, but
simply that some species-level clades are older or younger
than others. Recently radiating species complexes could
DOVR EH LQWHUSUHWHG DV LQIUDVSHFL¿F OLQHDJHV OHDGLQJ WR WKH
question of whether ITS properly resolves species depends
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 1 
ARTICLE 
189
Page 6
Lücking et al.
ARTICLE
on the ranking of such lineages (e.g. James et al  2QXĠɅ
Brännström et al. 2017).
Thines et al. (2018: 177) state that “The idea of using
VHTXHQFH VLPLODULW\ DV D PHDVXUH RI GH¿QLQJ WD[D LV WHPSWLQJ
...”. There appears to be a widespread misconception that
sequence-based nomenclature, in particular when based on
ITS, should rely on sequence similarity, a concept derived
from clustering techniques and employed, for instance, 
in the UNITE species hypotheses (Kõljalg et al. 2013).
Lücking & Hawksworth (2018: 154ff) explicitly state that
FOXVWHULQJ WHFKQLTXHV DQG SUH GH¿QHG VLPLODULW\ WKUHVKROGV
are inappropriate to delimit lineages, and that instead
multiple alignment-based phylogenetic approaches and
quantitative species delimination methods should be used. 
These methods are independent of any a priori similarity
threshold level, and instead the similarity between (sister) 
lineages is determined a posteriori and usually variable
between clades and dependent on the time of speciation and
other evolutionary parameters (such as population size and
structure). In our proposed approach, sequence similarity is
not at a measure to be considered (see also below under
point 7).
2. There is a high risk of introducing artefacts
as new species
We do agree that there is a risk, and this was addressed
in Lücking & Hawksworth (2018: 148ff). However, based on
published evidence, this risk is low and manageable (e.g. 
Lindner et al. 2013). Thines et al. (2018) cite erroneous
base calls stemming from careless editing of Sanger contigs
(particularly in terminal regions) or from sequencing errors, 
including TAQ polymerase errors, as one of the high risk
factors. According to these authors, “... most widely used
polymerases ...  have a high rate of incorporating wrong
nucleotides ...” (Thines et al. 2018: 178). In reality, reported
TAG polymerase errors are less than 0.1% of replicated bases
(Chen et al. 1991, Keohavong & Thilly 1998), on average less
than one base in a full ITS sequence of 500 to 600 bases, a
SURSRUWLRQ WKDW IDOOV ZHOO ZLWKLQ LQWUDVSHFL¿F YDULDWLRQ DQG LQ D
phylogenetic context provides no risk whatsoever of resulting
in artifactual species recognition. The authors are correct in
stating that terminal portions of Sanger sequences are often
of subpar quality (actually much more so in protein-coding
markers than in ribosomal DNA), but such portions can be
easily recognized and trimmed, reducing the probability of
any artifactual effect to practically zero. 
Thines et al. (2018) fail to recognize the most important
single nucleotide sequencing errors in high throughput
sequencing, namely CAFIE errors, addressed in Lücking &
Hawksworth (2018: 149ff). CAFIE errors on average are at
levels an order of magnitude higher than TAG polymerase
errors, at around 1 % (Lücking et al. 2014b), corresponding
to about 5–6 bases in a full length ITS sequence. However, 
due to the stochastic distribution of these errors within the
ITS (including the highly conserved 5.8S region), multiple
alignment-based phylogenetic methods are robust against
such errors and recover species-level clades accurately
(Lücking & Hawksworth 2018: 155). In contrast, clustering
methods are highly susceptible to sequencing errors, which
largely account for a substantial overestimation of OTUs 
in environmental studies relying on clustering approaches
(Lücking & Hawksworth 2018: 154ff).
We agree with Thines et al. (2018) that chimeras are
the most critical source of artifactual ITS sequences, both
in Sanger and high-throughput sequencing. However, there
DUH PHWKRGV RI DXWRPDWLFDOO\ ¿OWHULQJ FKLPHULF VHTXHQFHV
that reduce the potential risk to about 1 % (Edgar et al. 
2011, Quince et al. 2011, Schloss et al. 2011, Porazinska et
al. 2012, Kim et al. 2013, Mysara et al. 2015, Edgar 2016),
a proportion that certainly cannot be considered high. In
addition, Sanger-generated chimeras can rather easily be
detected as they can form long but unsupported branches, 
since they combine unique sequence patterns from unrelated
ITS1 and ITS2 portions (hence a long stem branch) with
DI¿QLWLHV WR WZR GLVWLQFW VHSDUDWH FODGHV KHQFH ZLWK ORZ
support since bootstrapping will pull individual sequences
to one of these other clades based on subsampling). High-
WKURXJKSXW VHTXHQFLQJ +76 FKLPHUDV DUH PRUH GLI¿FXOW WR
GHWHFW EXW DUH DOVR PRUH HDVLO\ ¿OWHUHG VLQFH FKLPHULF 3&5
products mostly result in sequences with subpar signal quality
DQG VR UDUHO\ SDVV WKURXJK TXDOLW\ ¿OWHUV ,I WKH\ GR WKH\ DUH
H[WUHPHO\ GLI¿FXOW WR UHFRJQL]H DV FKLPHUDV EXW GH¿QLQJ WD[D
through sequences originating from independent samples
reduces this risk considerably, since the probability of
congruent chimeras originating from two or more independent
samples is close to zero.
Thines et al. (2018) mention intragenomic divergence of
ITS sequences as a risk factor, a problem already addressed
LQ WKHLU ¿UVW SRLQW ZLWK D VWXG\ RQ Fusarium (O’Donnell &
Cigelnik 1997).  Another case cited is Xylaria hypoxylon 
3HUãRK et al. 2009, Stadler et al. 2014b), for which Stadler
et al. (2014b: 65) state: “Remarkably, three cultures obtained
independently from cultures derived from the same perithe-
FLXP RI WKH HSLW\SH PDWHULDO JDYH WKUHH VOLJKWO\ GLIIHUHQW ,76
sequences. This indicates that DNA sequencing will not al-
ways lead to 100 % reproducible results, and special care
should be taken not to overestimate the value of molecular
techniques for estimation of species numbers and diversity.”
We examined the three cited epitype sequences (AM993141, 
AM993142, AM993144). All three align for a total length of
512 bases, and we found the only difference to be a single
base call in position 86 of sequence AM993144, exhibiting
an A instead of a G. This variation amounts to 0.06 % of all
base calls in the three sequences, i.e. less than the average
of reported error levels of TAG polymerase. It could therefore
be a simple sequencing error or else variation to be expected
in the presence of concerted evolution; such variation is not
rare in Sanger sequences (evidenced by double peaks in in-
dividual positions), but has no real impact on species recog-
nition. It cannot be taken as a “high risk of introducing arte-
facts as new species.”
Thines et al. (2018) list further examples to underline
their point of aberrant intragenomic behaviour of ITS repeats. 
However, the studies of Won & Renner (2005) and Harpke
& Peterson (2008), as evidence for ITS degeneration, refer
to vascular plants in Gnetum and Cactaceae This can hardly
be used to assess evolutionary processes concerning
the ribosomal DNA cistron, including the ITS, in Fungi,
particularly since speciation based on hybridization and
allopolyploidy, cited in those studies as a potential cause of
190  IMA FUNGUS
Page 7
Sequence-based nomenclature – a reply to issues raised
ITS degeneration, is widespread in vascular plants, but is of
uncertain frequency in Fungi. A more appropriate reference
for Fungi would have been Li et al. (2013), which according to
Thines et al. (2018) underlines a potential lack of concerted
evolution, but mostly deals with presumed ITS pseudogenes
in Ophiocordiceps sinensis.  Pseudogenes evolve within
the genome of one lineage and explore new phylospace
independent from other lineages; they therefore should
not cluster with ITS variants of other lineages. An example
is the study of Lindner & Banik (2011) on Laetiporus, in
which a single species, L. cincinnatus, was found to contain
multiple ITS variants. All these cluster with support with
other species, in particular L. sulphureus (see also Lücking
& Hawksworth 2018: 151ff), and the only explanation for
such a pattern is hybridization and introgression, not ITS
degeneration and pseudogene formation. The distinction
between pseudogenes and hybridization is critical, since
the latter does not “... produce artefact shadow taxa ...”
as Thines et al. (2018: 178) claim, but corresponds to real
species, independent whether of their ITS is detected in
the hybrid genome of another species. Implementating ITS
meta-barcoding in Candida s.lat.,  Colabella et al.  (2018) 
found, depending on mapping procedures, identity values for
reads from strains of two different species to the expected
ITS sequence (from Sanger sequencing) of between 97.9% 
and 99.8%. These values were interpreted as intragenomic
variation, but could at least in part be due to sequencing
errors, as the proportions compare with those found by
Lücking et al. (2014b); nevertheless, the suggested mapping
procedures resulted in rather high accuracy to detect the
correct species. The authors also found that some reads were
“... highly homologous ... to the rDNA of other species ...”
(Colabella et al. 2018: 99), further supporting the hypothesis
WKDW LQWUDJHQRPLF ,76 YDULDWLRQ LV FKLHÀ\ GXH WR K\EULGL]DWLRQ
rather than pseudogene formation.
3. There is no consensus regarding the data
type or amount needed for species delimitation
We wholeheartedly agree with this point! However, such
D FRQVHQVXV LV QRW QHFHVVDU\ $ VFLHQWL¿F DSSURDFK WKDW
UHOLHV RQ D SUH GH¿QHG FRQVHQVXV VXFK DV FOXVWHULQJ
EDVHG RQ VLPLODULW\ WKUHVKROGV LV ÀDZHG 5DWKHU VFLHQWL¿F
analysis should be independent and not be based on a priori 
assumptions and instead enable us to test assumptions a
posteriori. There are numerous analytical methods to properly
analyze sequence data, elaborated in Lücking & Hawksworth
(2018),  and statistical approaches can be employed to
determine how many independent sequences of a certain
length are needed to render clades statistically reliable (see
below under point 7).
4. Voucherless data are not reproducible
Thines et al. (2018) argue that DNA sequence types without
physical voucher specimens are not reproducible. In addition, 
DNA sequence types do not allow the assessment of other
characters, including phenotype and other molecular
markers. While the latter statement is correct (and discussed
further below and in Lücking & Hawksworth 2018: 146ff),
this has little to do with reproducibility. The latter refers to
WKH RULJLQDO GDWD L H WKH VHTXHQFH V XVHG WR GH¿QH D 
species and in particular the sequence type, and not the
assessment of additional features. This issue has rarely been
questioned in Sanger sequences, although the problem of
reproducibility applies equally to both Sanger and HTS data
and both have analogous underlying sources. Sanger and
HTS sequences come from specimens or environmental
samples, respectively, and these can always be restudied
(if stored properly) or other specimens or samples can be
gathered under the same conditions. Both generate DNA
extracts and PCR products that can be reanalyzed, and both
UHVXOW LQ VHTXHQFHV UHDGV EDVHG RQ WUDFH ¿OHV WKDW FDQ EH
reassessed. Unfortunately, in most cases neither specimens
nor samples, or DNA extracts and PCR products, or trace
¿OHV DUH UHDGLO\ DFFHVVLEOH WR LQYHVWLJDWRUV RWKHU WKDQ WKRVH
who produced the data, and proper storage is often not
guaranteed. However, reproducibility of the original sequence
data is possible in quite an analogous way in both Sanger
and HTS sequences, so potential problems of reproducibility
equally apply to both. Therefore, this cannot be used as an
argument against sequence-based nomenclature.
In addition, sequences are evaluated in an alignment-
based phylogenetic context and potential problems can
be detected that way. An example is GenBank accession
AF356664, which caused an entire class of Fungi,
Eurotiomycetes, to erroneously appear nested within another
class, Lecanoromycetes,  due to a “multilocus chimera” 
(Lücking & Nelsen 2018).  Highly congruent sequences
originating from independent sources have an astronomically
low possibility to be artifactual, which provides a means of
testing the data without the need to go back to the source
and reproduce the actual sequence (see below). The same
approach can (and must) be used in sequence-based
nomenclature (Hawksworth et al. 2016, 2018, Lücking &
Hawksworth 2018: 149ff).
 6HTXHQFHEDVHG W\SHV FDQQRW EH YHUL¿HG
We are not sure why the authors list this as a separate
point, as it is fully congruent with their previous argument. 
As mentioned above, a simple but effective means of testing
a sequence is whether the same or a highly congruent
sequence occurs in independent samples. Areliable statistical
test can be employed to compute the probability that N
sequences of length L from X independent samples are so
similar that they cluster with strong support in a monophyletic
clade, but instead of being of common descent represent
VHTXHQFLQJ DUWLIDFWV ,W FDQ EH VKRZQ WKDW IRU 1 DQG ;   DQG
/   H J VHSDUDWH ,76 RU ,76 UHJLRQV WKLV SUREDELOLW\
becomes astronomically small. Even if the sequences are
from the same sample or run, the same principle applies, 
since HTS sequences are generated from independent PCR
products in separate wells and the repetition of the same
stochastic sequencing error, including chimeras, in separate
PCR products and wells is highly unlikely and substantially
decreases with increasing number of congruent sequences. 
Ergo, HTS-derived sequence types can be effectively tested, 
and so can the resulting clades.
6. Sequence-based types are not relatable
Thines et al. (2018) again argue that sequence types cannot
be attached to specimens (which is indeed the essence of
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 1 
ARTICLE 
191
Page 8
Lücking et al.
ARTICLE
sequence-based nomenclature) and that therefore other
characters cannot be assessed, a valid argument but
essentially repeating points (4) and (5). Sequence-based
nomenclature needs to be based on the molecular data
of a single marker in order to work, and this is indeed a
shortcoming of this approach, acknowledged by Lücking &
Hawksworth (2018: 146ff). However, this issue relates in
part to the potential limitations of ITS as a single barcoding
marker (see also reply to Zamora et al. above), many of
which are perceived rather than real, as shown in Lücking &
Hawksworth (2018: 150ff), and do not relate to the use of a
sequence type per se. While some limitations exist, the gain
in producing named reference sequences across a broad
UDQJH RI XQFODVVL¿HG IXQJDO OLQHDJHV VXUHO\ IDU VXUSDVVHV LWV
problems.
We do agree with Thines et al. (2018: 179) that: 
“Presently about 120 000 species are acknowledged, but
there are more than 400 000 names ... Only a mere fraction
of the 120 000 accepted species have DNA sequences
GHSRVLWHG ,I VSHFLHV ZHUH QDPHG EDVHG RQ HQYLURQPHQWDO
sequences, and they were given the same status as species
with specimens, the risk would arise that all work done
EHIRUH WKH ¿UVW '1$ VHTXHQFHV ZHUH GHSRVLWHG LQ *HQ%DQN
in 1991, would be deliberately ignored.” Since priority only
applies within the same rank, we have to be concerned with
approximately 240 000 species level names in Fungi as of
this date (not 400 000), but this number is still extremely
high considering that only a fraction, approximately 35 000
names or 15 %,  have sequence data attached to them
(Lücking & Hawksworth 2018: 152). This is in our view the
core problem of sequence-based nomenclature, and Lücking
& Hawksworth (2018: 152ff) considered this at some length, 
not only quantifying the problem but also offering solutions, 
something not acknowledged by Thines et al. (2018). Lücking
& Hawksworth (2018: 153 Table 2) computed the average
statistical synonym error rate, i.e. the proportion of new
VHTXHQFH EDVHG VSHFLHV DFWXDOO\ FRQVSHFL¿F ZLWK SUHYLRXVO\
established names lacking sequence data, as function of
predicted overall species richness of Fungi. The proportion
of inadvertent synonyms among new names based on
sequences only ranges from about 20 % (assuming 700 000
fungal species), to about 10 % (assuming 1.5 million), to
about 5 % (assuming 3 million). If currently there are 240 000
species level names in fungi, with 120 000 species accepted, 
and the number of true synonyms among the remaining 120
000 names ranges between zero and 60 000, the historical
error rate of inadvertent synonymy lies between 33 % and
50 %. While a projected synonym error rate in sequence-
based nomenclature between 5 % and 20 % compares quite
favorably to the historical error rate based on physical types, 
this rate is still too high; Lücking & Hawksworth (2018: 153, 
Box 5) therefore proposed: “For a new species based on a
sequence type, without a physical voucher specimen, to be
validly established ... available names in the containing genus
>PXVW@ KDYH EHHQ OLQNHG WR D SK\ORJHQHWLFDOO\ GH¿QHG DQG
named clade different from that with the new species ... or
must have been established as valid species or synonyms in
RWKHU JHQHUD >,Q DGGLWLRQ@ 1DPHV EDVHG RQ VHTXHQFH W\SHV
are not given priority over names based on physical types ...,
XQOHVV ODWHU HSLW\SL¿HG ZLWK D PDWFKLQJ VSHFLPHQ RU FXOWXUH” 
Finally, Thines et al. (2018: 179) argue that “... sequence
data do not relate to any real-world object.” This is the same as
saying that spoors, even if distorted, are not caused by actual
animals but are artifacts of tracking. The entire community of
biodiversity researchers, evolutionists, geneticists, etc., may
hopefully join us in disagreeing with this statement.
7. Sequences of reported OTUs are derived, 
not actual sequences
This is another point based on a misconception. While studies
based on environmental sequence data often operate with
cluster-derived OTUs, only in some cases are these reported
as consensus sequences; in reality, each OTU is the cluster
of original sequence reads contained therein. Data from
environmental sequencing studies deposited in the SRA are
exclusively original reads, not OTU consensus sequences. 
These reads are as real as Sanger sequences; in fact, HTS
reads are raw sequences whereas Sanger sequences are
typically consensus contigs of two or more raw sequences, 
so the argument of “derived” consensus sequences applies
more to Sanger sequences than to HTS reads. While we
agree with the statement that “OTU sequences do not need
to correspond to an actual sequence found in an organism, 
as they are derived sequences” (Thines et al. 2018: 180), this
argument is not pertinent since a DNA sequence type cannot
be a cluster- or clade-based consensus but must always be
the actual sequence best representing the clade.
Since Lücking & Hawksworth (2018) unmistakably
advocated that clustering methods are inappropriate for
delimiting sequence-based taxa (see above),  we are
astonished by the statement that “... it would be unclear
where to draw boundaries between the different OTUs as
there will always be the potential for overlap between OTUs if
they are derived from rather similar sequences.” (Thines et al. 
2018: 180). The authors apparently ignore the fundamental
principles of multiple alignment-based phylogenetic analyses
and quantitative species recognition methods now routinely
applied to delimit clades, whether based on single or multiple
markers, methods used by themselves on multiple occasions
H J 3HUãRK et al. 2009, Thines & Kummer 2013, Choi et
al. 2015, Liu et al. 2016, Kijpornyongpan & Aime 2017, 
Hongsanan et al. 2017, Raja et al  5pEORYi et al. 2018).
8. Sequence-based types favour well-funded
large mycology labs and leave researchers in
developing countries behind
This statement appears to assume that sequence-based
nomenclature is introduced by the same researchers that
produce the environmental sequence data. This contradicts
the statement made on the same page under their point (9):
“,I LW LV SRVVLEOH WR SXEOLVK QHZ VSHFLHV IURP WKH FRPSXWHU MXVW
on the basis of a DNA sequence ...”
Sequence-based nomenclature is essentially a computa-
tional exercise; it is by no means trivial and requires con-
siderable skill and understanding, but in terms of logistics, 
all that is needed is a computer and access to the internet, 
with freely available software and multi-core servers such
as CIPRES (Miller et al. 2010), as well as the corresponding
data repositories (SRA, GenBank). The SRA currently holds
more than a billion fungal ITS reads (Lücking & Hawksworth
192  IMA FUNGUS
Page 9
Sequence-based nomenclature – a reply to issues raised
2018: 144) and just analysing these in a solid phylogenetic
context would keep numerous researchers occupied for quite
some time without any new environmental sequence data be-
ing generated. Such analyses can be done in virtually any
part of the world which, quite to the contrary, gives research-
ers in less developed countries access to an entirely new di-
mension of fungal biodiversity research, research that almost
nobody has been doing to this point, so why keep others from
doing it?
9. Allowing sequence-based types would be
detrimental for mycology as a discipline
We respectfully disagree. Citing Nilsson et al. (2016),
Thines et al. (2018: 180) state: “,I WKH DFW RI SXEOLVKLQJ D
sequence could be seen as the formal act of introducing a
new species, there is a high risk that interest in the actual
discovery of the organism would diminish, as the discovery
of the actual organism would become the equivalent of an
HSLW\SL¿FDWLRQ ZKLFK ZRXOG SUREDEO\ EH GRQH IRU RQO\ D IHZ
highly prevalent or interesting organisms.´ :H ¿QG LW GLI¿FXOW
to follow this argument. If bigfoot would be formally named
based on its footprints (some authors relate it to the extinct
ape genus Gigantopithecus,  so it might already have a
name), people would not stop looking for the creature (even
if DNA data suggest that its Himalayan counterpart, the yeti, 
may just be a bear; see Sykes et al. 2014, Gutiérrez et al.
2015). Also, mycology cannot be reduced to naming things. 
Fungal nomenclature is a part of mycology, but the essence
of mycology is elucidating the role of fungi in ecosystems, 
their impact as pathogens of crops and humans, and their
innumerable potential applications in food, pharmaceutics, 
acid and enzyme production, and biological control. None
of this can be done with sequences; the physical fungus is
always required, and hence naming sequences is not a threat
WR DQ\ RWKHU ¿HOG RI P\FRORJ\
Notably, the authors apparently inadvertently make this
argument themselves: “Another problematic issue is that if
sequence data were accepted as type, specimens might be
seen as obsolete ... This could herald the end of fungaria
and the decline of culture collections, even though these
might hold the key for substances of unpredictable value for
human welfare, such as antibiotics, therapeutically relevant
metabolites, as well as platform chemicals and enzymes for
biotechnology.” Since (ITS) sequence data are only useful
WR GH¿QH FODGHV DQG KROG QR LQIRUPDWLRQ RQ IHDWXUHV RU
properties, let alone possible importance and applications, 
there would be no reason or pressure to reduce or eliminate
fungaria or culture collections. Naming sequences does not
change the need for having the actual fungus at hand; to the
contrary, providing a formal nomenclatural framework for
fungi known only from sequences makes obtaining funding
for the study of these and assessments of their potential
properties more likely, especially based on the context in
which the sequences were detected. With sequence-based
QRPHQFODWXUH RWKHU ¿HOGV RI P\FRORJ\ ZRXOG QRW VWRS RU
slow down, but we would not have to wait for centuries until
a substantial portion of the fungi on Earth has been named.
We agree that: “There is also the risk that in systems
where quantity in research is valued higher than quality, 
massive amounts of names without detailed quality checks 
ZRXOG EH SXEOLVKHG ÀRRGLQJ IXQJDO QRPHQFODWXUH ZLWK WHQV
of thousands of meaningless names that would need to be
sorted out in future decades or centuries.” (Thines et al. 2018: 
180). Together with the risk of naming species that already
have a name not attached to a sequence, this is certainly
the most critical issue of this approach, and therefore we
advocate strict quality control (e.g. Lücking & Hawksworth
2018: 156, Box 6). Such quality control can be enforced, and
while nomenclaturists argue that rules how to perform science
should not be part of the Code, complementary guidance can
be agreed and provided by international bodies such as the
ICTF. We see a viable solution in giving sequence-based
QDPHV D XQLTXH LGHQWL¿HU VXFK DV D ³nom. seq.´ VXI¿[ see
above), which are accepted as valid but do not have priority
over specimen-, culture-, or illustration-based names. Such
names could then be fully incorporated into the fungal system
L H UHPRYLQJ WKH VXI¿[ DQG WKH SULRULW\ OLPLWDWLRQ WKURXJK
WZR PHFKDQLVPV D HSLW\SL¿FDWLRQ ZLWK D SK\VLFDO VSHFLPHQ
or culture; or (b) periodical evaluation of a list of names by a
committee operating under the ICTF and applying rigorous
quality control.
Interestingly,Thines et al. (2018: 180) also appear to
argue for some sort of sequence-based nomenclature: “...
nonmycologists ... often tend to assign the species or genus
name according to the most similar DNA sequence found in a
BLAST search. This has led to manifold inaccuracies, which
has prompted ... to encourage a more accurate treatment
RI WKH WD[RQRP\ RI WKH VSHFLHV $ '1$ EDVHG W\SL¿FDWLRQ
would send the wrong signal also to the scientists of other
communities who, for a correct interpretation of their results, 
rely on mycologists providing sound species concepts using
polyphasic methodology.´ 7KH LVVXH LV QRW WKDW LGHQWL¿FDWLRQV
are naively based on BLAST searches, but that BLAST
searches increasingly return results such as “uncultured
IXQJXV´ DQG VLPLODU XQVSHFL¿HG GHVLJQDWLRQV )LJ  ,I WKHVH
entities do not start to be formally named in some way, the
problem will intensify exponentially.
Thines et al. (2018) postulate that mycologists will
eventually provide “...  sound species concepts using
polyphasic methodology”, which is certainly a desirable goal, 
but is not bound to happen within a reasonable time frame, 
due to the enormous number of fungal species that need to be
named. Assuming a reasonable time frame of 50 to 100 years
(Lücking & Hawksworth 2018: 145, Box 1) and a predicted
number of between 1.5 and 3 million fungal species, the
current rate of little over 2000 new species per year would have
to be increased to between 15 000 and 60 000 new species
per year (Fig. 2). Since 2008, the number of new species
described each year has increased on average by 100; 
projecting this increase would result in 7500 new species per
year by 2068 (50 years) and 12 500 new species per year by
the year 2118 (100 years). By then, we would have described
an impressive 757 000 new species and surpassed plants. 
However, not only would this linear increase not approach
the minimum rate to describe 1.5 million new species within
100 years, but it would be unrealistic. The current increase of
about 100 additional new species per year is largely based
on more effective approaches to detect and describe new
fungal species, including an increased number of mycology
students particularly in tropical regions of the world, such as
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 1 
ARTICLE 
193
Page 10
Lücking et al.
ARTICLE 
Fig. 2. Necessary increase in the rate of newly described fungal species per year to reach a certain predicted number within reasonable time
frames of 50 and 100 years, respectively.
at the Federal University of Pernambuco in Brazil (https://
www3.ufpe.br/ppgbf/index.php?option=com_content&view=
article&id=445&Itemid=246), and the Mushroom Research
Centre in Thailand (http://www.mushroomresearchcentre.
com),  and the Key State Laboratory of Mycology in the
Chinese Academy of Sciences. However, this tendency may
reach a plateau, because of a lack of posts in mycology for
WKH HPHUJLQJ VWXGHQWV $OVR P\FRORJ\ DQG RWKHU ¿HOGV DUH
increasingly shifting towards applied high-tech areas, and
the support for alpha-taxonomy, biodiversity inventories, 
and naming organisms can sadly be expected to further
decrease. We therefore predict that the annual rate of new
fungal species being described from physical specimens and
cultures will rise but level off at below 5000 species per year, 
possibly even below 3000. Of the “50 most wanted fungi” 
based on environmental sequencing data (Nilsson et al.
2016), one has been formally described based on cultures
(James & Seifert 2017, Torres-Cruz et al. 2017), so “... the
KDUG ZRUN RI ¿QGLQJ DQG GHVFULELQJ WKHVH XQNQRZQV ”
(James & Seifert 2017: 362) indeed proceeds at a slow pace. 
However strong the desire may be to name fungi based only
on physical specimens or cultures, for hundreds of thousands
to millions of species this is not possible, unless we are
content to wait several more centuries, when most of the
habitats potentially yielding new species will have vanished.
10. An introduction of sequence-based
nomenclature is impossible at present due to
the fast pace at which sequencing technologies
develop
The development of new technology has shaped fungal
FODVVL¿FDWLRQV DQG DOO RWKHU ¿HOGV RI VFLHQFH YLUWXDOO\ VLQFH
the beginning of time, factually since the start of fungal 
nomenclature in 1753 (Crous et al.  2015).  In no single
case when new technologies developed, such as the light
microscope, tools to analyze chemical products, the electron
PLFURVFRSH DQG ¿QDOO\ '1$ VHTXHQFLQJ WKH P\FRORJLFDO
FRPPXQLW\ ¿UVW HYDOXDWHG WKH QHZ PHWKRGRORJLHV EHIRUH
WKH\ VWDUWHG WR EH XVHG DV WRROV LQ WKH IRUPDO FODVVL¿FDWLRQ RI
fungi. We do not see the reason why this should not be the
case now. 
At the start of formal fungal nomenclature, fungi were
HVVHQWLDOO\ FODVVL¿HG EDVHG RQ WKHLU PRUSKRORJ\ DQG
substrate ecology (including hosts).Today we know that a
FODVVL¿FDWLRQ EDVHG RQ D SRO\SKDVLF DSSURDFK LQFOXGLQJ
molecular data, anatomy, chemistry, morphology, etc. is
much more robust. Yet, even if we sometimes may wish
away the additional work required to assess old types and
protologues, we never seriously considered a provision in the
Code WKDW IXQJDO QRPHQFODWXUH VKRXOG KDYH VWDUWHG RI¿FLDOO\
in 1990. Even if we did: molecular sequencing is constantly
developing, having started with a few selected markers and
techniques that now seem ancient and obsolete; yet there
was no movement proposing to wait in formalizing results
from molecular studies until techniques became more
advanced. Why now? We cannot help to see this reluctance
DV EDVHG RQ LUUDWLRQDO IHDU UDWKHU WKDQ VFLHQWL¿F DUJXPHQWV
Even if we waited for entire genome sequences to be derived
from environmental DNA, these likely would not result in
VLJQL¿FDQW DGYDQFHV RYHU VWXGLHV XVLQJ VHOHFWHG PDUNHUV
rendering the considerable amount of additional resources
to obtain and analyse genomes from numerous species
almost futile. Wherever technology will be taking us, the
bulk of species delimitation studies and environmental meta-
barcoding approaches will continue to use few, selected
barcoding markers (e.g. Quaedvlieg et al. 2012). Also, if
194  IMA FUNGUS
Page 11
Sequence-based nomenclature – a reply to issues raised 
ARTICLE FODGHV DUH FOHDUO\ GH¿QHG DQG VXSSRUWHG EDVHG RQ VLQJOH RU
few markers, no new technology in the future will essentially
chance this.
We agree with Thines et al. (2018: 181) in saying: “At
present, any such approaches are probably as useful as
LW KDG EHHQ WR GH¿QH FRPPXQLFDWLRQ VWDQGDUGV IRU FXUUHQW
PRELOH SKRQHV ZKHQ WKH ¿UVW SRUWDEOH WHOHSKRQHV DSSHDUHG
in the late 80’s.” Indeed, relating to this analogy: we do not
propose to set future communication standards, we propose
to start using portable phones! Why? Because only their
use, however primitive, fosters their advancement. The
computational community is already putting substantial
resources into phylogeny-based analyses of environmental
sequences that compete with clustering methods in speed
but far surpass them in accuracy (Berger et al. 2011, Zhang et
al. 2013, Carbone et al. 2017, Barbera et al. 2018). Allowing
IRUPDO VHTXHQFH QRPHQFODWXUH ZRXOG VWLPXODWH WKLV ¿HOG LQ
XQSUHFHGHQWHG ZD\V DQG DOO P\FRORJLVWV ZRXOG SUR¿W IURP
this.
PROPOSALS
In order to progress this issue at IMC11, rather than let it
drift and be a potential source of confusion and frustration
for at least another four years, we suggest two alternatives
EH FRQVLGHUHG DV DPHQGPHQWV IURP WKH ÀRRU RI WKH
Nomenclature Session:
(1) In the event of the proposals being accepted, to add the
following Note to Chapter F of the Code under Art. F.4.2: 
Note: Sequence-based names are to be registered in one
RI WKH DSSURYHG UHSRVLWRULHV DQG DOORFDWHG DQ LGHQWL¿HU 
EXW LQGLFDWHG E\ WKH DGGLWLRQ RI WKH VXI¿[ ³nom. seq.”
(nomen sequentium)  after the name to indicate the
special status of those names: Such names have priority
over other sequence-based names, but do not have
priority over names based on physical types (including
FXOWXUHV RU LOOXVWUDWLRQV XQWLO HSLW\SL¿HG E\ D PDWFKLQJ
specimen or culture or included in a list of protected
names. 
(2) In the event of the formal proposals F-005 and F-006
(Hawksworth et al. 2018) not being accepted, to add the
following new Note and an Example to Chapter F of the Code 
under Art. F. 5.5 (which deals with registration matters):
“Note X: In the case of designations based on molecular
sequence data where there is no specimen or illustration
available to serve as a nomenclatural type, the
designations are to be registered in one of the approved
UHSRVLWRULHV DQG DOORFDWHG DQ LGHQWL¿HU  EXW ZKHQ
released after effective publication such designations
are to have “nom. seq.” (nomen sequentium) appended
to indicate that the names are effectively published but
UHPDLQ QRW YDOLGO\ SXEOLVKHG XQWLO W\SL¿HG DV UHTXLUHG E\
this Code.
Example X: The designation Hawksworthiomyces
sequentia de Beer & al. (in Fungal Biology 120: 1332. 
 ZDV DVVLJQHG WKH LGHQWL¿HU 0% EXW DV LW
lacks a Code-compliant type it is to be referred to as
H. sequentia de Beer & al. nom. seq. or H. sequentia 
nom. seq., but not H. sequentia. The designation would
remain available for use but not be validly published until
W\SL¿HG E\ D VSHFLPHQ RU LOOXVWUDWLRQ DQG SULRULW\ ZRXOG
GDWH IURP WKH ¿QDO DFW RI YDOLGDWLRQ WKH ODWHU W\SL¿FDWLRQ
Box 2
Possible topics and guidance that might be included in a Code of Practice on the introduction of
sequence-based names. 
In fungal nomenclature, when novel lineages are detected based on environmental (or analogous) sequence
data alone, without a physical specimen or illustration, designations of new taxa can be formally introduced
under the following conditions:
%  Sequence-based names must always be used with the agreed designation indicating their special status, for
example Neoarchaeorhizomyces nom. seq. and; Neoarchaeorhizomyces paradoxus nom. seq.
%  Limitations of priority in relation to specimen- and illustration-based names.
%  Sequence-based names should not be introduced in genera that contain names not linked to
SK\ORJHQHWLFDOO\ GH¿QHG FODGHV
%  Registration in the mandated repositories is required.
%  Sequence-based names should be introduced in accordance with the following protocol: 
(a) Full ITS as the barcoding marker. 
(b) Multiple alignment-based phylogenetic analysis in combination with quantitative, single-marker species
recognition methods; clustering methods with preset similarity thresholds are not allowed. 
F $ FODGH IRUPDOO\ UHFRJQL]HG DV VSHFLHV PXVW FRQWDLQ DW OHDVW ¿YH VHTXHQFHV IURP ¿YH LQGHSHQGHQW
VDPSOHV WR EH LGHQWL¿HG E\ WKHLU 65$ VDPSOH DFFHVVLRQ QXPEHUV RU *% DFFHVVLRQ QXPEHUV
(d) The type sequence is not the clade consensus but the individual sequence best matching the clade
consensus (to be determined quantitatively using an identify matrix).
(e) The underlying phylogeny used to establish new species in a given genus should contain all other
species previously established in the genus.
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 1  195
Page 12
Lücking et al.
ARTICLE 
196 
The ,QWHUQDWLRQDO &RGH RI 1RPHQFODWXUH IRU DOJDH IXQJL DQG
plants has always been careful not to make rules relating
WR WD[RQRPLF SUDFWLFH LQ RUGHU QRW WR FRQVWUDLQ VFLHQWL¿F
approaches, but we see advantage in having some additional
guidance available which is provided by the international
VFLHQWL¿F FRPPXQLW\ DQG LQ WKH FDVH RI IXQJL WKLV FRXOG EH WKH
ICTF. Such guidance could be on the lines of what is included
here in Box 2, which would be analogous to Appendix 11 in
the prokaryote Code.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We appreciate the frank and open contributions to this debate
provided by many of our mycological colleagues around the world, 
ZKLFK KDYH DVVLVWHG XV LQ WKH FODUL¿FDWLRQ RI RXU LGHDV DQG WKH
IRUPXODWLRQ RI WKH PRGL¿HG SURSRVDOV DQG SURYLVLRQV QRZ PDGH
REFERENCES
Barbera P, Kozlov AM, Czech L, Morel B, Darriba D, et al. (2018) 
EPA-ng: massively parallel evolutionary placement of genetic
sequences. BioRxiv: 291658.
Berge, SA, Krompass D, Stamatakis A (2011) Performance, 
accuracy, and web server for evolutionary placement of short
sequence reads under maximum likelihood. Systematic Biology 
60: 291–302.
Carbone I, White JB, Miadlikowska J, Arnold AE, Miller MA et
al. (2017) T-BAS: Tree-Based Alignment Selector toolkit for
phylogenetic-based placement, alignment downloads and
metadata visualization: an example with the Pezizomycotina tree
of life. Bioinformatics 33: 1160–1168.
&KHQ - 6DKRWD $ 6WDPEURRN 3- 7LVFK¿HOG -$  3RO\PHUDVH
FKDLQ UHDFWLRQ DPSOL¿FDWLRQ DQG VHTXHQFH DQDO\VLV RI KXPDQ
mutant adenine phosphoribosyltransferase genes: the nature
and frequency of errors caused by Taq DNA polymerase. 
Mutation Research 31: 169–176.
Choi YJ, Klosterman SJ, Kummer V, Voglmayr H, Shin HD, Thines
M (2015) Multi-locus tree and species tree approaches toward
resolving a complex clade of downy mildews (Straminipila,
Oomycota), including pathogens of beet and spinach. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 86: 24–34.
Colabella C, Corte L, Roscini L, Bassetti M, Tascini C, et al. (2018) 
NGS barcode sequencing in taxonomy and diagnostics, an
application in “Candida” pathogenic yeasts with a metagenomic
perspectiv. ,0$ )XQJXV 9: 91–105.
&URXV 3: %UDXQ 8 +XQWHU *& :LQJ¿HOG 0- 9HUNOH\ *-0 et al.
(2013) Phylogenetic lineages in Pseudocercospora. Studies in
Mycology 75: 37–114.
&URXV 3: +DZNVZRUWK '/ :LQJ¿HOG 0-  ,GHQWLI\LQJ DQG
naming plant pathogenic fungi: past, present, and future. Annual
Review of Phytopathology 53: 247–267.
Del-Prado R, Divakar PK, Lumbsch HT, Crespo AM (2016) Hidden
genetic diversity in an asexually reproducing lichen forming
fungal group. PloS One 11 (8): e0161031.
Edgar, RC (2016) UCHIME2: improved chimera prediction for
amplicon sequencing. bioRxiv: 074252.
Edgar RC, Haas BJ, Clemente JC, Quince C, Knight R (2011) 
UCHIME improves sensitivity and speed of chimera detection. 
Bioinformatics 27: 2194–2200.
)HUQiQGH]Ʌ0HQGR]D ) 'RPDVFKNH 6 *DUFtD 0$ -RUGDQ 3 0DUWtQ
MP, Printzen C (2011) Population structure of mycobionts
and photobionts of the widespread lichen Cetraria aculeata.
Molecular Ecology 20: 1208–1232.
Geml J, Laursen GA, O’Neill K, Nusbaum HC, Taylor DL (2006) 
%HULQJLDQ RULJLQV DQG FU\SWLF VSHFLDWLRQ HYHQWV LQ WKH À\ DJDULF
(Amanita muscaria). Molecular Ecology 15: 225–239.
Gomes RR, Glienke C, Videira SIR, Lombard L, Groenewald JZ, 
Crous PW (2013) Diaporthe: a genus of endophytic, saprobic
and plant pathogenic fungi. Persoonia 31: 1–41.
Grube M, Gaya E, Kauserud H, Smith AM, Avery SV, et al. (2017) 
The next generation fungal diversity researcher. Fungal Biology
Reviews 31: 124–130.
Gutiérrez EE, Pine RH (2015) No need to replace an “anomalous” 
primate (Primates)  with an “anomalous” bear (Carnivora,
Ursidae). ZooKeys 487: 141–154.
Harpke D, Peterson A (2008) Extensive 5.8 S nrDNA polymorphism
in Mammillaria (Cactaceae)  with special reference to the
LGHQWL¿FDWLRQ RI SVHXGRJHQLF LQWHUQDO WUDQVFULEHG VSDFHU UHJLRQV
Journal of Plant Research 121: 261–270.
Hawksworth DL (2017) DNA sequences as types: a potential loophole
in the rules discovered. ,0$ )XQJXV 8: (4).
Hawksworth DL, Hibbett DS, Kirk PM, Lücking R (2016) (308–310) 
Proposals to permit DNA sequence data to serve as types of
names of Fungi. Taxon 65: 899–900.
Hawksworth DL, May TW, Redhead SA (2017) Fungal nomenclature
evolving: changes adopted by the 19th International Botanical
Congress in Shenzhen 2017, and procedures for the Fungal
Nomenclature Session at the 11th International Mycological
Congress in Puerto Rico 2018. ,0$ )XQJXV 8: 211–218.
Hawksworth DL, Hibbett DS, Kirk PM, Lücking R (2018) (F-005-006) 
Proposals to permit DNA sequence data to be used as types of
names of fungi. ,0$ )XQJXV 9: v–vi.
Hibbett D (2018) More than a handful of dirt: sequence-based species
description and the role of the ICN (a response to Seifert). ,0$
Fungus 9: (20)–(22).
Hibbett D, Abarenkov K, Koljalg U, Öpik M, Chai B, et al. (2016) 
6HTXHQFH EDVHG FODVVL¿FDWLRQ DQG LGHQWL¿FDWLRQ RI Fungi.
Mycologia 108: 1049–1068.
Hongsanan S, Maharachchikumbura SS, Hyde KD, Samarakoon
MC, Jeewon R, et al.  (2017) An updated phylogeny of
Sordariomycetes based on phylogenetic and molecular clock
evidence. Fungal Diversity 84: 25–41.
James TY, Seifert KA (2017) Description of %L¿JXUDWXV DGHODLGDH:
The hunt ends for one of the” Top 50 Most Wanted Fungi”.
Mycologia 109: 361–362.
James TY, Moncalvo JL, Li S, Vilgalys R (2001) Polymorphism at the
ribosomal DNA spacers and its relation to breeding structure of
the widespread mushroom Schizophyllum commune. Genetics 
157: 149–161.
Keohavong P, Thilly WG (1989) Fidelity of DNA polymerases in DNA
DPSOL¿FDWLRQ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA 86: 9253–9257.
Kijpornyongpan T, Aime MC (2017) Taxonomic revisions in the
Microstromatales: two new yeast species, two new genera, and
validation of Jaminaea and two Sympodiomycopsis species. 
Mycological Progress 16: 495–505.
Kim M, Lee KH, Yoon SW, Kim BS, Chun J, Yi H (2013) Analytical
tools and databases for metagenomics in the next-generation
IMA FUNGUS
Page 13
Sequence-based nomenclature – a reply to issues raised
sequencing era. *HQRPLFV ,QIRUPDWLFV 11: 102–113.
Kirk PM (2012) Nomenclatural novelties. ,QGH[ RI )XQJL 1: 1.
Kõljalg U, Nilsson RH, Abarenkov K, Tedersoo L, Taylor AF, et
al.  7RZDUGV D XQL¿HG SDUDGLJP IRU VHTXHQFHɅbased
LGHQWL¿FDWLRQ RI Fungi. Molecular Ecology 22: 5271–5277.
Li Y, Jiao L, Yao YJ (2013) Non-concerted ITS evolution in Fungi, as
revealed from the important medicinal fungus Ophiocordyceps
sinensis. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 68: 373–379.
Lindner DL, Banik MT (2011) Intragenomic variation in the ITS
U'1$ UHJLRQ REVFXUHV SK\ORJHQHWLF UHODWLRQVKLSV DQG LQÀDWHV
estimates of operational taxonomic units in the genus Laetiporus.
Mycologia 103: 731–740.
Lindner DL, Carlsen T, Nilsson HR, Davey M, Schumacher T, 
Kauserud H (2013) Employing 454 amplicon pyrosequencing to
reveal intragenomic divergence in the internal transcribed spacer
rDNA region in Fungi. Ecology and Evolution 3: 1751–1764.
Liu F, Wang M, Damm U, Crous PW, Cai L (2016) Species boundaries
in plant pathogenic fungi: a Colletotrichum case study. BMC
Evolutionary Biology 16: 81.
Lücking R, Hawksworth DL (2018) Formal description of sequence-
based voucherless Fungi: promises and pitfalls, and how to
resolve them. ,0$ )XQJXV 9: 143–166.
Lücking R, Moncada B (2017) Dismantling Marchandiomphalina 
into Agonimia (Verrucariaceae) and Lawreymyces gen. nov. 
(Corticiaceae):  setting a precedent to the formal recognition
of thousands of voucherless Fungi based on type sequences. 
Fungal Diversity 84: 119–138.
Lücking R, Nelsen MP (2018) Ediacarans, protolichens, and lichen-
derived Penicillium: a critical reassessment of the evolution of
lichenization in fungi. In Transformative Paleobotany (Krings M
et al. (eds.): in press. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Lücking R, Dal Forno M, Sikaroodi M, Gillevet PM, Bungartz F, 
et al.  (2014a) A single macrolichen constitutes hundreds of
unrecognized species. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA 111: 11091–11096.
Lücking R, Lawrey JD, Gillevet PM, Sikaroodi M, Dal Forno M, 
Berger SA (2014b) Multiple ITS haplotypes in the genome of the
lichenized basidiomycete Cora inversa (Hygrophoraceae): fact
or artifact? Journal of Molecular Evolution 78: 148–162.
Lücking R, Dal Forno M, Moncada B, Coca LF, Vargas-Mendoza LY, 
et al. (2017) Turbo-taxonomy to assemble a megadiverse lichen
genus: seventy new species of Cora (Basidiomycota: Agaricales:
Hygrophoraceae), honouring David Leslie Hawksworth’s seven-
tieth birthday. Fungal Diversity 84: 139–207.
Mark K, Saag L, Leavitt SD, Will-Wolf S, Nelsen MP, et al. (2016) 
Evaluation of traditionally circumscribed species in the
lichen-forming genus Usnea,  section Usnea (Parmeliaceae,
Ascomycota) using a six-locus dataset. Organisms, Diversity &
Evolution 16: 497–524.
Miller MA, Pfeiffer W, Schwartz T(2010) Creating the CIPRES Science
Gateway for inference of large phylogenetic trees. Proceedings
of the Gateway Computing Environments Workshop (GCE): 1–8. 
New Orleans.
0RQFDGD % /FNLQJ 5 6XiUH] $  0ROHFXODU SK\ORJHQ\ RI WKH
genus Sticta (lichenized Ascomycota: Lobariaceae) in Colombia. 
Fungal Diversity 64: 205–231.
Mysara M, Saeys Y, Leys N, Raes J, Monsieurs P (2015) CATCh, 
DQ HQVHPEOH FODVVL¿HU IRU FKLPHUD GHWHFWLRQ LQ 6 U51$
sequencing studies. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 
81:1573–1584. 
Nilsson RH, Wurzbacher C, Bahram M, Coimbra VR, Larsson E, et
al. (2016) Top 50 most wanted fungi. MycoKeys 12: 29–40.
O’Donnell K, Cigelnik E (1997) Two divergent intragenomic rDNA ITS2
types within a monophyletic lineage of the fungus Fusarium are
nonorthologous. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 7: 103–116.
O’Donnell K, Ward TJ, Robert VARG, Crous PW, Geiser DM, Kang S
 '1$ VHTXHQFH EDVHG LGHQWL¿FDWLRQ RI Fusarium: current
status and future directions. Phytoparasitica 43: 583–595.
2QXĠɅBrännström I, Tibell L, Johannesson H ( 2017) A worldwide
phylogeography of the whiteworm lichens Thamnolia reveals
three lineages with distinct habitats and evolutionary histories. 
Ecology and Rvolution 7: 3602–3615.
Parker CT, Tindall BJ, Garrity GM (2015) International Code of
Nomenclature of Prokaryotes. ,QWHUQDWLRQDO -RXUQDO RI 6\VWHPDWLF
and Evolutionary Microbiology: DOI 10.1099/ijsem.0.000778.
3HUãRK ' 0HOFKHU 0 *UDI . )RXUQLHU - 6WDGOHU 0 5DPEROG *
(2009) Molecular and morphological evidence for the delimitation
of Xylaria hypoxylon. Mycologia 101: 256–268.
Porazinska DL, Giblin-Davis RM, Sung W, Thomas WK (2012) The
nature and frequency of chimeras in eukaryotic metagenetic
samples. Journal of Nematology 44: 18–25.
4XDHGYOLHJ : *URHQHZDOG -= GH -HV~V <ixH]0RUDOHV 0 &URXV
PW (2012) DNA barcoding of Mycosphaerella species of
quarantine importance to Europe. Persoonia 29: 101–115.
Quince C, Lanzen A, Davenport RJ, Turnbaugh PJ (2011) Removing
noise from pyrosequenced amplicons. BMC Bioinformatics 12: 38.
Raja HA, Miller AN, Pearce CJ, Oberlies NH (2017) Fungal
LGHQWL¿FDWLRQ XVLQJ PROHFXODU WRROV D SULPHU IRU WKH QDWXUDO
products research community. Journal of Natural Products 80:
756–770.
5pEORYi 0 0LOOHU $1 5pEORYi . âWČSiQHN 9  3K\ORJHQHWLF
FODVVL¿FDWLRQ DQG JHQHULF GHOLQHDWLRQ RI Calyptosphaeria 
gen. nov., Lentomitella, Spadicoides, Torrentispora and other
morphologically similar fungi based on a six-locus dataset
(Sordariomycetes). Studies in Mycology 89: 1–62.
Richard F, Bellanger JM, Clowez P, Hansen K, O’Donnell K, et al.
(2015) True morels (Morchella, Pezizales) of Europe and North
America: evolutionary relationships inferred from multilocus data
DQG D XQL¿HG WD[RQRP\ Mycologia 107: 359–382.
Rosling A, Cox F, Cruz-Martinez K, Ihrmark K, Grelet GA, et al. (2011) 
Archaeorhizomycetes: unearthing an ancient class of ubiquitous
soil Fungi. Science 333: 876–879.
Roy BA, Vogler DR, Bruns TD, Szaro TM (1998) Cryptic species in
the Puccinia monoica complex. Mycologia 90: 846–853.
Ryberg M, Nilsson RH (2018) New light on names and naming of
dark taxa. MycoKeys 30: 31–39.
Samson RA, Visagie CM, Houbraken J, Hong SB, Hubka V, et al.
 3K\ORJHQ\ LGHQWL¿FDWLRQ DQG QRPHQFODWXUH RI WKH JHQXV
Aspergillus. Studies in Mycology 78: 141–173.
Schloss PD, Gevers D, Westcott SL (2011) Reducing the effects of
3&5 DPSOL¿FDWLRQ DQG VHTXHQFLQJ DUWLIDFWV RQ 6 U51$EDVHG
studies. PloS One 6 (12): e27310.
Schoch CL, Robbertse B, Robert V, Vu D, Cardinali G, et al. (2014).
)LQGLQJ QHHGOHV LQ KD\VWDFNV OLQNLQJ VFLHQWL¿F QDPHV UHIHUHQFH
specimens and molecular data for Fungi. Database 2014: 1–21.
Seifert KA (2017) When should we describe species? ,0$ )XQJXV 
8: (37)–(39).
Simmons DR, Longcore JE (2012) Thoreauomyces gen. 
nov.,  Fimicolochytrium gen. nov. and additional species in
Geranomyces. Mycologia 104: 1229–1243.
VOLUME 9 ·  NO. 1 
ARTICLE 
197
Page 14
ARTICLE
Lücking et al.
Stadler M, Læssøe T, Fournier J, Decock C, Schmieschek B, et
al. (2014a) A polyphasic taxonomy of Daldinia (Xylariaceae).
Studies in Mycology 77: 1–143.
Stadler M, Hawksworth DL, Fournier J (2014b) The application of
the name Xylaria hypoxylon, based on Clavaria hypoxylon of
Linnaeus. ,0$ )XQJXV 5: 57–66.
Sykes BC, Mullis RA, Hagenmuller C, Melton TW, Sartori M (2014) 
Genetic analysis of hair samples attributed to yeti, bigfoot and
other anomalous primates. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
London B 281: 20140161.
Thines M, Crous PW, Aime MC, Aoki T, Cai L, et al. (2018) Ten
reasons why a sequence-based nomenclature is not useful for
fungi anytime soon. ,0$ )XQJXV 8: 177–183.
Thines M, Kummer V (2013) Diversity and species boundaries in
ÀRULFRORXV GRZQ\ PLOGHZV Mycological Progress 12: 321–329.
Torres-Cruz TJ, Billingsley Tobias TL, Almatruk M, Hesse C, Kuske
CR, et al. (2017) %L¿JXUDWXV DGHODLGDH gen. et sp. nov., a new
member of Mucoromycotina with endophytic and soil-dwelling
habitats. Mycologia 109:363–378.
Turland NJ, Wiersema JH, Barrie FR, Greuter W, Hawksworth DL, 
et al. (2018) ,QWHUQDWLRQDO &RGH RI 1RPHQFODWXUH IRU DOJDH 
fungi, and plants (Shenzhen Code) adopted by the Nineteenth
,QWHUQDWLRQDO %RWDQLFDO &RQJUHVV 6KHQ]KHQ &KLQD -XO\ .
[Regnum Vegetabile no. 159.] Oberreifenberg: Koeltz Botanical
Books.
Visagie CM, Houbraken J, Frisvad JC, Hong SB, Klaassen CHW, 
et al   ,GHQWL¿FDWLRQ DQG QRPHQFODWXUH RI WKH JHQXV
Penicillium. Studies in Mycology 78: 343–371.
:DOWKHU *  3DZáRZVND -  $ODVWUXH\,]TXLHUGR $  :U]RVHN 0
Rodriguez-Tudela JL, et al. (2013) DNA barcoding in Mucorales:
an inventory of biodiversity. Persoonia 30: 11–47.
Weir BS, Johnston PR, Damm U (2012) The Colletotrichum gloeo-
sporioides species complex. Studies in Mycology 73: 115–180.
Won H, Renner SS (2005) The internal transcribed spacer of
nuclear ribosomal DNA in the gymnosperm Gnetum. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 36: 581–597.
Zamora JC, Svensson M, Kirschner R, Olariaga I, Ryman S, et
al. (2018) Considerations and consequences of allowing DNA
sequence data as types of fungal taxa. ,0$ )XQJXV 9: 167–175.
Zhang J, Kapli P, Pavlidis P, Stamatakis A (2013) A general species
delimitation method with applications to phylogenetic placements. 
Bioinformatics 29: 2869–2876.
198  IMA FUNGUS
