AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
AND
FRAMINGHAM PUBLIC LIBRARY EMPLOYEES
SEIU LOCAL 888
Effective
July 1, 2019 to June 30, 2022
Page 2
 Article I: Preamble ................................................................................................... 3
 Article II: Recognition ............................................................................................. 3
 Article III: Management Rights ............................................................................... 3
 Article IV: No Strike Clause .................................................................................... 4
 Article V: Non-Descrimination ................................................................................ 4
 Article VI: Dues Deduction and Agency Service Fee ............................................. 5
 Article VII: Discipline ............................................................................................. 5
 Article VIII: Grievance Procedure ........................................................................... 6
 Article IX: Holidays ................................................................................................. 8
 Article X: Vacation Leave ....................................................................................... 9
 Article XI: Sick Leave ........................................................................................... 12 
 Article XII: Wages ................................................................................................. 14 
 Article XIII: Hours of Work .................................................................................. 17 
 Article XIV: Bereavement Leave .......................................................................... 19 
 Article XV: Personal Day ...................................................................................... 20 
 Article XVI: Leaves of Absence ............................................................................ 20 
 Article XVII: Extended Leaves of Absence .......................................................... 21 
 Article XVIII: Domestic Violence Leave .............................................................. 22 
 Article XIX: Jury Duty .......................................................................................... 24 
 Article XX: Filling Positions ................................................................................. 24 
 Article XXI: Group Insurance ............................................................................... 25 
 Article XXII: Union Representative ...................................................................... 25 
 Article XXIII: Seniority ......................................................................................... 27 
 Article XXIV: Layoff and Recall .......................................................................... 28 
 Article XXV: Transfers .......................................................................................... 28 
 Article XXVI: Parental Leave ............................................................................... 28 
[URL: "#Page28"] Article XXVII: Working Conditions ..................................................................... 28 
 Article XXVIII: Bulletin Boards ........................................................................... 29 
 Article XXIX: COPE, Political Education Fund ................................................... 29 
 Article XXX: Study Committee ............................................................................. 29 
 Article XXXI: Professional Excused Time ........................................................... 30 
 Article XXXII: Severability and Waiver Provisions ............................................. 30 
 Article XXXIII: Duration ...................................................................................... 31 
 Article XXXIV: Health and Safety ........................................................................ 31
 Article XXXV: Working Out of Grade ................................................................. 31
 Article XXXVI: Labor Management ..................................................................... 31 
 Article XXXVII: Miscellaneous ............................................................................ 32 
2
Page 3
ARTICLE I
PREAMBLE
THIS AGREEMENT entered into by the City of Framingham, hereinafter
referred to as the "Employer", and Framingham Library Staff Association, Local 888, 
Service Employees International Union, CTW-CIO, CLC, hereinafter referred to as the
"Union", has as its purpose the promotion of harmonious relations and peaceful procedures
for the resolution of differences; and the establishment of rates of pay, hours of work, and
other conditions of employment. The term "employee" when used in this Agreement shall
mean those employees of the City hereinafter described. 
ARTICLE II
RECOGNITION
The Employer recognizes the union as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for
the purpose of establishing salaries, wages, hours of work and other conditions of employment
for all full-time and regular part-time employees, and temporary employees, excluding the
Director, Assistant Director, Administrative Assistant, Secretary to the Director, pages and all
employees currently represented by the Association of Municipal Personnel, in accordance
with MCR-3884. The Employer and the union recognize the right of any employee to become
a member of the union and will not discourage, discriminate or in any other way interfere with
any employee in the exercise of those rights. The Employer will advise all new employees, 
at the time of their employment, that the union is their bargaining representative and will
notify the union in writing of the name and classification of each new employee. 
ARTICLE III
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
The union recognizes the right of the City and its representatives to manage the
Library and direct employees covered by this Agreement. The City shall select and
determine the number and types of employees required, and shall assign work to such
employees in accordance with requirements determined by the City. 
3
Page 4
The listing of the following specific rights of management in this Article is not
intended to be a waiver of any of the rights of the City not listed herein. Such inherent
management rights shall remain with the City except as they may be shared with the Union by
specific provisions of this Agreement. 
The City shall have the right to appoint, promote, assign and transfer employees; 
establish qualifications and specifications for positions and to determine the necessity for
filling a vacancy; direct employees; take disciplinary action against employees for just cause; 
relieve employees from duties because of lack of work, lack of money, or other legitimate
reasons; maintain and improve the efficiency of governmental operations; set standards for
quality of service; determine the facilities and methods by which the Employer's operations are
to be conducted, including but not limited to library locations and hours, employee work
schedules, and the use of pages and part-time employees; and promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations pertaining to the employees covered by this Agreement provided that such rights
will not be exercised in conflict with the Agreement. 
ARTICLE IV
NO STRIKE CLAUSE
No employee shall engage in, induce, or encourage any strike, work stoppage, 
slowdown or withholding of services by herself/himself or by any other employee in
accordance with Chapter 150E. 
ARTICLE V
NON-DISCRIMINATION
The City and Union agree that they will continue their present policy and practice of not
discriminating against any employee because of union membership and activities or the lack of
membership or the refraining from engaging in union activities. Further, the City and Union
agree that they will continue their present policy and practice of not discriminating against any
employee because of race, color, creed, national origin, ancestry, sex, religion, handicap, sexual
orientation or age as provided by law. 
4
Page 5
ARTICLE VI
DUES DEDUCTION AND AGENCY SERVICE FEE
Section 1. 
During the term of this Agreement, the Employer shall deduct from the
employee’s pay an amount set by the Union for union dues, agency fees, COPE contributions
from each member of the Union who voluntarily executes an authorization form and upon
request, any additional dues amounts specified by the Union and authorized by the employee. 
When filed with the Employer, the authorization form will be honored in
accordance with its terms. Deductions will be promptly transmitted to the Union by electronic
transfer (ACH). Along with the ACH payment, an employee payroll roster will be submitted
within two business days via electronic means utilizing a CSV or Excel format, including any
employee in a bargaining unit that is not having dues deducted. 
The electronic payroll roster must include; employee ID numbers, legal name, 
bargaining unit, deduction amount, deduction type, base pay amount (excluding overtime, shift
differentials, bonuses, and longevity), pay ending date and check date. 
When the Employer hires new employees who are members of the bargaining
unit, one-half (½) hour shall be allotted o the Union to meet with such employees. The Employer
shall notify the Union Stewards upon hiring of a new employee. 
Section 2. 
Upon signing of this Agreement and monthly, thereafter, the Employer shall supply to
the Union a list of all employees covered by this Agreement. The list shall include the employee’s legal
name, home address, phone number, personal email, employee ID number, date of hire, annual salary, 
bargaining unit, department, job title, work site, work email address, and work phone number. Each
month the Employer shall also electronically transmit a list of all new hires, any terminated, or
transferred employees during the month. 
ARTICLE VII
DISCIPLINE
Employees shall not be disciplined or discharged except for just cause. No notice of
reprimand shall be placed in an employee's file unless first shown to the employee. An employee
5
Page 6
shall have the right to inspect his or her personnel file. An employee shall also have the right
upon request to have a union representative present at any meeting in which disciplinary action is
taken. 
ARTICLE VIII
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 1. 
A "grievance" is hereby defined to mean a dispute involving the meaning, 
interpretation, violation or application of this Agreement. 
Section 2. 
Failure at any step of this procedure to communicate the decision of a grievance
within the specified time limits to the aggrieved employee and to the President of the Union shall
permit the aggrieved party or parties to proceed to the next step. A working day shall be Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays. 
Section 3.
Failure at any step of this procedure to appeal the decision to the next step
within the specified time limits shall be deemed to be acceptance of the decision rendered at that
step. 
Section 4. 
No reprisal of any kind shall be taken by any party of this Agreement against
any party in interest, any witness, any members of the Union or any other participant in the
grievance procedure by reasons of participation. 
Section 5. 
Procedure: 
Step 1: The grievance shall be presented by the Union in written form to the Director
within ten (10) working days after the occurrence of the matter which gave rise to the
grievance, or ten (10) working days after the employee first should have known of such
6
Page 7
occurrence, whichever is first. The Director shall hold a meeting on the grievance with the
employee and the representative(s) of the Union within ten (10) working days of receipt of the
written grievance. The Director shall give his/her answer in writing within ten (10) working
days of the date of the meeting. 
Step 2: If the reply does not resolve the grievance, or the Director fails to reply, the
Union within ten (10) working days may refer it to the Mayor or designee. The Mayor and/or
its authorized representative, a representative from the Supervising Board where
applicable, the employee and the representative(s) of the Union will meet within ten (10) 
working days after the presentation of the grievance for further discussion thereof in an attempt
to dispose of such grievance. The response shall be due in writing within ten (10) working days
of the date of the meeting. 
Step 3: If the reply does not resolve the grievance, or the Director fails to reply, 
the Union may submit the grievance to arbitration in accordance with the voluntary rules
of the American Arbitration Association. A written demand for arbitration must be
received by the City within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of Step 2 answer or when Step
2 answer was due, whichever is first. The decision of the arbitrator on all questions of fact
shall be final and binding on both parties. The arbitrator shall not have the power to amend, 
add to, or alter the provision of the Agreement but shall, within a reasonable time of his
appointment, render a decision based on the evidence submitted by the parties, which decision
shall be consistent with the provisions of this Agreement. 
Section 6. 
No employee shall have the right to require arbitration, that right being
reserved to the Union and the Employer. 
Section 7.
The Employer will make available to the arbitrator, upon request, records, 
which are pertinent to the grievance and are not, in the opinion of the Employer, of a
confidential nature. 
7
Page 8
Section 8. 
Each party shall bear the expense of preparing and presenting its own case. The
cost of the arbitrator and incidental expenses mutually agreed to in advance shall be shared
equally between the two parties. 
Section 9.
Any of the time limits set forth herein may be extended by mutual written agreement
of the parties. 
ARTICLE IX
HOLIDAYS
Section 1. 
The following legal holidays shall be deemed to be paid holidays for
employees eligible under this Agreement: 
New Year's Day  Independence Day
Martin Luther King Day  Labor Day
Washington's Birthday  Columbus Day
Patriot's Day  Veteran's Day
Memorial Day  Thanksgiving Day *
1/2 day off day before Christmas **  Christmas Day
* The day after Thanksgiving is a regular work day. However, if City Hall is closed on that date, all
bargaining unit members shall be entitled to take another day as a ‘floating holiday’.
** 12:00 p.m. (noon) release on the last working day before Christmas. 
In addition to the above, an employee will be given an additional one-half (½) day off
to be taken at a time to be determined by the Director, and subject to the requirements of
adequate staffing as determined by the Director. 
When any of the above holidays fall on Sunday that holiday will be recognized
and observed on Monday following that Sunday. When one (1) of these days falls on
Saturday, the preceding Friday will be observed as the holiday by the City Departments. 
8
Page 9
An employee is credited with another day of vacation when one (1) of the above
holidays fall during his/her vacation leave. 
Time worked on a holiday shall be paid at time and one-half (1 ½) the regular hourly
rate in addition to pay for that holiday. Effective July 1, 1998, any employee who works on
the Saturday of a holiday weekend, shall receive Sunday differential pay. 
Except as provided below, the Library will close at 5:00 p.m. the day before all
holidays, and will close on the Saturday before Memorial Day and the Saturday before
Labor Day. 
The Library will remain open until 9:00 p.m. on the night before Veteran's Day whenever
Veteran's Day falls on Tuesday through Friday. On the evening before Veteran's Day, when the
Library is open until 9:00 p.m., all permanent employees shall receive Sunday shift differential
pay for all time spent working past 5:30 p.m. 
When Christmas falls on a Saturday, the library will remain open until 9:00 p.m. on the
Thursday, December 23. When New Year's Day falls on a Saturday, the library will remain open
until 9:00 p.m. on Thursday, December 30. 
Section 2. 
Part-time employees covered by this Agreement and working the schedule of
twenty (20) hours per week but less than the established weekly hours shall be eligible for
holiday pay in proportion to the relationship of the individual's annual scheduled hours to
that of the established annual hours. 
ARTICLE X
VACATION LEAVE
The following vacation plan will apply to all full-time permanent employees covered
under this Agreement: 
Section 1. 
Regular full-time permanent employees, except as hereinafter provided, shall be
entitled to vacation with pay in accordance with the following schedule: 
9
Page 10
Length of Continuous Service  Vacation with Pay
a.  In first year, employees will earn ten (10) days of vacation and may use five (5) of
those days after six (6) months. *
b.  More than one (1) year to five (5) years  2 weeks
c.  More than five (5) years but less than ten (10) years  3 weeks
d.  More than ten (10) years but less than sixteen (16) years  4 weeks
e.  Sixteen years (16): One additional contract vacation day  4 weeks + 1 day
f.  Seventeen years (17): One additional contract vacation day 4 weeks + 2 days
g.  Eighteen years (18): One additional contract vacation day  4 weeks + 3 days
h.  Nineteen years (19): One additional contract vacation day  4 weeks + 4 days
i.  Twenty years (20):  5 weeks
At twenty (20) years, employees receive five (5) weeks of vacation, and contract days end
after employee’s nineteenth (19) year. 
* Employees after completion of six (6) months of service may take one (1) weeks’ 
vacation. 
A one-time adjustment may be made for an employee who is converted from another
eligibility date to anniversary date of eligibility. No employee shall receive more or less
vacation than is due under this Article because of such conversion. 
Section 2. 
Permanent part-time employees covered by this Agreement working a
scheduled work week of twenty (20) hours or more, but less than the established weekly hours
shall be credited with paid vacation leave under the above schedule in the same proportion
that the scheduled hours of the employee bear to the established hours of the department. 
Section 3. 
Vacation must be taken in the year following the employee's eligibility, except
that, with written notice to the Library Director prior to the end of the vacation year, an
employee may carry over one (1) week of unused vacation. For example, an employee who
completes two (2) years of continuous service on August 15 must take a minimum of all
but one (1) week of his/her two (2) weeks’ vacation during the period of August 16 through
10
Page 11
August 15 of the following year. Vacation may not be accumulated from year to year - except
that one (1) week of vacation may be carried over from one (1) year to the next. In
addition, further arrangements for vacation carry over may be made for unusual
circumstances and with the approval of the Director. The time for taking vacation shall be at
the discretion of the Director. 
Section 4. 
Employees entitled to vacation leave benefits who terminate in good standing
with written notice of thirty (30) days for professional employees and fourteen (14) days
for non-professional employees to the City, or who retire or are laid-off, shall be entitled to pro-
rata vacation of one-twelfth (1/12) of eligibility for each month of service since their most
recent anniversary date. 
Such employees, under the conditions set forth above, also shall be paid vacation pay
equivalent to any unused earned vacation leave credited to him/her at the time of his/her severance. 
Section 5.
For purposes of this Article, an employee's anniversary date shall be the date
on which such employee begins work with the City of Framingham and becomes eligible for
vacation benefits. 
Section 6. 
Newly hired permanent employees who have worked as permanent full-time
employees in another City or city library shall be able to apply all years during which
they have paid into the public employee retirement system towards calculating vacation to
which they are entitled. Those who worked previously as permanent part-time employees in
another City or city library shall be able to count years of service as above on a pro-rated basis. 
11
Page 12
ARTICLE XI
SICK LEAVE
Section 1. 
a.  During the term of this Agreement sick leave shall accrue to full-time
permanent employees at the rate of one and one-quarter (1 ¼) days per month. 
b.  Accrual of sick leave is based on each full calendar month of employment. 
Section 2. 
Permanent part-time employees covered by this Agreement working a
scheduled work week of twenty (20) hours or more but less than the established weekly hours
shall accrue sick leave in proportion to the relationship of the individual's annual scheduled
hours to that of the established annual hours. 
Section 3.
An unlimited number of sick days may be accumulated. 
Section 4. 
In the event an illness extends beyond five (5) consecutive workdays, a doctor's
certificate shall be required as to nature of illness, the condition of the employee, and the
ability of the employee to resume work. 
When the Director has reason to believe that there is a pattern of sick leave abuse, 
she/he may require the submission of a doctor's certificate for future illnesses in that fiscal
year. 
Section 5.
The Framingham Public Library Sick Bank Policy is attached. 
Section 6.
Up to seven (7) days sick leave may be used per fiscal year for the care of the
employee's spouse, children, parents, and members of the employee's immediate household due
12
Page 13
to serious illness. After five (5) consecutive working days a doctor's certificate may be required. 
Every effort will be made by the employee to effect alternative arrangements. 
Section 7. 
An employee who uses no sick leave in any fiscal year shall accrue five (5) 
extra sick leave days for that fiscal year or twenty (20) sick leave days in all for that fiscal year. 
Section 8. 
Accrued personal sick leave may be used to supplement Workers' Compensation
benefits. 
Section 9. 
Upon ordinary retirement or death, a bargaining unit member or her/his heirs
shall be entitled to a buy-back of the employee's unused accumulated sick leave over one
hundred (100) days accumulation at the rate of one (1) day for every five (5) days (e.g. if the
employee had one hundred and twenty (120) days of unused accumulated sick leave, she/he
would be entitled to a buy-back of four (4) days). The maximum value of such buy-back is
forty (40) days or three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). For purposes of buy-back one (1) day
shall consist of one (1) day's pay at the employee's prevailing rate of pay. 
Notwithstanding the limits set out above, an employee who takes ordinary retirement, 
after giving the City at least four (4) months written notice of his/her intent to retire
accompanied by the actual filing of his/her retirement papers, shall be entitled to buy back an
additional twenty (20) days of unused, accumulated sick leave, using the same formula as is set
forth above. In such case, the maximum value of such buy-back shall be six thousand dollars
($6,000.00).
Section 10. 
Any remaining days that the retiring employee is not entitled to under the buy-
back section of the contract shall be added to the Library Staff Sick Bank. 
13
Page 14
Section 11. 
An employee may be granted up to a maximum of sixty (60) sick leave days per
request. Employees may request an extension if granted less days than requested. The committee
will reconvene to review documentation for requested extension of sick leave bank time. 
ARTICLE XII
WAGES
FISCAL YEARS 2019 - 2021
ANNUAL SALARY SCHEDULE - LIBRARY 
SEE ADDENDUM A
Section 1. 
Adjustment to Base Wage
July 1, 2019 2% 
July 1, 2020 1% 
July 1, 2021 1% 
Effective July 1, 2019, the wages on the attached annual salary schedule shall reflect an
increase of 2% over the June 30, 2019 wages. 
Effective July 1, 2020, the wages on the annual salary schedule shall reflect an increase of
1% over the June 30, 2020 wages. 
Effective July 1, 2021, the wages on the annual salary schedule shall reflect an increase of
1% over the June 30, 2021 wages. 
New pay schedule effective July 1, 2019. 
After the City Council’s 2nd meeting following the Agreement of the MOA, retro
payment will be paid in full within ninety (90) days following the ratification of the
contract. 
Add to shift differential of three dollars ($3.00) per hour for driving the
bookmobile and two dollars ($2.00) per hour for staffing bookmobile. The Bookmobile
Supervisor does not receive the differential. 
•  Must attend and pass driver training prior to driving the Bookmobile. 
•  Must be willing to be out in inclement weather. 
14
Page 15
Permanent staff who retire in good standing prior to ratification of the contract will receive
retro pay for any cost of living pay increases achieved by said contract for hours worked. 
Section 2. 
Effective July 1, 1992, temporary employees (substitutes) who have worked
fifteen hundred (1,500) hours from date of hire shall be eligible to move on the step system for
every fifteen hundred (1,500) hours worked. After the initial move, employees will be eligible
to move no more than once every twelve (12) month period. Substitutes can carry over
accumulated hours from year to year. 
Section 2. 
Employees shall be entitled to an IRS Section 125 Plan. 
Section 3. 
Educational Incentive: 
Library personnel shall annually receive on completion of hours of credit at a
graduate school of Library Science while in the service of the City of Framingham: 
12 credit hours $200.00
24 credit hours $200.00
36 credit hours $300.00
This is to be cumulative and to be added to any step of those job classifications
which do not require a graduate degree in Library Science as a part of job qualifications. 
Effective July 1,2018, the Education stipend will be deleted from the contract and added
to the pay schedule. (This will be rolled into base pay only to the ones who get it – step dates
will be adjusted to make up for it going away).
Section 4. 
Permanent employees shall receive the following shift differentials: 
Effective in FY 2018: 
Evening shift (all hours worked after 5:00 p.m.)  $1.50 per hour
Effective 7/1/2017: Saturday shift differential  $3.75 per hour
15
Page 16
Effective 9/1/2017: Sunday shift differential  $9.75 per hour
Effective 7/1/2017: Sunday and summer Saturday shift differential $9.75 per hour
Effective 7/1/2017: Supervisor Sunday and summer Saturday shift differential $15.50 per hour
The Director shall designate the supervisor for the purpose of this provision. 
Effective 7/1/2017: Friday night, Saturday, and Sunday Program Supervisor differential $15.25 per
hour
Effective 7/1/2017: Night shift differential will begin at 5:00pm. 
Effective in FY 2019: 
Effective 7/1/2018: Saturday shift differential  $4.00 per hour
Effective 9/1/2018: Sunday shift differential  $10.00 per hour
Effective 7/1/2018: Summer Saturday shift differential  $10.00 per hour
The Director shall designate the supervisor for the purpose of this provision. 
Effective 7/1/2018: Friday night, Saturday, and Sunday Program Supervisor differential $15.50
per hour
For the purposes of this article summer shall be defined as July and August and
inclusive of the Labor Day weekend. 
All temporary employees (substitutes) shall receive an additional six dollars
($6.00) per hour for all worked performed on Sundays and summer Saturdays. 
Section 5. 
Paid release time and paid compensatory time shall be allowed for attendance
at job related courses and shall be prorated for part-time employees at the discretion of the
Director. 
Section 6.
When an employee's position is reclassified, the employee shall be placed on
the step in the new classification which would provide a raise at least equal to one (1) step
above the step she/he held in the prior classification plus any education incentive which will
no longer be received in the new classification. If she/he was at maximum, she/he shall be
placed at the step in the new classification that would provide an increase at least equal to the 
16
Page 17
difference between maximum and the next lowest step in that prior classification plus any
education incentive which will no longer be received in the new classification. She/he shall
then be eligible for a step increase on the anniversary of the effective date of reclassification. 
The City and the Union agree to establish a Reclassification Committee whose sole purpose
shall be to make recommendations relating to the reclassification of positions at the
Framingham Public Library. The parties agree that this Committee shall begin work within
ninety (90) days after ratification of this contract. 
Section 7. 
The parties agree to create an Education Committee to review and recommend
language for education incentives for next collective bargaining Agreement as of July 1, 2016. 
The Committee will be comprised of: 
•  Three members of management – to be decided by the City of Framingham
•  Three members of the bargaining unit – to be decided upon by the bargaining unit
Section 8. 
The parties agree to create a Language Committee to review and recommend
language for an incentives for employees who speak other languages and use their skills to
translate information for library patrons for the next collective bargaining Agreement as of
July 1, 2016. The Committee will be comprised of: 
•  Three members of management – to be decided by the City of Framingham
•  Three members of the bargaining unit – to be decided upon by the bargaining unit
ARTICLE XIII
HOURS OF WORK
Section 1. 
The regular workweek for full-time employees shall consist of five (5) days, 
which may or may not be consecutive, totaling thirty-seven and one-half (37 ½) hours within a
calendar week, beginning on Monday. The usual work day shall consist of eight (8) hours of
work or less scheduled between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:30 p.m., Monday through Friday; 
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturday; and Noon and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday. The City retains 
17
Page 18
the right to schedule hours of duty in accordance with work requirements of the Library. 
Consistent with past practice, the Director will cover Sunday work with employees who elect
to work on Sundays. Permanent employees shall not be required to work Sundays during the
work year except in the case of an emergency as determined by the Director. 
Permanent employees shall not be required to work Saturday or Sunday except in the
case of an emergency as determined by the Director, during the summer months of July and
August up to and including Labor Day weekend. 
No staff will be required to work alone in either building or the Bookmobile during
operating hours or early morning/after Library programs. The minimum staffing level will be
two (2) people. 
Section 2. 
Part-time employees can be required to work more than their regularly
scheduled hours and be called in as needed by Library schedules. Whatever additional part- 
time work is required shall be equitably assigned after having given due consideration to the
personal needs of the employees involved. 
Section 3. 
The City may, apart from the above, establish from time to time different
work schedules and hours of work for individual employees after consultation with the Union
and after having given due consideration to the convenience of the employee involved. 
Section 4. 
Employees shall be allowed a fifteen (15) minute rest break in each one-half
(½) shift. 
Section 5. 
Overtime pay at the rate of one and one-half (1 ½) times the employee's regular
straight time hourly rate shall be paid for work performed in excess of forty (40) hours in the
work week. 
18
Page 19
ARTICLE XIV
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Eligible employees will be granted a period of five (5) work days' absence, if
necessary, without loss of pay each time there is a death in the employee's immediate family. 
Additional days without loss of pay, if needed, may be granted at the discretion of the
Director. 
Immediate family shall be defined as the employee's spouse, children, unborn child, 
mother, father, sister, brother, grandchild, grandparents of either the employee or employee’s
spouse, mother-in-law, father-in-law, miscarriage of unborn child, any members of the
employee's immediate household who is in the legal care of the employee. 
Eligible employee will be granted a period of three (3) work days' absence, if
necessary, without loss of pay each time there is a death of a sister-in-law, brother-in-law, 
aunt, and uncle. 
When there is a death in the family other than those listed above, bereavement leave
may be granted at the discretion of the Director. 
ARTICLE XV
PERSONAL DAY
Section 1. 
Each full-time employee covered by this Agreement will be granted two (2) 
personal days in each fiscal year. 
These personal days are for personal use without loss of pay and are to be taken at a time
reasonable to the Director in order that the employee's absence will not interfere with the
operation of the Department. 
Section 2. 
Part-time employees covered by this Agreement who work on a schedule of
twenty (20) hours per week or more but less than the established weekly hours, will be eligible
for two (2) one-half (½) days or one (1) single day as a personal day in each fiscal year. 
19
Page 20
Section 3.
An employee covered by this Agreement including those entitled to five (5) 
weeks of vacation who uses three (3) days or less of his/her available and earned sick leave for
the period commencing July 1 through and inclusive of the following June 30, shall be
entitled to one (1) additional personal day to be taken during the twelve-month period
commencing the following July 1. 
Section 4. 
New full-time employees shall be eligible for personal days after completion
of the probationary period. If such period ends before January 1, two (2) personal days will be
granted for the remainder of the fiscal year. If such period ends on or after January 1, one (1) 
personal day will be granted for the remainder of the fiscal year. 
New part-time employees shall be eligible for personal days after completion of the
probationary period. If such period ends before January 1, two (2) one-half (½) or one
(1) single personal day will be granted for the remainder of the fiscal year. If such period ends
on or after January 1, one-half (½) personal day will be granted for the remainder of the fiscal
year. 
ARTICLE XVII
LEAVES OF ABSENCE
At the discretion of the Director, leaves of absence may be granted consistent with the
terms of the City by-law. 
ARTICLE XVIII
EXTENDED LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Section 1. 
After completion of one (1) year of continuous employment, a permanent
employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay, not to exceed one (1) year, at the
discretion of the Director and with the approval of the Board of Library Trustees for the
purpose of caring for a sick member of the employee's immediate family as that term is
defined in Article XV or for one's own health reasons. 
20
Page 21
Section 2. 
After three (3) years of continuous employment in the City an employee may
be granted a leave of absence without pay not to exceed one (1) year for personal reasons at
the discretion of the Director. The exercise of this discretion will be reasonable. The
employee shall specify the reasons for the leave request in writing. 
Section 3. 
All benefits, accrued or otherwise, to which an employee was entitled prior to
any leave taken under this Article will be restored to her/him upon return. The period of
unpaid leave will not be credited toward seniority. The employee shall be returned to the
position and step on scale she/he held prior to the leave unless the position has been
eliminated by a reduction in force. 
ARTICLE XIX
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE LEAVE
The City of Framingham is committed to providing victims of domestic violence job
protected leave to all employees, full or part-time, consistent with City policies and Massachusetts
General Laws, Chapter 149, Section 52E. 
ARTICLE XX
JURY DUTY
The City agrees to compensate an employee on jury duty with regular salary. Any
compensation received for jury duty shall be turned over to the City, except expenses. 
During the employee's jury duty period, the employee is expected to work any period of his or
her regular daily shift when not on jury duty, not to exceed the regular hours scheduled for that
day including travel time. 
21
Page 22
ARTICLE XXI
FILLING POSITIONS
Section 1. 
Vacancies and/or newly created positions in the bargaining unit will be posted on
department bulletin boards, for a period of seven (7) working days. 
Section 2. 
Employees of the bargaining unit having the qualifications to fill a posted
position and desiring to be considered shall apply in writing to the Director. 
Section 3.
The selection of an employee to fill a vacancy shall be made on the basis of
qualifications (including education and degrees where applicable),  length of service and
experience in the field and in the system, skill and ability. The City will be the sole judge of
the foregoing criteria, provided that such judgment shall not be exercised arbitrarily, 
capriciously or unreasonably. 
Section 4. 
Employees of the bargaining unit will be considered before an individual from
outside is appointed to fill a vacancy, but the City reserves the right to hire applicants not
covered under the Agreement. 
Section 5. 
Any employee, who applied for a position which was posted, and not selected, 
shall be given reasons for denial in writing if he/she so requests. 
Section 6. 
The first six (6) months of continuous employment after the initial hiring date
shall be considered a probationary period. The City reserves the right to terminate any
employee before the end of the probationary period if in the judgment of the director he or she
22
Page 23
is not qualified to perform the duties of the position. Such termination shall not be subject to
the grievance procedure of this Agreement. 
Section 7. 
Upon promotion, an employee shall be placed on the step in the new
classification that would provide a raise at least equal to one (1) step above the step she/he
held in the prior classification plus any education incentive which will no longer be received
in the new classification. If she/he was at maximum, she/he shall be placed at the step in the
new classification that would provide an increase at least equal to the difference between
maximum and the next lowest step in that prior classification plus any education incentive
which will no longer be received in the new classification. She/he shall then be eligible for a
step increase on the anniversary of the effective date of reclassification. 
Section 8.
The library administration may provide In-Service Training for all staff. 
Section 9. Unfilled Vacancies
If a funded position within the bargaining unit is not posted within two (2) weeks
after it has been vacated, the Chapter Chair may request a written response from the Director in
regards to the intentions of filling said position. The Director shall respond, in writing, within
two (2) weeks, to the best of their knowledge. 
Section 10. Open Positions
A position within the bargaining unit must be posted within thirty (30) days of a
vacancy. If a funded position within the bargaining unit is not posted within thirty (30) days after
it has been vacated, the Chapter Chair will request a written response from the Library Director
and/or the Human Resources Director, in regards to the intentions of filling said positions. The
Library Director and/or the Human Resources Director will respond in writing within two (2) 
weeks. 
23
Page 24
In the event of open funded positions and/or open funded hours, in no instance shall any
employee be assigned regular, on-going shifts in lieu of filling a vacant funded position for more
than sixty (60) days. 
ARTICLE XXII
GROUP INSURANCE
This bargaining unit shall have the right to have a member on the Employee's
Group Insurance Advisory Committee in accordance with the terms of Massachusetts General
Laws, Chapter 32B. 
ARTICLE XXIII
UNION REPRESENTATIVE
Section 1. 
The Union shall furnish the Employer with a written list of Union Representatives
immediately after the designation of such representatives; and the Union shall notify the Employer
of any changes in the list of representatives. 
Section 2. 
The Union Officers shall be granted reasonable time off from work with full
pay for the purpose of meeting with management to present and adjust grievances at levels
one, two and three of the grievance procedure. Permission for time off shall be requested as far
in advance as possible except in emergency situations and where practical no less than twenty- 
four (24) hours in advance of the proposed meeting time. 
Section 3.
If collective bargaining meetings with management are scheduled during
working hours, members of the bargaining team will be excused from work with full pay to
attend such meetings. 
24
Page 25
Section 4. 
Two (2) union representatives will be granted reasonable time off with pay for the
purpose of attending the annual union convention. 
Section 5. 
The City shall provide fifty (50) hours, in the aggregate, of paid release time, 
annually, for union officials and representatives to attend union training, bargaining
preparation meetings and for other union business with prior notification to the Library
Director. 
ARTICLE XXIV
SENIORITY
The length of service of the employee with the City of Framingham shall determine the
seniority of the employee, regardless of whether she/he is permanent part-time or full-time. 
Separate seniority lists shall be kept for Professional and Non-Professional employees. If an
employee moves from a position on one list to the other, seniority shall be based on original
date of hire. 
ARTICLE XXV
LAYOFF AND RECALL
Section 1. 
In the case of a staff reduction, the City will determine which positions
shall be discontinued or eliminated. It is recognized that when making layoffs, the Library
Director is entitled to retain proven qualified employees to meet the staffing needs of the
Library. In no instance shall a permanent position be eliminated and any or all of the hours
assigned to a substitute employee. In deciding which of two or more qualified employees shall
be retained, seniority shall govern with layoffs made in order of inverse seniority from
two separate seniority lists (Professional, Non-Professional), with no right to bump from one list
to another. 
25
Page 26
Section 2. 
Laid off employees shall be allowed to maintain group insurance coverage as
provided by federal and state statutes. 
Section 3.
The Library shall provide the Union and the affected employee(s) with notice of
a reduction in force no less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the effective date of the
reduction. The Library and the Union shall meet within five (5) working days of such notice
to provide reasons for the action and to negotiate the impact of the action. 
Section 4. 
In the event of a layoff, the affected employee may elect to bump the least
senior employee in her/his classification, who is less senior than the affected employee, whose
job she/he is qualified to perform. If there is no such employee, the affected employee has the
right to bump the least senior employee, who is less senior than the affected employee, in any
lower classification in the bargaining unit whose job she/he is qualified to perform. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no employee shall be required to bump into or accept a
position that would result in a change in the number of hours the affected employee has been
working. The affected employee may choose instead to bump the least senior employee, as
described above, who works the same number of hours. 
A laid off employee has the right to refuse a vacancy in a lower classified position or
of a different number of work hours than the position from which she/he was laid off without
jeopardy to unemployment benefits or recall rights. 
These procedures shall also apply to employees displaced through bumping. 
Section 5. 
An employee is qualified if she/he meets the minimum requirements in the
posted job description and is able to perform the duties of the position, as defined in the job
description, within six (6) work weeks of commencing such duties. The determination of
qualification shall be made by the Assistant Director. An employee may appeal a 
26
Page 27
determination of not qualified to the Library Director, and such determinations are subject to
the grievance procedure. 
Section 6. 
In the event of a recall, employees shall have the right to return to their former
positions in accordance with their seniority within classifications. In the event a position
becomes vacant or is restored to the bargaining unit and there are no employees in that
classification who are laid off and are qualified to do the job and accept the position, then
other employees who are laid off and are qualified to do the job shall in order of their seniority
be given preference to fill said position before any new employees are hired. 
Employees shall be notified of a recall by certified mail to their last address of record
left with the City. An employee who is on layoff status and who fails to report for work
within fourteen (14) days after the notice of recall shall be considered terminated unless an
extension has been granted by the Library Director. 
Section 7. 
If an employee who has been laid off or bumped accepts a position in the same
or a lower classification and their original position is restored, they shall have the right to
return to their former position in accordance with their seniority within the classification. 
Section 8. 
Upon return to work, all benefits, accrued or otherwise, to which an employee was
entitled prior to layoff shall be restored. The period of layoff shall not be credited toward seniority. 
ARTICLE XXVI
TRANSFERS
Transfers shall be made at the discretion of the Director based on the needs and
requirements of the Library system. Due consideration shall be given to the personal needs of
the employees involved. The Director agrees to notify the Union when making permanent
transfers. 
27
Page 28
ARTICLE XXVII
PARENTAL LEAVE
Consistent with current practice, the City will provide parental leave in accordance
with Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 149, Section 105D and the City's published
Policy on Parental Leave. Parental Leave will run concurrently with the City of
Framingham Family Medical Leave as outlined in policy. 
ARTICLE XXVIII
WORKING CONDITIONS
The City and the Association recognize that it is important for employees to work in clean, 
safe, well ventilated, and well-lit areas in which the temperature is maintained at an acceptable
level, and the City agrees to exert good faith and reasonable effort to provide such working
conditions. However, the Director in his/her discretion shall decide what constitutes
acceptable working conditions and what improvements, if any, shall be effected, and said
decision shall be final. In addition, the Director in the exercise of his/her discretion may decide
to close the Library or reduce the size of the work force due to outside weather conditions. 
ARTICLE XXIX
BULLETIN BOARDS
Bulletin boards shall be provided for the use of the Union. 
ARTICLE XXX
COPE, POLITICAL EDUCATION FUND
The Employer will honor voluntary contribution deduction authorizations from
employees in the bargaining unit for contributions to SEIU Committee On Political Education
(COPE). The Employer, upon demand of the Union and a forty-five (45) day notice in writing
to the Employer, will deduct the authorized amounts from individual employees' paychecks and
promptly remit those sums to SEIU, Local 888, along with a list of employees who have had
amounts deducted and amounts for each of those employees. 
28
Page 29
ARTICLE XXXI
STUDY COMMITTEE
The parties agree to continue the joint committee previously established consisting of
two (2) representatives appointed by each party to discuss the subject of performance
evaluation. 
ARTICLE XXXII
PROFESSIONAL EXCUSED TIME
Employees may be granted a leave of absence with pay to attend such professional
meetings as contribute to their continuing education in librarianship. Prior approval of the
Director is required. The City shall reimburse those authorized to attend meetings of professional
library associations for those dues, fees and/or expenses which are approved by the Director in
advance. 
ARTICLE XXXIII
SEVERABILITY AND WAIVER PROVISIONS
Section I. 
Should any provision of this Agreement contain a conflict with a municipal personnel
ordinance, By-Law, rule or regulation or any statute as defined in General Laws, Chapter 150E, 
Section 7, the terms of this Agreement shall prevail. 
Section 2. 
The Union and the City agree that each had a right to bargain for any provision
that they wished in this contract and each expressly waives the right to reopen the contract for any
further demands or proposals that could have been made prior to the effective date of the contract and
that the present contract constitutes the complete agreement on all matters and that if other
proposals have been made, they have been withdrawn in consideration of this Agreement. 
29
Page 30
ARTICLE XXXIV
DURATION
The provisions of this Agreement will be effective July 1, 2019 and will remain in force and
effect through June 30, 2021 or until such time thereafter as a new Agreement is signed. This
Agreement shall be automatically renewed for a period of one (1) year unless by January 1, 2019 either
party notifies the other in writing of its desire to terminate, amend, or modify any part of this Agreement. 
ARTICLE XXXV
HEALTH AND SAFETY
The City shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) toward glasses for any employee whose optometrist
prescribes special glasses for computer work. 
The City shall make available in a reasonable amount of time a professional to
address requests of ergonomic adjustments. All requests shall be made to the Director. 
There will be at least two (2) training sessions each fiscal year. Library employees who
miss the scheduled training, with permission of the Library Director and the Director City
Division having the training, attend the training with another division or department. The Director
of Human Resources will notify the Library Director or his/her designee regarding dates and
times of trainings in other departments. Staff must request prior approval to allow for coverage at
the Library. 
a.  Effective July 1, 2020, employees who attend Substance abuse/Addictions and
Narcan training will receive a stipend of three hundred dollars ($300.00) each fiscal year. 
b.  Effective July 1, 2020, employees who attend training on mental health issues, 
provided by the City of Framingham each year, will receive a stipend of three hundred dollars
($300.00) each fiscal year. 
c.  Each stipend will be paid within thirty (30) days of training. 
d.  Library Staff who have already completed the Opiod/Narcan training will receive
the three hundred dollars ($300.00) stipend on or before July 17, 2020. 
30
Page 31
ARTICLE XXXVI
WORK OUT OF GRADE
An employee who is temporarily assigned to perform the duties and responsibilities of
an absent employee for a period of over five (5) consecutive days shall be paid, retroactive to
the first day, at step one of the classification of the position being filled or a ten percent (10%)
differential over their current base salary, whichever is greater. Out of grade pay shall have no
impact on incentive pay, merit pay or other differentials received by the replacing employee in
his/her regular position. 
ARTICLE XXXVII
LABOR MANAGEMENT
In order to provide a means for the exchange of views between the City and the Union, a
joint labor-management committee shall be established consisting of the Library Director and
representatives from the bargaining unit. 
The Committee shall meet monthly, or as needed, at times mutually agreed upon by the
Library Director and the Union. Such meetings shall be for the purpose of discussing and
resolving matters relating to the general application of the Agreement and to others matters of
mutual concern including, but not limited to, health and safety issues, matters and issues
unique to the Framingham Public Library, the library profession and the Minuteman Library
Network. 
The parties shall establish a joint labor management committee charged with reviewing
bargaining unit member’s job descriptions in order to accurately reflect the employee’s duties
every five (5) years. The first review shall take place one month from the ratification date of this
Agreement, and be completed no later than January 1, 2013. The committee may request
amendments to the job descriptions of unit employees, however such amendments are subject to
approval of the Human Resources Director and Mayor in their sole discretion pursuant to the
City’s Personnel By-Law. 
a.  Effective July 1, 2019, the parties agree to work with a consultant hired by the
Human Resources Director, to update the library job descriptions every five (5) years. All
permanent staff will have access to the Consultant’s summary reports. A schedule of meetings
with employees will occur within 30 days of their completion. Based on the current schedule, the
31
Page 32
next reclassification should be completed and reports provided by February 1, 2024 for the
funding in FY 2025 budget beginning July 1, 2024. 
b.  Any reclassification recommendations that change an employee’s L-level shall be
put into effect and payment to reflect this new level on July 1 of the immediately following fiscal
year. 
ARTICLE XXXVIII
MISCELLANEOUS
The Library Technology Administrator position shall be accreted into the bargaining unit
as outlined in the MOU of June 19, 2009. 
In witness whereof, the City of Framingham and the Framingham Public Library
Employees' SEIU Local 888, have agreed to these terms on the  day of  , 20 .
CITY OF FRAMINGHAM FRAMINGHAM LIBRARY STAFF
ASSOCIATION, SEIU LOCAL 888
____________________________________  ____________________________________
____________________________________  ____________________________________
____________________________________  ____________________________________
____________________________________  ____________________________________
____________________________________  ____________________________________ 
32
