AGREEMENT
between
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM
and the
MASSACHUSETTS LABORERS' DISTRICT COUNCIL
of the Laborers' International Union of North America
AFL-CIO
on behalf of
FRAMINGHAM DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS SUPERVISORS
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE LOCAL UNION 1116
Effective: July 1, 2016 -June 30, 2019
Page 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX
XX
XXI
XXII
XXIII
XXV
XXVI
XXVII
XXVIII
XXIX
XXX
XXXI
XXXII
XXXIII
XXXV 
Preamble
Declaration of Principles
Recognition
Membership in the Union
Management Rights
No Strike or Lockout
Dues and Fees Deductions and/or Payments
Temporary Position, Temporary Appointment, 
Probationary Period and Seniority
Bulletining and Filling Positions
Transfers
Holidays
Clothing Allowance
Vacations
Grievance &Arbitration Procedure
Work Week, Work Day and Work Conditions
Wages
Overtime
Travel Allowance
Jury Duty
Military Leave
Bereavement Leave
Paid Sick Leave
Leave of Absence
Miscellaneous
Union Activities
Personal Day
Waiver
Sick Leave Bank
Sick Leave Buy Back
Longevity
Education Incentive
Disciplinary Procedures
Duration 
PAGE
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
5
7
9
10
11
12
13
15
15
16
17
17
17
18
18
20
21
22
23
23
23
24
24
25
25
27
1
Page 3
AGREEMENT
This Agreement, made and entered into as of this day of  ,
201_, by and between the Town of Framingham, Massachusetts, hereinafter referred to as the
"Town ", and the Massachusetts Laborers' District Council of the Laborers' International Union
of North America, AFL-CIO in behalf of Public Employee Local Union 1116, hereinafter
referred to as the "Union ". 
ARTICLE I
Preamble
Delivery of municipal services in the most efficient, effective and courteous manner is of
paramount importance to the Town and the Union. Such achievement is recognized to be a
mutual obligation of both parties within their respective roles and responsibilities. 
This Agreement is entered into between the Town and the duly authorized collective
bargaining representative of its employees within the units hereinafter described to provide, 
insofar as possible, for the continuous employment of labor and to bring about stable conditions
of employment, and to establish necessary procedures for the amicable adjustment of all disputes
and grievance which may arise between the Town and its employees. The term "employee" 
when used in this Agreement shall mean those employees of the Town within the units
hereinafter described. 
ARTICLE II
Declaration of Principles
There shall be no discrimination against any employee by reason of race, national origin, 
color, ancestry, religion, handicap, age as provided by law, sex, or union affiliation. The Town
will employ and use all means of safety for the protection of the employees in compliance with
safety regulations which are in accordance with the law. 
Page 4
ARTICLE III
Recognition
In accordance with the certification of the Labor Relations Commission in case MCR
4251 dated September 22, 1993, the Town recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive
bargaining representative for all employees in the bargaining unit as below: 
All full-time and regular part-time Inspectors, System Integration Managers, Program
Administrators, Engineers, Supervisors, Director of Fleet Maintenance Police Department, and
Operation Managers employed by the Town's Highway, Water, Sewer, Automotive, Assistant
Fire Alarm Superintendent to Lighting and Signals Electrician, Welder, Systems Integration
Manager —Hardware to Operations Manager, Recycling Coordinator, Sanitation and Fire
Departments but excluding all managerial, confidential and all other employees. 
ARTICLE IV
Membership in the Union
Section 1. 
The Town will advise all new permanent employees at the time of their employment that
the Union is their bargaining representative and will notify the Union in writing of the name, 
address, and classification of each new permanent employee. 
Section 2. 
The Town and the Union recognize the right of any employee to become or not to become
a member of the Union and will not discourage, discriminate, or in any other way interfere with
the employee in the exercise of these rights. 
ARTICLE V
Management Rights Of The Employer
The Employer shall not be deemed to be limited in any way by this Agreement in the
performance of the regular and customary functions of municipal management, and reserves and
retains all powers, authority, and prerogatives including but not limited to: the right to manage
the affairs of the Town and its Departments, and to maintain and improve the efficiency of
3
Page 5
operations; to determine the methods, means, processes and personnel by which operations are to
be conducted; to determine the size of and direct the activities of the work force; to determine the
schedule and hours of duty and the assignment of employees the shifts, if such shifts are
established, subject to Article XV; to assign work, to determine the work tasks, classification and
standards of productivity and performance, and to evaluate employees with regard thereto; to
hire, promote, assign, and transfer employees; to discipline, suspend, demote and discharge
employees for just cause; to undertake experimental programs not inconsistent with statute or by-
law, subject to collective bargaining requirements where applicable; and to issue reasonable rules
and regulations governing the conduct of employees and Departments, provided that such rules
and regulations are not inconsistent with the express provisions of this Agreement. 
ARTICLE VI
No Strike or Lockout
Section 1. 
No employee shall engage in, induce, or encourage any strike, work stoppage, slowdown
or withholding of services by himself or any other employees. 
Ca~tinn 7
The Town agrees that there shall be no lockout of employees. 
ARTICLE VII
Dues and Fees Deductions andlor Payments
Section 1. AGENCY FEES
It shall be a condition of employment during the life of this Agreement as specified
herein, that on or after the 30th day following the beginning of permanent employment or the
date of this Agreement whichever is later, an agency service fee shall be paid to the Union. The
said fee shall be due only as follows: 
(a)  All permanent employees hired or transferred into the bargaining unit (as defined
in Article III) after the signing of this Agreement who elect not to become members of the Union
Page 6
will be required to pay the Union directly or authorize payroll deduction of one hundred percent
(100%) of the monthly union dues. 
(b)  Any employee who is required to pay or authorize payroll deductions for an
agency fee and who fails to do so, will be discharged at the request of the Union, which request
shall be in writing, to the appropriate elected department head, and shall state the reasons
therefore. 
Section 2.  UNION DUES OR AGENCY FEE DEDUCTIONS. 
The Town agrees to deduct the Union dues or agency fees from the earnings of an
employee who has executed the designated authorization form. Such deductions shall be in the
amount specified on the authorization form and deducted from the paycheck weekly. Withheld
amounts will be forwarded to the designated Union office as soon as practical following the
actual withholding, together with a record of the amount and the names of those for whom
deductions have been made. 
Section 3.  DEDUCTIONS FOR UNION PENSION. 
The Town agrees to deduct from the employee's earnings the amount as shown on the
designated authorization form for the Union Pension Program. 
The withheld deductions will be forwarded to the designated Union office as soon as
practical following the actual withholding, together with a record of the amount and the names of
those for whom deductions have been made. 
Section 4. 
The Union shall indemnify and save the Town harmless against all claims, demands, 
suits, or other forms of liability, which may arise by reason of any action taken pursuant to this
Article VII. 
Section 1. 
ARTICLE VIII
Temporary Position, Temporary Appointment, 
Probationary Period &Seniority
TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE. 
5
Page 7
An employee shall be considered temporary if he is hired on a temporary basis and to fill
a temporary position, full-time or part-time. 
(A) A person may be hired on a temporary basis for a period of no longer than six (6) 
months and one (1) day. 
(B) Any employee hired on a temporary basis or hired to fill a temporary position with
ninety (90) days continuous service who is laid off for less than sixty (60) days
and is rehired, shall be considered to have been in the continuous employment of
the Town during such period of layoff. 
Section 2.  PROBATIONARY PERIOD. 
Every employee whether hired on a temporary or permanent basis shall be on a
probationary period during the first six months of his employment. 
CPrtinn ~  CFNT(IRTTV
(A) Seniority is defined as the length of continuous employment in any permanent
position covered by this Agreement. An employee shall not acquire seniority during his
probationary period of six (6) months but thereafter his seniority will date from the first
working date after his initial employment. 
(B) Seniority list containing the name, date of seniority, classification and location of
employees will be made available to the Union in January of each year. Protests
regarding seniority must be made within thirty (30) days after the lists are posted. No
change shall be made in the seniority date established for an employee which has
heretofore appeared or hereafter appears on two (2) consecutive annual lists without
protest by the employee. In the case of employees who started work on the same day, 
their relative positions shall be determined by a drawing. 
Section 4.  REDUCTION IN FORCE. 
In the event a reduction in force is required, the most junior employee in the division
affected shall be subject to layoff, provided that the more senior employee shall be qualified to
do the job. The Town shall give not less than two (2) weeks notice of any layoff, unless the
cause of layoff is such as to make notice impossible. 
Section 5.  RECALLS. 
Employees shall have the right to return to their former positions in accordance with their
seniority within their classifications. In the event a position becomes vacant and there are no
D
Page 8
employees with recall rights to said position, then other employees who are laid off and are
qualified to do the job shall in the order of their seniority be given prefel-ence to fill said position
before any new employees are hired. An employee who is on layoff status and who fails to
report for work within fourteen (14) days after the notice of recall shall be considered terminated
unless an extension is granted by the appropriate elected department head. 
Recall rights as set forth herein shall expire after two (2) years from last date of
employment under this Agreement. 
ARTICLE IX
Bulletining and Filling Positions
Cartinn ~
Vacancies in regularly assigned positions or' newly created positions other than the lowest
classification in that division or department that will be of more than thirty (30) days duration
shall be posted for five (5) working days on all regular bulletin boards within ten (10) working
days after such vacancies occLu-,  or such new positions are established. The daily hours and
workweek of the vacant position will be included in the posted bulletin. 
C~~tir~n 7
Unit employees desiring such positions shall, within five (5) working days after bulletin
is posted, apply in writing to the appropriate division head on forms provided by the department. 
C'a~tinn Z
Within fifteen (15) working days after the expiration of the advertising bulletin, 
appointments shall be awarded by the appointing authority. The name of the appointee shall be
bulletined on all regular bulletin boards. Copies of this bulletin shall be furnished to the Shop
Steward. 
Ca~tinn d
The Town of Framingham will make its best effort to promote the most qualified person
to all its positions. When, in the opinion of the department head, there are qualified candidates
for- promotion who are relatively equal in qualifications, the most senior employee will be
promoted. 
7
Page 9
The following factors will be considered in determining the best-qualified candidates for
promotion: 
1.  Ayes or no determination on whether the candidate meets the
minimum requirements of the position relative to the mutually agreed
upon job descriptions at the time of posting. 
2.  The actual amount of experience in duties performed at industry
standards quality in duties listed under MAJOR DUTIES in the job
description. 
3.  The ability to demonstrate, the performance of functions in the
major duties in the job description. The Union may have one observer to
insure quality of tests. 
4.  Level of education and specialized education and training directly
related to the MAJOR DUTIES listed in the job description. 
5.  The relative differences in the last two Performance Evaluations. 
6.  Unscheduled emergency work availability. 
7.  Reported accident history on the job. 
8.  If CDL required for position, the moving violation record on or off
the job pursuant to procedures spelled out in section 383.31 Subpart C
and section 383.33. 
9.  Attendance history. 
CPrtinn S
Every employee shall be considered to serve a probationary period during the first six (6) 
months after assuming a new position. This probationary period may be extended for a second
six (6) month period if the employee has made significant progress during the initial six (6) 
month period, but is not satisfactorily meeting all of the requirements of the new position. 
Any employee changing to a different job classification shall serve a probationary period
of six (6) months. This period is to allow the Town time to judge the ability, competency, fitness
and other qualification of the employee to meet the requirements of the new position. At any
time during the probationary period the Town has the right to return the employee to his/her
previous position at the rate of the employee's previous wage compensation. This provision also
applies to the employee who has the option to return his/her previous position during such six (6) 
month period 
E:~ 
Page 10
CPrtinn (i
Every employee shall have a thirty (30) day trial period during which an employee can
decide whether he/she shall keep the new appointment or revert back to his/her- former position. 
If the employee chooses to revert back to his former position, they shall be returned to such
position and the new position shall immediately be returned to such and the new position shall be
offered to the next qualified applicant in line pursuant to this article. 
~Prtinn 1 
ARTICLE X
Transfers
No employee shall be required to accept a permanent transfer. 
~Prtinn 7
Employees temporarily transferred to a higher- rated job for' eight (8) hours or more shall
receive the lowest rate of the higher rated job or his own rate, whichever' is higher', for- all hours
worked dLu~ing such transfer. 
ARTICLE XI
Holidays
~Pctinn 1
Permanent employees shall be granted the following holidays with pay whenever- the
holiday falls on a regular workday: 
New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Pt-esident's Day, Patriot's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, 
Christmas Day. 
CPrtinn 7
If a holiday falls on a Saturday, the employee will get Friday off with pay, and if a holiday
falls on a Sunday, the employee will get Monday off with pay. 
~~ 
Page 11
CPrtinn ~
Each employee shall be entitled to have the working day before Christmas off with pay; 
and if he works on said day, he will be paid time and one-half the regular rate of pay in addition
to a day's pay. 
CP~tinn d
An employee who works on Christmas and Thanksgiving shall receive double time. An
employee who works any other holiday will be paid at time and one-half his regular rate in
addition to his holiday pay, except that when an employee is assigned to perform emergency
work such as snow and ice removal, or repair of water and sewer breaks, time worked between
the hours of 11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. on a holiday shall be paid at two times the employee's
regular rate of pay in addition to the holiday pay. However, two times the regular rate of pay
shall not apply to scheduled shift work or stand-by. 
.CPrtinn 5
Paid holidays shall be considered as time worked. 
Section 6. 
In order to be eligible for holiday pay, a permanent employee must have worked the last
regularly scheduled workday before and the first regularly scheduled workday following the
holiday unless excused by the Department Head. 
ARTICLE XII
Clothing Allowance
All bargaining unit members shall purchase work clothing from the central supply source
and shall be allowed six hundred dollars ($600.00) per year. Stormy weather clothing or
protective clothing which the employee is required to return to the Town shall not be charged
against his allowance. Employees shall at all times be properly attired for work at the beginning
of their shift. Clothing items worn must be appropriate attire for job functions. 
10
Page 12
Effective July 1, 2014, the clothing allowance shall be eliminated and $600.00 added to
base wage after which the COLA calculation shall be applied. 
ARTICLE XIII
Vacations
Vacation leave shall be determined in accordance with the Personnel By-Laws of the
Town except that three (3) weeks vacation with pay shall be granted at the completion of five (5) 
years of service and four (4) weeks vacation with pay at the completion of ten (10) years of
service. Vacation leave of five (5) weeks with pay shall be granted to any employee who has
been employed by the Town for twenty (20) years and over. 
Individuals who, because of job-related or other illness or disability, do not take all of
their vacation leave may request the right to carry over unused vacation leave from one calendar
year to the next. Any such request must be submitted in writing to the appropriate Department
Head prior to December 31st of the calendar year in question. In the event that any such request
is not approved by the Department Head, the requesting employee will be credited with extra sick
leave equal to the number of unused vacation leave days that were not carried over to the next
year. 
An employee who receives Workers Compensation benefits for six (6) consecutive
months will not accumulate vacation benefits after such period until he returns to active
employment. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, an employee shall be entitled to carry
over no more than one (1) week of earned vacation into the following year. The notice of the
employee's intention to do so, must be in writing and must be filed with the department head on
or before December 1 of the year in which the vacation was earned. The actual time for taking
the deferred vacation week is subject to the approval of the department head. 
Due to the importance of emergency response during winter weather events, employees
must be available at all times for call back as needed between November 15 and April 15. 
Vacations are limited during this timeframe but requests for time off may be considered on a case
by case basis. Requests should be submitted by October 15 for consideration by the Director of
11
Page 13
Public Works or his designee however all requests will be reviewed. Vacation requests which
are not approved cannot be grieved. 
Employees that are called in while on an approved vacation, will have that day restored to
the employee's accrued vacation leave. 
ARTICLE XIV
Grievance and Arbitration Procedure
CPrtinn 1
Tlr~finitinnc
"Grievance" -- a dispute between the Employees' Collective Bargaining Representative
(ECBR) and the Town as to the following: the meaning, interpretation or application of the
collective bargaining agreement. 
Section 2.  RIGHT TO INITIATE AND PROSECUTE GRIEVANCE
(A) Nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted to require the ECBR to
prosecute an employee's grievance if it considers it to be invalid or without
merit. 
(B) If at any step of the grievance procedure the aggrieved employee
decides to accept the decision rendered, he may do so. However, the
ECBR shall have the right to pursue the matter through the remaining
steps. 
(C) Employees with less than six months of service may not use the grievance
and arbitration procedures. 
Section 3.  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Step 1: 
The grievance shall be submitted in writing by the grieving party, within five (5) working
days to the Director or Department Head. Response to the grievance will be made within five (5) 
working days, stating what action is to be taken in response to the grievance. A copy of the
grievance and decision of this Step and all subsequent Steps will be filed with the Director of
Personnel. 
12
Page 14
Step 2: 
If the grievance is not disposed of at Step 1, it shall be submitted by the grieving party
within five (5) working days following receipt of response or date on which response was due to
the Director of Personnel. Response to the grievance will be made within five (5) working days, 
stating what action is to be taken in response to the grievance. 
Step 3
If the grievance is not disposed of at Step 2, it shall be submitted by the grieving party
within five (5) working days following receipt of response or date on which response was due to
the Town Manager or designee. The Town manager or designee shall respond to the grieving
party in writing within ten (10) working days, stating what action is to be taken in response to the
grievance and the reasons therefore. 
The Town Manager or designee may decide to hold an informal hearing at which time the
grieving party shall be allowed to present evidence in support of his grievance. Such hearing
shall be held by the Town Manager or designee within ten (10) days of the presentation of the
grievance to it. The Town Manager or designee shall issue a decision stating the action to be
taken by it or its reasons, therefore, within ten (10) working days next following the close of the
hearing. 
Step 4: 
If the grievance is not settled at Step 3 or if the appropriate elected board does not
respond within the time limits set out in Step 3, the grievance may be submitted to arbitration
with the American Arbitration Association or with the Mass. Board of Conciliation and
Arbitration. Any claim for arbitration must be submitted within thirty (30) days after the date of
the decision, or the date the decision should have been made, in Step 3. 
Section 4.  DILIGENT HANDLING OF GRIEVANCE
(A) To encourage their prompt and amicable handling, grievances
which are not decided within the time period specified at Steps 1 and 2
shall be considered to have been denied and may be advanced to Step 3. 
(B) If both parties agree, grievances may be instituted at a Step other than Step 1. 
The time limitations provided for in the Steps outlined above shall apply. 
13
Page 15
(C) Time extensions beyond those stipulated above may be arrived at by mutual
Agreement. 
ARTICLE XV
Work Week, Work Day and Work Conditions
Section 1. 
For employees, the usual regular workday shall consist of eight (8) hours work to start at
7:00 A.M. and end at 3:00 P.M. A time period of one-half hour taken approximately in the
middle of the workday shall be the lunch break. Forty (40) hours shall constitute one (1) week's
work. The usual regular workweek shall be Monday through Friday. However, it is understood
that some shifts may work at other times. 
comet;.,,, ~
There will be no changes in wages, hours and working conditions without prior
consultation with the Union and providing the proposed changes are not in conflict with any
provision of this Agreement. 
Section 3. 
The Union and its members, unless he/she is physically incapacitated, both collectively
and individually, do agree to guarantee that any emergency manpower needs of the Town and/or
individual departments shall be met as determined by management provided all emergencies are
handled within the provisions of this Agreement. 
ARTICLE XVI
Wages
Employees covered by this Agreement shall be compensated according to the schedule
attached to this contract. 
Effective July 1, 2016: 0% increase
Effective July 1, 2017: 1%increase
Effective July 1, 2018: 1%increase 
14
Page 16
Effective July 1, 2016, all employees covered by this Agreement shall be paid in
accordance with the salary schedule attached hereto and made a part hereof. When an employee
is promoted from one grade to another, he will be slotted into the new grade at a step at least
equal to one step above his step prior to advancement. If the employee is at step 6, he will
receive an increase at least equal to the difference between step 5 and step 6 at his grade prior to
his promotion. 
ARTICLE XVII
Overtime
~Prtinn 1
All employees covered by this Agreement, with the exception of the various, shall receive
overtime compensation at the rate of time and one-half the regular rate of pay, for all hours
actually worked in excess of the regular workdays and/or workweeks set out in Section 1 of
Article XV. 
Operations Managers shall receive an annual stipend in lieu of overtime compensation for
all hours worked in excess of the regular workdays and workweeks as set out in Article XV. The
annual stipend shall be $6,000.00. This stipend shall be paid semi-annually in December and in
June to cover the time actually worked in the previous six months. 
The maximum accrual for compensation will be forty (40) hours. Employees must have
prior approval from the Department Head before earning compensation time and must have
Department Head approval before using compensation time. The taking of compensation time
will be subject to staffing requirements and other administrative controls including the approval
of the Director. 
With the exception of Operation Managers, all employees performing emergency work
such as snow and ice removal, repair of water and sewer breaks, between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
A.M. shall be paid at two (2) times the regular rate of pay provided that they have received less
than twenty-four (24) hours' notice. However, two (2) times the regular rate of pay shall not
apply to scheduled shift work. 
15
Page 17
CP~tinn 7
Night and Saturday calls in all departments shall be rotated as evenly as is reasonably
possible. 
Section 3. 
Employees will not be required to report in on a call in or call back unless they are
guaranteed a minimum of three (3) hours of overtime except if an employee is called back within
two (2) hours of their scheduled shift, they will be compensated for two (2) hours at two (2) 
times the regular rate of pay. 
.CP~tinn d
The employee on stand-by designated by the Department or Division Head shall be
provided with an electrical signal device (beeper) for the twenty-four (24) hour period, 3:00 p.m. 
one day to 3:00 p.m. the following day while waiting to be engaged. When required to return to
work such employee shall receive pay for a minimum of four (4) hours of time at time and one-
half (1 1/2) his regular rate of pay for the first return each night or day. On subsequent returns in
the same twenty-four (24) hour period, 3:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., he shall be paid at the rate of one
and a half (11/2) times his regular rate of pay only for time worked. Stand-by hours worked
between 11:00 P.M and 7:00 A.M., will be paid at a double time (2) times rate of pay provided
that the employee received less than 24 hours notice. 
It is understood that participation in the stand-by program is mandatory and not an
employee option. A schedule of assigned stand-by days will be prepared at least two months in
advance providing employees with ample notice of when they must be available. It is also
understood that from time to time an employee may have personal commitments which do not
allow them to fulfill their stand-by requirement. In such instances, the employee must seek
written permission from their Division Head to find alternate coverage for the period of time in
which they are not available. It is the employee's responsibility to ensure that their assigned shifts
are covered. Supervising Mechanic at the Fire Department added to beeper pay list for being on-
call. 
16
Page 18
Any employee who is required to carry a beeper for one (1) continuous week shall receive
effective July 1, 2017 - $200; effective July 1, 2018 - $250 for said week. Included within this
weekly compensation is the requirement that the stand-by employee conducts communication via
telephone or other means, computer work, or similar activities without actually returning to
work. 
On-Call Program Administrators: One Administrator per week, rotating being on call. 
CP~tinn 5
Upon ratification, overtime eligible employees who work for twelve (12) straight hours
prior to their next normally scheduled workday, will be paid time and one-half (1 1/2) for all hours
worked in that next normally scheduled work day. 
ARTICLE XVIII
Travel Allowance
Section 1. 
Town Vehicles shall be used when available. 
Cr~rtinn 7
If use of a private automobile is authorized by the appropriate elected Department Head, a
travel allowance equal to the rate approved from time to time by the Internal Revenue Service
shall be paid to the employee for use of the automobile. 
ARTICLE XIX
Jury Duty
Any employee called for jury duty will receive the difference between his regular pay and
his payment for jury service. 
ARTICLE XX
Military Leave
Any employee required to attend annual two (2) week military reserve training shall be
paid his regular pay during said period. 
17
Page 19
ARTICLE XXI
Bereavement Leave
In the event of a death in an employee's immediate family, he/she shall be eligible for up
to five (5) days leave with pay. Immediate family as used herein shall consist of (spouse) wife, 
husband, child, step child, mother, father, sister, brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-
law, brother-in-law, grandparents or legal guardian. 
ARTICLE XXII
Paid Sick Leave
~'a~tinn ~
Sick leave shall accrue at the rate of 1 1/4 days per month and shall be accumulative
without limit except as provided below. A doctor's certificate will be required after three (3) 
consecutive days. 
An employee who receives Workers Compensation benefits for twelve (12) consecutive
months will not accumulate sick leave benefits after such period until he returns to active
employment. 
CP~tinn 7
Sick leave may be used for the care of the employee's wife or children, but after three (3) 
days a doctor's certificate may be required. 
CA~tinn Z
The Union agrees to use its best efforts to assure that sick leave will be used for the
purpose for which granted. Any employee who fraudulently reports an illness or injury in order
to secure the benefit of sick leave with pay shall be subjected to disciplinary measures up to and
including discharge. 
Ca~tinn d
Except for employees hired after July 1, 1987, the Town will pay an injured employee the
difference between workmen's compensation payments and the employee's normal week's pay
for up to ninety (90) calendar days. For employees hired after July 1, 1987, the Town shall be
~~:~ 
Page 20
required to pay the difference for up to sixty (60) calendar days. The provisions of this Section
shall be applicable only after an employee has been out of work because of a workmen's
compensation injury for fifteen (15) consecutive workdays. 
Section 5. 
Accrued personal sick leave may be used to supplement workmen's compensation
payments. 
Ca~tinn ~i
The Town may require employees to explain in writing each absence due to illness in a
calendar year in excess of seven (7) days in the aggregate that the employee wishes charged to
paid sick leave. Available sick leave shall not be granted until such written explanation, when
required, has been received by the Department Head. Where the Town has reasonable basis to
question the legitimacy of an employee's use of sick leave, it may require such employee to be
examined by the Town's physician or other medical practitioner to investigate any absences due
to illness exceed seven (7) days in the aggregate in any calendar year. 
Employees are not permitted to call in sick in advance for multiple sick days. The only
exception will be a doctor's certificate of illness attesting to the need of an employee to be sick
leave for more than one day. 
Section 7. 
An employee who retires, terminates or otherwise leaves the employ of the Town of
Framingham and who has accrued sick days at the time of said severance from employment, may
donate such accrued sick leave days to the Sick Leave Bank up to a maximum of one (1) sick
leave day for each year of the employee's service with the Town. 
ARTICLE XXIII
Leave of Absence
Section 1. 
Leaves of absence for any purpose are subject to approval by the Personnel Board (See
Personnel By-Law).
Requests for leave of absence shall be made in writing to the appropriate elected
Department Head. 
19
Page 21
Such requests for leaves of absence, when recommended by the appropriate elected
Department Head, will be referred to the Personnel Board along with that recommendation. 
The reply to the employee's request for leave will be made in writing. Such leaves of
absence granted will be without pay. 
Section 2. 
Seniority and other benefits will not accrue during the period of the leave of absence. 
Section 3. 
The applicant and the Union shall have an opportunity to appear before the appropriate
elected Department Head to present case for application of leave. 
Ca~tinn d
An employee who is on leave of absence status and who fails to report for work on the
first working day following completion for the leave period shall be considered terminated from
employment unless an extension was requested in writing, recommended by the appropriate
elected Department Head and approved by the Personnel Board. 
The applicant and the Union shall be given an opportunity to present the case for
extension to the appropriate elected Department Head. 
Section 1. 
ARTICLE XXIV
Miscellaneous
Workmen's Compensation coverage, life insurance, medical insurance, pension, and
wash-up time shall remain as at present. The Town's contribution to medical insurance shall be
as set forth in the coalition agreement between the Town and the Public Employee Bargaining
Unit. 
Cartinn 7
In the interest of safety of employees and the public, and in accordance with the law, 
where special licenses to operate motor equipment is required, an employee without such license
20
Page 22
will not be required in any case to operate such equipment. The Town and bargaining unit
members shall be required to abide by the rules of the town-wide Safety Committee. 
.CP~tinn ~
Employees shall receive one (1) break of fifteen (15) minutes duration for each four (4) 
hour period of work. 
CPrtinn d
The Town agrees to pay for specialty licenses for those positions which require specialty
licenses. The Town will pay for job related organization memberships if approved in advance by
the Director. The renewal forms for the aforementioned shall be submitted to the Department
Head for payment directly to the proper• authority. 
.CPrtinn 5
The Town will contribute five (5) cents for each twenty-four cents per hour the employee
contributes to the LIUNA Pension Fund. Effective January 1, 2006 the Town will contribute an
additional five (5) cents to the employee's share of the pension fund. Effective January 1, 2005
the employees will contribute an additional twelve (12) cents to the pension fund. Effective
January 1, 2006 the employees will contribute an additional twelve (12) cents to the pension
fund. Effective January 1, 2007 the employees will contribute an additional twelve (12) cents to
the pension fund. Effective December 1, 2007, the Town will contribute an additional $.06 to the
pension fund. 
Section 6. Meal Reimbursement
Employees who participate in emergency related overtime will receive reimbursements
for meals which are intended to reduce the necessary costs associated with working emergency
overtime. Overtime including snow plowing or sanding, sewer or water emergencies, hurricanes
and wind storms, flooding events or any weather related overtime shall be considered eligible
and shall be included. An employee must work four consecutive overtime hours prior to or
immediately following a regular shift or work twelve consecutive hours of overtime to be eligible
for a meal allowance. Overtime which is, or could be scheduled in advance, including planned
maintenance or repairs, regardless of the hours of the incident shall be excluded and not eligible
for a meal reimbursement. Examples of overtime which is excluded is scheduled or unscheduled, 
21
Page 23
line painting, programmed street sweeping, sanitation collection, yard waste collection, 
scheduled snow removal and hauling, scheduled tree maintenance, scheduled water, sewer, or
drain maintenance and or repair. The reimbursement rates shall be $10 dollars for an evening
meal occurring between 3PM and 11 PM and $6 for a morning meal occurring between 11 PM
and 7AM. The Town may at its sole discretion provide a meal in lieu of reimbursement. 
Section 7. Tool Allowance
Supervising Mechanic —Fire Department and Police Department and Fleet Services
Supervisor —DPW will receive an annual tool allowance of $350.00. 
ARTICLE XXV
Union Activities
Section 1. 
The Town will provide a bulletin board for the use of the Union for official notices and
other non-controversial matters. 
Section 2. 
Insofar as the work requirements of the Department permit, Union officers and/or
stewards will be excused from duty with pay, when required to help in the processing and
servicing of employees with grievances. Union officers and/or stewards shall give the employer
reasonable advance notice of their desire to conduct such Union business so that work schedules
may be arranged accordingly. One employee may be absent from work to conduct such Union
business. With prior approval of the employer, one additional employee may be absent from
work if the circumstances of such Union business requires additional representation. 
ARTICLE XXVI
Personal Days
Each employee shall be entitled to two (2) personal days each fiscal year. Any employee
using three (3) or less sick days in a fiscal year shall receive an additional personal day. 
22
Page 24
ARTICLE XXVII
Waiver
The Union and the Town agree that each had a right to bargain for any provision that they
wished in this contract and each expressly waives the right to reopen the contract for any further
demands or proposals that could have been made prior to the effective date of this contract and
that the present contract constitutes a complete agreement on all matters and that if other
proposals have been made, they have been withdrawn in consideration of this Agreement. 
ARTICLE XXVIII
Sick Leave Bank
Section 1. 
A sick leave bank shall be established for this Unit. Effective as of July 1, 1994, the bank
shall contain sixty-five (65) days. 
Ca~tinn 7
Each new employee in the bargaining unit shall contribute two (2) of his sick days to the
bank. 
Section 3. 
The number of days that can be drawn by an individual will be limited to sixty (60) sick
leave bank days. 
Cantinn d
The sick leave bank shall be administered by a sick leave bank committee consisting of
six (6) members. Three (3) members shall be designated by the Employer to serve at its
discretion and three (3) members shall be designated by the Union to serve at its discretion. The
sick leave bank committee shall determine the eligibility for use of the bank and the amounts of
leave to be granted. 
The following criteria shall be used by the committee in administering the bank and in
determining eligibility for sick leave withdrawals and the amount of said withdrawals: 
(A) Adequate medical evidence of serious illness; and
23
Page 25
(B) Prior utilization of all eligible sick leave. 
CPrtinn 5
If, at any time, the sick leave bank falls below one hundred (100) sick leave days, it shall
be replenished by the contribution of one (1) additional day of sick leave by each member of the
unit staff covered by this Agreement. Such additional day will be deducted from the employee's
annual fifteen (15) days of sick leave. 
ARTICLE XXIX
Sick Leave Buy Back
Upon ordinary retirement or death, a bargaining unit member or his heirs shall be entitled
to a buy-back of his unused accumulated sick leave over one hundred (100) days accumulation at
the rate of one (1) day for every five (5) days, for example: if the employee had one hundred
twenty (120) days of unused accumulated sick leave, he would be entitled to a buy back of four
(4) days. The maximum number of days which can be bought back is twenty (20) and the
maximum value of such buy back is $5,000. For purposes of buy-back, one (1) day shall consist
of one (1) day's pay at the employee's prevailing base rate of pay. 
Effective July 1, 2015, the Sick Leave Buyback of $5,000 will be eliminated in exchange
for step 8 on the wage schedule. 
ARTICLE XXX
Longevity
Longevity pay shall be paid to all permanent employees covered by this Agreement as
follows: 
10 years
15 years
20 years
25 years
30 years
35 years 
$250.00 per year
$300.00 per year
$350.00 per year
$400.00 per year
$450.00 per year
$600.00 per year
24
Page 26
Effective July 1, 2014, longevity will be eliminated in exchange for a new step 7 on the
wage schedule. 
ARTICLE XXXI
Education Incentive
Employees may receive up to $550.00 in education incentive per fiscal year upon
successful completion of an approved course which must be part of a degree program an/or
related to employment with the Town. 
A "Request for Approval" form must be filed with the Human Resource Department prior
to starting the cotu~se. The form must be approved by the Department Head and Human
Resources Department. 
Two members foi- the union and two members fi-om management will form a committee
to establish rules and procedures. 
ARTICLE XXXII
Disciplinary Procedures
The Department Heads or appointing authority shall exercise full disciplinary authority
consistent with their responsibilities to direct employees to perform the re9uired work duties in
order to achieve departmental goals and satisfactory municipal service to the general public. 
All warnings, suspensions and discharges must be stated in writing and a copy given to
the employee and union. 
All disciplinary actions, including discharges, shall be applied in a fair manner' and shall
not be inconsistent to the infraction for' which disciplinary action is being applied. The following
actions, though not inclusive, are prohibited and may result in disciplinary action, up to and
including termination. 
The use of profanity or objectionable/offensive language in the presence of any member
of the public; 
25
Page 27
Use of profanity or objectionable/offensive language in the presence of any employee, 
once such conduct has been identified as unacceptable by individuals present, even if it is
considered to be "shop talk;"
Theft of Town property, whether personal, public or private; 
Physical fighting, with anyone, except for self-defense, while working; 
Harassment, that creates a hostile work environment, of any sort; 
Failure to wear/use appropriate safety equipment; 
Failure to follow the written or oral orders of supervisory personnel; 
Possession of alcohol or controlled substances in the workplace. 
ARTICLE XXXIII
Duration
The provisions of this Agreement will be effective July 1, 2016 and will continue and
remain in full force and effect through June 30, 2019. 
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM
BOARD OF SELECTMEN 
MASSACHUSETTS
LABORERS' 
DISTRICT COUNCIL
26
Page 28
LICENSE AND CERTIFICATION SCHEDULE
a. Increase annual limit of payment for licenses, and certifications as follows: 
The town hereby agrees to provide annual incentives for Licensing and Certifications by
offering stipends to employees who acquire and maintain the following valid licenses and
certifications in accordance with the attached "Licensing and Certifications —Schedule ."
The Town shall compensate the employee for the cost of the respective exams) only upon
the successful completion of said exam and the receipt of the certificate or license. The
employee is responsible for the license application and renewal process and the costs
associated therewith. The Town shall reimburse the employee for the renewal costs of said
licenses and certifications upon presentation of a valid receipt. If the employee fails to
renew, or to maintain, a current license or certificate, for which the Town had previously
compensated the employee, the Town shall not again compensate the employee for the re-
testing fees. The licenses and certifications that are established as a progressive process shall
not be combined for purposes of reimbursement. The provision of compensation under this
clause does not alter the minimum requirements for a certification or license within a specific
position description. 
The employee is responsible for reporting the current status and the renewal dates of all
licenses and certificates to the Division Head on July 1S` of each year. The employee shall
complete a form provided by the Department in which the employee may request
reimbursement and compensation. If the employee is not in possession of the valid license
or certification as of the first day in the fiscal year of the application, the stipend shall be
calculated from the next full quarter of the fiscal year in which the license or certification was
acquired. The request for license and certification stipends must be generally relevant to the
function of the Department in which the employee is working. The applicability and number
of these licenses and certificates shall be at the discretion of the respective Division Director. 
27
Page 29
There is a cap of $2,800 effective July 1, 2013; $2,900 effective July 1, 2014; and $3,000
effective July 1, 2015 per fiscal year. 
Licenses and/or certifications which do not have an expiration date must have been obtained
within 5 years to be considered eligible, except for those not renewable per the attached
stipend schedule. 
An employee who for any reason does not possess all of the licenses and/or certifications
required as a component of their job description shall not be eligible for participation in the
stipend program until they have received said licenses. Employees hired prior to the date of
ratification of this agreement will be grandfathered. All employees hired after the date of
ratification of this agreement will be required to obtain and maintain licenses and/or
certifications required as a component of their job description. If any license and/or
certification requirements are updated, the employees will be required to complete the
updated program to maintain receipt of the appropriate stipend. 
b. New Stipends: Applicability: 
i. ETT/LSIT Certification Engineering 
Total: 
$870
ii. MSCE  Engineering $3500
iii. PE/LS  Engineering $6000
Separate dollar limit from (a.) above. 
In the event that either the Town or the Union feels the need to review the attached schedule, 
both parties agree to meet and discuss the issues. 
Town of Framingham
Local Union No. 1116
License and Certificate Compensation Request
Name:  Department: 
Title: 
1(Q4) 
For Submittal On: (Circle One) 
July 1(Q1) October 1(Q2) January 1(Q3) April
Employees: Place a check mark (~/)in the box next to all licenses/certificates that you currently
ho/d. Total the compensation amount on the last page, sign and date the request Return
Page 30
this form to your Divisions' Program Administrator, accompanied by copies of a//
licenses
or certificates for which you are requesting compensation, at /east 2 weeks prior to
the beginning of each new fiscal quarter, 
Pay only the highest grade license. k* The following certificates are unavailable for
renewal. 
License or Certification
Hoistin License Class lA *
Hoistin License Class 1B *
Hoistin License Class 2A *
Hoistin License Class 2B *
Hoistin License Class 3A
Hoistin License Class 4A* 
Hoistin License Class 4E
D Hoistin License Class 4F
Hoistin License Class 4G 
A licabili
ALL
ALL
ALL
ALL
ALL
ALL
ALL
ALL
ALL 
Total
$500.00
$500.00
$300.00
$300.00
$300.00
$300.00
$50.00
$50.00
$50.00 
Supervisor's
A royal
n  Commercial Driver's License — Class A *
n  Commercial Driver's License — Class B *
n  Commercial Driver's License — Hazmat Endorsement
n  Commercial Driver's License —Tanker Endorsement 
ALL  $500.00
ALL  $300.00
ALL  $50.00
ALL  $50.00
n  Massachusetts Pesticide A licator License
n  Certified Arborist MMA
n  UMASS Green School Landsca e Mana ement Certificate**
n  UMASS Green School Turf Mana ement Certificate** 
H  $600.00
H  $1 200.00
H  $600.00
H  $600.00
Drinkin Water S stem Distribution Grade 1D *
qn  Drinkin Water S stem Distribution Grade 2D *
Drinkin Water S stem Distribution Grade 3D *
Drinkin Water S stem Distribution Grade 4D * 
W & S
W & S
W & S
W & S 
$700.00
$800.00
$900.00
$1,200.00
29
Page 31
~~ Drinkin Water S stem Treatment Grade iT *
n  Drinkin Water S stem Treatment Grade 2T *
n  Drinkin Water S stem Treatment Grade 3T *
n  Drinkin Water S stem Treatment Grade 4T *
n  Backflow and Cross Connection Tester DEP
n  Backflow and Cross Connection Surve or DEP
n  Wastewater Collection S stems NWEA Grade I*  **
n  Wastewater Collection S stems NWEA Grade II *  **
n  Wastewater Collection S stems NWEA Grade III * **
n  Wastewater Collection S stems NWEA Grade IV * ** 
W & S
W & S
W & S
W & S
W & S
W & S
W, S H & E
W, 5 ,H & E
W S , H & E
W S , H & E 
$700.00
$800.00
$900.00
$1,200.00
$600.00
$700.00
$500.00
$600.00
$700.00
$800.00
n  Ba state Roads Scholar
n  ACI Concrete
n  Drain La ers License
n  0 eration &Maintenance of Waste Water S stems Certificate 
ALL
ALL
W, S, H & E
W S, H & E 
$800.00
$700.00
$500.00
$500.00
n  Work Zone Traffic Control IMSA
n  Si ns and Markin s IMSA Level I*
n  Si ns and Markin s IMSA Level II *
n  Si ns and Markin s IMSA Level III *
Public Contractin Overview
Su lies and Services Contractin
Desi nand Construction
Certified Public Purchasin Official * 
W, S, H & E
H & E
H & E
H & E
Ops Mgr ADMIN &
FIRE, SUP, Police
Ops Mgr ADMIN &
FIRE, SUP, Police
Ops Mgr ADMIN &
FIRE, SUP, Police
Ops Mgr ADMIN &
FIRE, SUP, Police 
$700.00
$500.00
$700.00
$1 000.00
$600.00
$600.00
$600.00
$1,200.00
Introduction to ArcGIS 1  ALL  $500.00
n  Massachusetts Ins ection Sticker Certified
n  Construction Su ervisor's License
i■ Licensed Master Electrician
i■ Journe man Electrician
~■  HVAC/R License 
FLEET FIRE Police
ALL
W & S
W & S
FLEET 
$500.00
$1,000.00
$1,200.00
$1,000.00
$1,000.00
■ Certified Transfer Station Mana er
■ Certified Collection S stems Mana er 
SW  $700.00
SW  $700.00
~~~ 
Page 32
i■ Certified Rec clin S stems Mana er
'■  DOT Hazmat Certification
■ Confined S ace Certificate
■ Trench Safe
■ 40 Hour Hazwo er Certificate
■ Snow &Ice Control Certificate
■ 10 Hour OSHA Card
Safe Bucket Truck 0 eration
Public Works Preparing For &Responding To Terrorism
Incident Trainin Certificate **
ICS 100
ICS 200
NIMS 700
CPR/Defibrillator Certification
Scott-Pack Trainin
E.H.A.P. 
ASE Automotive and Li ht Truck
En ine Re air ASE Al
Automotive transmission — transaxle ASE A2
Manual Drive Train and Axle ASE A3
Sus ension and Steerin ASE A4
Brake S stem ASE AS
Electrical & Electronic S stems ASE A6
Heatin and Air Conditionin ASE A7
En ine Performance ASE A8
ASE Medium and Heav Trucks
Diesel En Ines
Drive Train and Axels
Breakin S stem
Sus ension and Steerin
Electrical & Electronic S stems
D HVAC 5 stems
Preventative Maintenance Ins ections 
SW
ALL
Public Works
Public Works
ALL
ALL
ALL
H &Fire
ALL
ALL
ALL
ALL
ALL
ALL
ALL
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police
Fleet, Fire, Police 
$700.00
$500.00
$600.00
$600.00
$700.00
$500.00
$500.00
$500.00
$600.00
$500.00
$600.00
$700.00
$100.00
$100.00
$300.00
$100.00
$100.00
$100.00
$100.00
$100.00
$100.00
$100.00
$100.00
X100.00
$100.00
X100.00
X100.00
$100.00
$100.00
$100.00
Total Compensation Amount Requested: 
31
Page 33
Note; Effective July 1, 2014 stipend cap is $2,900.00
Employee Signature: 
Department Director Signature: 
Director of Admin. &Finance Signature: 
Date: 
Date: 
Date: 
32
Page 34
Town of Framingham
LIUNA, DPW, Local 1116
Memorandum of Agreement
March 28, 2017
1. Article XVI Wages: 
a. Adjustment to base wage: 
July 1, 2016
July 1, 2017
July 1, 2018 
0% 
1% 
1% 
b. New pay schedule Attachment A
2. Article X Transfers Section 3 —housekeeping, delete, the following: 
The Town agrees to provide a training program for the operation of heavy equipment. An
employee being trained to operate equipment which carries a higher pay grade will be paid his
regular rate of pay while working as a trainee with a qualified operator. This period of time shall
not exceed forty-five (45) days, after which he will be paid at the glade level for the job, unless
an extension of that time is agree upon by both parties. 
3. Article 111 Reco~tionni  - the following four titles will be added to the bargaining unit: 
a. Assistant Fire Alarm Superintendent to Lighting and Signals Electrician - PW 14
b. Welder — PW 14
c. Systems Integration Manager— Hardware to Operations Manager— PW Z9
d. Recycling Coordinator — PW 10
4. Article XVI Wages -Add language for Promotions: 
Effective July 1, 2016 all employees covered by this Agreement shall be paid in accordance with
the salary schedule attached hereto and made a part hereof. When an employee is promoted
from one grade to another, he will be slotted into the new grade at a step at least equal to one
step above his step prior to advancement. If the employee is at step 6, he will receive an
increase at least equal to the difference between step 5 and step 6 at his grade prior to his
promotion. 
5. Article XVII Overtime —
a. Section 4 —amend to read: Any employee who is required to carry a beeper for (1) 
continuous week shall receive, effective July 1, 2017 -$200; effective July 1, 2018 -$250 for
said week. Included within this weekly compensation is the requirement that the stand-by
employee conducts communication via telephone or other means, computer work or similar
activities without actually returning to work. 
Page 35
b. New Section 5. Upon ratification, overtime eligible employees who work for 12 straight
hours prior to their next normally scheduled work day, will be paid time and one-half (1%2) 
for all hours worked in that next normally scheduled work day. 
6. Article XIII Vacations: Add language: 
Due to the importance of emergency response during winter weather events, employees must
be available at all times for call back as needed between November 15 and April 15. Vacations
are limited during this timeframe but requests for time off may be considered on a case by case
basis. Requests should be submitted by October 15 for consideration by the Director of Public
Works or his designee however all requests will be reviewed. Vacation requests which are not
approved cannot be grieved. 
7. Article XIII Vacations —Delete entire second paragraph relative to single vacation days. 
8. Article XIII Vacations —Add language: 
Employees' who are called in while on an approved vacation, will have that day restored to the
employee's accrued vacation leave. 
9. Article XX1 Bereavement -Change to Town Policy: 
In the event of a death in an employee's immediate family, he/she shall be eligible for up to five
(5) days leave with pay. Immediate family as used herein shall consist of (spouse) wife, 
husband, child, step child, mother, father, sister, brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-
law, brother-in-law, grandparents or legal guardian. 
10. Article XXXVI —Education Incentive —Typo in last sentence —Change "forma" to "form".
11. Article XXIV, Section 7 -Mechanics Tool Allowance: 
The Supervising Mechanic in the Fire Department, Police Department and DPW Fleet operations
Manager will receive an annual tool allowance of $350.00. 
12. Article XXXIII —Duration: 
The provisions of this Agreement will be effective July 1, 2016 and remain in full force and effect
through June 30, 2019. 
Page 36
In witness whereof, the Town of Framingham and the Framingham Public Works Supervisors, 
Local 1116 have agreed to these terms on the  day of  , 2017. 
Town of Framingham Framingham Public Works Supervisors, 
LIUNA, Local 1116
