AGREEMENT
between the
Town of Framingham
and the
Massachusetts Laborers’ District Council 
on behalf of
FRAMINGHAM PARKS DEPARTMENT
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES LOCAL UNION 1156
of the
LABORERS’ INTERNATIONAL UNION OF NORTH AMERICA, AFL-CIO
JULY 1, 2016 - JUNE 30, 2019
Page 2
Page 3
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PAGE
 AGREEMENT .............................................................................................................................. 4
 PREAMBLE .................................................................................................................................. 4
 DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES ........................................................................................... 4
 RECOGNITION ........................................................................................................................... 4
 MEMBERSHIP IN THE UNION................................................................................................ 5
 MANAGEMENT RIGHTS .......................................................................................................... 5
 NO STRIKE OR LOCK OUT ..................................................................................................... 6
 DUES AND FEES DEDUCTIONS AND/OR PAYMENTS ..................................................... 6
 TEMPORARY POSITION, TEMPORARY APPOINTMENT, ............................................. 7
 BULLETINING AND FILLING POSITIONS .......................................................................... 8
 TRANSFERS ............................................................................................................................... 10 
 HOLIDAYS ................................................................................................................................. 10
 CLOTHING................................................................................................................................. 11
 VACATIONS............................................................................................................................... 11 
 GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION ....................................................................................... 12 
 WORK WEEK, WORK DAY, AND WORK CONDITIONS ................................................ 14 
 WAGES ........................................................................................................................................ 15 
 OVERTIME ................................................................................................................................ 15 
 TRAVEL ALLOWANCE .......................................................................................................... 17 
 JURY DUTY................................................................................................................................ 17 
 MILITARY LEAVE ................................................................................................................... 17 
 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ........................................................................................................ 17 
 PAID SICK LEAVE ................................................................................................................... 18 
 LEAVE OF ABSENCE .............................................................................................................. 20 
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS ............................................................................................. 20
 MISCELLANEOUS ................................................................................................................... 21 
 LICENSING AND TRAINING CERTIFICATIONS ............................................................. 21 
 UNION ACTIVITIES ................................................................................................................. 22 
 PERSONAL DAY ....................................................................................................................... 23 
 WAIVER ...................................................................................................................................... 23 
 SICK LEAVE BANK ................................................................................................................. 23
 SICK LEAVE BUYBACK ......................................................................................................... 23 
 LONGEVITY .............................................................................................................................. 24
 TRAINING .................................................................................................................................. 25 
 DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES ............................................................................................. 25 
 DURATION ................................................................................................................................. 27 
Page 4
AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered this day of  , 20___ by and between the 
Town of Framingham, Massachusetts, hereinafter called the "Town", and the Massachusetts Laborer's District
Council in behalf of Local Union No. 1156, Massachusetts Laborers' International Union of North America, AFL-
CIO, hereinafter called the "Union". 
ARTICLE I
PREAMBLE
Delivery of municipal services in the most efficient, effective, and courteous manner is of paramount
importance to the Town, and the Union. Such achievement is recognized to be a mutual obligation of both parties
within their respective roles and responsibilities. 
This Agreement is entered into between the Town and the duly authorized collective bargaining
representative of its employees within the units hereinafter described to provide, insofar as possible, for the
continuous employment of labor and to bring about stable conditions of employment, and to establish necessary
procedures for the amicable adjustment of all disputes and grievances which may arise between the Town and its
employees. The term "employee" when used in this Agreement shall mean those employees of the Town within the
units hereinafter described. 
In the event that contract language interpretations differ between management and the Union in subsequent
sections of this contract, the spirit of this paragraph shall be applied in the interpretation of the language. 
ARTICLE II 
DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 
There shall be no discrimination against any employee by reason of race, national origin, color, ancestry, 
religion, handicap, age as provided by law, sex, or union affiliation. The Town will employ and use all means of
safety for the protection of the employees in compliance with safety regulations which are in accordance with the
law. 
ARTICLE III
RECOGNITION
In accordance with the certification of the Labor Relations Commission in Case MCR 94 dated July 25, 1966
and the amendment, Case No. CAS-95 dated July 19, 1972, and the amendment to the bargaining unit as agreed upon
by the parties and submitted to the Labor Relations Commission June 1974, the Town recognizes the Union as the
sole and exclusive bargaining representative for all employees in the bargaining unit as defined in Section 1, below: 
4
Page 5
Section 1: 
The bargaining unit shall be comprised of all employees in the Park Maintenance Department, Arena Night
Supervisor, and the Parks Maintenance Mechanic; but excluding all office clerical employees, the Construction
Supervisor, The Director of Parks and Recreation, the Superintendent of Recreation and the Superintendent of Park
Maintenance. Park Maintenance and Park and Recreation Construction, Supervisor Loring Arena Director and
Recreation Program Supervisor, Facilities Manager, and Activities Supervisor will perform no unit work except in
emergencies. 
Section 2: 
Temporary and seasonal workers will be excluded from the bargaining unit. 
ARTICLE IV
MEMBERSHIP IN THE UNION
Section 1: 
The Town will advise all new permanent employees at the time of their employment that the Union is their
bargaining representative and will notify the Union of each new permanent employee in their bargaining unit. 
Section 2: 
The Town and the Union recognize the right of any employee to become or not to become a member of the
Union and will not discourage, discriminate, or in any other way interfere with the employee in the exercise of these
rights. 
ARTICLE V
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
The listing of the following specific rights of management in this Article is not intended to be a waiver of
any of the rights of the Town not listed herein. Such inherent management rights shall remain with the Town except
as they may be shared with the Union by specific provisions of this Agreement. 
(a) Among the Management Rights vested in the Town are the right in accordance with applicable law to
hire, promote, transfer, and such other rights as are granted by law. The Town may also suspend, discipline, or
discharge any permanent employee but only for just cause. 
(b) The Town shall have the freedom of action to determine the methods, the means and the personnel for
all operations. To determine methods and means of operations and administration; to control the budget; and to
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations. The Town must take whatever action is necessary to carry out its
work in emergency situations. The Town shall select and determine the number and types of employees required, 
and shall assign work to such employees in accordance with requirements determined by the Town. 
5
Page 6
ARTICLE VI 
NO STRIKE OR LOCK OUT
Section 1. 
No employee shall engage in, induce, or encourage any strike, work stoppage, slowdown or withholding of
services by himself or any other employees. 
Section 2. 
The Town agrees that there shall be no lock out of employees.
ARTICLE VII 
DUES AND FEES DEDUCTIONS AND/OR PAYMENTS
Section 1:  AGENCY FEES. 
It shall be a condition of employment during the life of this Agreement as specified herein, that on or after
the 30th day following the beginning of permanent employment or the date of this Agreement whichever is later, an
agency service fee shall be paid to the Union. The said fee shall be due only as follows: 
(a)  Permanent employees in the bargaining unit as of the date of the signing of the 1971 Agreement and
who were not members of the Union on that date, are specifically exempted from the requirement to contribute the
agency fee. 
(b)  Permanent employees who were Union members as of the date of the signing of the 1971 Agreement
but who have since terminated or may in the future terminate their Union membership and continue in the employ of
the Town in the Bargaining Unit (as defined in Article III) will be required to pay to the Union directly or authorize
deduction of one hundred (100%) percent of the monthly union dues. 
(c)  All permanent employees hired or transferred into the bargaining unit (as defined in Article III) after
the signing of this Agreement who elect not to become members of the Union will be required to pay the Union
directly or authorize payroll deduction of one hundred percent (100%) of the monthly union dues. 
(d)  Any employee who is required to pay or authorize payroll deductions for an agency fee and who fails
to do so, will be discharged at the request of the Union, which request shall be in writing, to the appropriate elected
Department Head, and shall state the reasons therefore. 
Section 2:  UNION DUES OR AGENCY FEES DEDUCTIONS. 
The Town agrees to deduct the Union dues or agency fees from the earnings of any employee who has
executed the designated authorization form. Such deductions shall be in the amount specified on the authorization
form and deducted from the pay check weekly. Withheld amounts will be forwarded to the designated Union office
as soon as practical following the actual withholding, together with a record of the amount and the names of those
for whom deductions have been made. 
Section 3:  DEDUCTIONS FOR UNION PENSION. 
6
Page 7
The Town agrees to deduct from the employee's earnings the amount as shown on the designated
authorization form for the Union Pension Program. 
The withheld deductions will be forwarded to the designated Union office as soon as practical following the
actual withholding, together with a record of the amount and the names of those for whom deductions have been
made. 
The two employees transferred from the bargaining unit to the non-bargaining group effective March 14, 
2005 who had participated in the LIUNA Pension long term and are identified in the MOA, shall have the right to
remain in the LIUNA program at the current contract contribution rate provided by the Town. This shall remain in
effect until such time as the employee leaves the position to which they have been transferred. 
Section 4: 
The Union shall indemnify and save the Town harmless against all claims, demands, suits, or other forms of
liability, which may arise by reason of any action taken pursuant to this Article VII. 
ARTICLE VIII 
TEMPORARY POSITION, TEMPORARY APPOINTMENT, 
PROBATIONARY PERIOD AND SENIORITY
Section 1:  TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE. 
An employee shall be considered temporary if he is hired on a temporary basis and to fill a temporary position, 
full-time or part-time. 
a)  A person may be hired on a temporary basis for a period of no longer than six (6) months and one
(1) day. 
b)  Any employee hired on a temporary basis or hired to fill a temporary position with ninety (90) days
continuous service who is laid off for less than sixty (60) days and is rehired, shall be considered to have been in the
continuous employment of the Town during such period of layoff. The Union shall be notified of the start and finish
date. 
Section 2:  PROBATIONARY PERIOD. 
Every employee whether hired on a temporary or permanent basis shall be on a probationary period during
the first six (6) months of his employment. Service on a temporary basis shall be counted as service in a probationary
status. When an employee is promoted into a new position, he shall serve a six (6) month probationary period during
which time his ability to perform shall be evaluated. If the parties agree, this probationary period may be extended
for an additional six (6) month period. If, after the six (6) or twelve (12) month probationary period, the employee is
found to be unsatisfactory by the Director or his designee, the employee may be returned to his previous position and
pay grade; for promotional situations, the employee may be returned to his previous position and pay grade, new
hires will be terminated from position. 
7
Page 8
Section 3:  SENIORITY. 
a)  Seniority is defined as the length of continuous employment in any permanent position covered by
this Agreement. An employee shall not acquire seniority during his probationary period of six (6) months but
thereafter his seniority will date from the first working date after his initial employment. Departmental seniority for
all Parks Division employees begins on their most recent start of service date with the Department. Total seniority
time with the Town of Framingham will not be credited towards departmental seniority. 
b)  Seniority list containing the name, date of seniority, classification and location of employees will be
made available to the Union in January of each year after written request is made by Union Steward. Protests
regarding seniority must be made within thirty (30) days after the lists are posted. No change shall be made in the
seniority date established for an employee which has heretofore appeared or hereafter appears on two (2) consecutive
annual lists without protest by the employee. In the case of employees who started work on the same day, their
relative positions shall be determined by a drawing. 
Section 4:  REDUCTION IN FORCE. 
In the event a reduction in force is required, the most junior employee in the division affected shall be subject
to layoff, provided that the more senior employee shall be qualified to do the job. The Town shall give not less than
two (2) weeks' notice of any layoff, unless the cause of layoff is such as to make notice impossible. 
Section 5:  RECALLS. 
For a period of two (2) years from date of lay-off, employees shall have the right to be recalled to their former
positions in accordance with their seniority within their classifications. In the event a position becomes vacant and
there are no employees with recall rights to said position, then other employees who are laid off and are qualified to
do the job shall in the order of their seniority be given preference to fill said position before any new employees are
hired. An employee who is on lay-off status and who fails to report for work within fourteen (14) days after the
notice of recall shall be considered terminated unless an extension is granted by the appropriate Department Head. 
ARTICLE IX 
BULLETINING AND FILLING POSITIONS
Section 1: 
Vacancies in regularly assigned positions or newly created positions in that Division or Department that will
be of more than thirty (30) days duration shall be bulletined for five (5) working days on all regular bulletin boards
within twenty (20) working days after such vacancies occur, or such new positions are established. The daily hours
and work week of the vacant position will be included in the posted bulletin. 
Section 2: 
Unit employees desiring such positions shall, within five (5) working days after bulletin is posted, apply in
writing to the appropriate Division Head on forms provided by the Department. 
8
Page 9
Section 3: 
Appointments to such positions shall first be made from within the Division or Department where the vacancy
exists and shall be made on the basis of qualification and seniority within the Division of the Department. If no
employee in said Division or Department is qualified, the appointment shall be made from the bidders in other
Divisions or Departments on the same basis. If no qualified employee bids for an opening, the position may be filled
from the outside. The name of the appointee shall be bulletined on all regular bulletin boards. Copies of this bulletin
shall be furnished to the Shop Steward. At least monthly, the Human Resources Department will publish a report
listing all currently unfilled positions. 
The Town of Framingham will make its best effort to promote the most qualified person to all its positions. 
When there are qualified candidates for promotion who are relatively equal in qualifications, the most senior
employee will be promoted. The decision of the Division Head shall be final. 
The following factors will be considered in determining the best qualified candidates for promotion: 
1.)  A “yes” or “no” determination on whether the candidate meets the minimum requirements
of the position relative to the mutually agreed upon job descriptions at the time of posting. 
2.)  The actual amount of experience in duties performed at industry standards quality in duties
listed under MAJOR DUTIES in the job description. 
3.)  The ability to demonstrate the performance of functions in the MAJOR DUTIES in the job
description. The Union may have one observer to insure equality of tests. 
4.)  Level of education and specialized education and training directly related to the MAJOR
DUTIES listed in the job description. 
5.)  The relative differences in the last two Performance Evaluations. 
6.)  Unscheduled emergency work availability. 
7.)  Reported accident history on the job. 
8.)  If CDL required for position, the moving violation record on or off the job pursuant to
procedures spelled out in section 383.31 Subpart C and section 383.33
Section 4: 
Any employee changing to a different job classification shall serve a probationary period of six (6) months. 
This period is to allow the Town time to judge the ability, competency, fitness and other qualifications of the
employee to meet the requirements of the new position. At any time during the probationary period the Town has
the right to return the employee to his/her previous position at the rate of the employee’s previous wage compensation. 
There shall be a thirty day (30) trial period during which an employee can decide whether he/she shall keep the new
appointment or revert back to his/her former position. If he/she chooses to revert back to his/her former position, 
he/she shall immediately be returned to such position and the new position shall be offered to the next qualified
applicant in line pursuant to this article. If the parties agree, the probationary period may be extended for an additional
9
Page 10
six (6) month period. Any employee returning to their previous position under the provisions of this section shall
retain their department seniority previously held. 
ARTICLE X
TRANSFERS
Section 1: 
No employee shall be required to accept a permanent transfer. 
Section 2: 
Employees temporarily transferred to a higher rated job for eight (8) hours or more shall receive the lowest
rate of the higher rated job or his own rate, whichever is higher, for all hours worked during such transfer. 
Section 3: 
The Town agrees to provide a training program for the operation of heavy equipment. The Town agrees to
provide training for CDL and MA Hoisting license once a year.  An employee being trained to operate equipment
which carries a higher pay grade will be paid his regular rate of pay while working as a trainee with a qualified
operator. This period of time shall not exceed forty-five (45) days, after which he will be paid at the grade level for
the job, unless an extension of that time is agreed upon by both parties. 
Section 1: 
ARTICLE XI 
HOLIDAYS
Permanent employees shall be granted the following holidays with pay whenever the holiday falls on a
regular work day: 
New Year's Day 
Martin Luther King Day
Washington’s Birthday 
Patriot's Day 
Memorial Day 
Independence Day 
Labor Day
Columbus Day 
Veteran's Day/or Day after Thanksgiving
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Day before Christmas
Any other holiday declared by the President, Congress, Governor or General Court as a paid holiday. 
Section 2: 
When either of these holidays falls on Sunday, that holiday will be recognized and observed on Monday
following that Sunday. When one of these days falls on Saturday, the preceding Friday will be observed as the holiday. 
Section 3: 
10
Page 11
Each employee shall be entitled to have the working day before Christmas off with pay; and if he works on
said day, he will be paid time and one-half the regular rate of pay in addition to a day’s pay. 
Section 4: 
An employee who works on a holiday will be paid at time and one-half (1½) his regular rate in addition to
his holiday pay, except that when an employee is assigned to perform emergency work such as snow and ice removal, 
or repair of water and sewer breaks, time worked between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on a holiday shall
be paid at two (2) times the employee's regular rate of pay in addition to the holiday pay. However, two (2) times the
regular rate of pay shall not apply to scheduled shift work. 
Section 5: 
Employees shall be paid double time for all hours actually worked on Christmas Day and Thanksgiving Day. 
Section 6: 
Paid holidays shall be considered as time worked. 
Section 7: 
In order to be eligible for holiday pay, a permanent employee must have worked the last regularly scheduled
work day before and the first regularly scheduled work day following the holiday unless excused by the Department
Head. 
Section 8: 
All men with rotation day off with holiday falling on scheduled day off will receive a day off with pay within
thirty (30) days. 
ARTICLE XII 
CLOTHING
All bargaining unit members shall receive a “one time” increase of 2% to the FY 15 salary schedule to
purchase identifiable work clothing from the central supply source in lieu of the previous annual clothing allowance
of $600.00. It shall be the responsibility of the employee to purchase his/her own work clothing with this increase to
the base pay and to be properly attired at all times for all work conditions including special events, and as reasonable
determined by management. Rain gear or specialized clothing for specialized clothing for special events which the
employee is required to return to the Town shall not be considered the responsibility of the employee. 
ARTICLE XIII
VACATIONS
Vacation leave shall be determined in accordance with the Personnel By-Law of the Town except that three
(3) weeks’ vacation with pay shall be granted at the completion of five (5) years of service and four (4) weeks’
vacation with pay at the completion of ten (10) years of service. Vacation leave of five (5) weeks with pay shall be
granted to any employee who has been employed by the Town for twenty (20) years and over. 
11
Page 12
When requests for a full week vacation conflict with requests for less than a full week vacation and the
operational needs of the Department preclude the granting of both those requests in the same week, then requests for
a full week will take preference over requests for a lesser period. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, 
in an emergency situation, the appropriate department head may grant an employee permission to use vacation time
in single days subject to the manpower needs of the department and other administrative controls.
Individuals who, because of job-related or other illness or disability, do not take all of their vacation leave
may request the right to carry over unused vacation leave from one calendar year to the next. Any such request
must be submitted in writing to the appropriate Department Head prior to December 31st of the calendar year in
question. In the event that any such request is not approved by the Department Head, the requesting employee will
be credited with extra sick leave equal to the number of unused vacation leave days that were not carried over to the
next year. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, an employee shall be entitled to carry over no more than
one week of earned vacation into the following year. The notice of the employee's intention to do so, must be in
writing and must be filed with the department head on or before December 1 of the year in which the vacation was
earned. The actual time for taking the deferred vacation week is subject to the approval of the Department Head. 
ARTICLE XIV
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION
Section 1:  DEFINITIONS. 
"Grievance" -- A dispute between an employee and the Town or between the Employees' Collective
Bargaining Representative (ECBR) and the Town as to any of the following: 
a)  The meaning, interpretation, or application of the collective bargaining agreement. 
Section 2:  RIGHT TO INITIATE AND PROSECUTE 
GRIEVANCE. 
a)  Nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted to require the ECBR to prosecute an
employee's grievance if it considers it to be invalid or without merit. 
  If at any step of the grievance procedure the aggrieved employee decides to accept the decision rendered, he may
do so. However, the ECBR shall have the right to pursue the matter through the remaining steps. 
  Employees with less than six months of service may not use the grievance and arbitration procedures. 
Section 3:  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE. 
The Town and the Union acknowledge that it is usually most desirable for an employee and the employee’s
supervisors to resolve problems through free and informal communication. If however, the informal process fails to
satisfy the employee or the Union, a grievance may be processed. 
12
Page 13
Once the grievance is processed, it is understood that full exploration of the pertinent facts is beneficial to
all. In efforts to fully explore all facts of a grievance and at all steps, the Division Director (i.e., the Director of Parks
& Recreation), the Human Resources Director, and the Town Manager may conduct informal hearings, conduct group
or individual interviews, review records, and perform needed research. All parties (management and Union members) 
shall fully cooperate in providing full disclosure of information and relative facts. 
STEP 1: 
The facts in dispute and the claim of the grieving party arising there from shall be presented in writing to the
Division Director within ten (10) working days after the occurrence of the events upon which the grievance is based
or when such occurrence was brought to the notice of the grieving party. The Grievance is first field with the Director
or Department Head. Response to the grievance will be made within ten (10) working days, stating what action is to
be taken in response to the grievance. A copy of the grievance and decision of this Step and all subsequent steps will
be filed with the Director of Human Resources. 
STEP 2: 
If the grievance is not disposed of at Step 1, it shall be submitted in writing by the grieving
party within five (5) working days after the response of the Division Director was given, or should have been given, 
to the Director of Human Resources. Response to the grievance will be made within five (5) working days, stating
what action is to be taken in response to the grievance. 
STEP 3: 
If the grievance is not disposed of at Step 2, it shall be submitted in writing by the grieving
party within five (5) working days following receipt of response or date on which response was due by the Director
of Human Resources to the Town Manager. The Town Manager may decide to hold an informal hearing and/or
conference at which time the grieving party shall be allowed to present evidence in support of his grievance. Such a
hearing shall be held by the Town Manager within ten (10) days of the presentation of the grievance to it. The Town
Manager shall issue a decision stating the action to be taken by it or its reasons, therefore, within ten (10) working
days next following the close of the hearing. 
If the grievance is not settled at Step 3 or if the Town Manager does not respond within the
time limits set in Step 3, then within thirty (30) working days after the expiration of the time limits set out in Step 3, 
the grievance may be submitted to arbitration with the American Arbitration Association in accordance with the
Voluntary Labor Arbitration Rules of that Association, or to the Division of Labor Relations. 
The decision of the Arbitrator shall be final and binding on both parties. The Arbitrator shall
not have the power to amend, add to, or alter the provisions of the Agreement, but shall, within a reasonable time of
his appointment, render a decision based on the evidence submitted by the parties, which decision shall be consistent
with the provisions of this Agreement. Expenses, including required travel and other expenses of the Arbitrator, shall
be borne equally by the parties. 
13
Page 14
Section 4:  DILIGENT HANDLING OF GRIEVANCE. 
a)  To encourage their prompt and amicable handling, grievances which are not decided within
the time period specified at Steps 1 and 2 shall be considered to have been denied and may be advanced to Step 3. 
  If both parties agree, grievances may be instituted at a step other than Step 1. The time limitations provided for
in the steps outlined above shall apply. 
  Time extensions beyond those stipulated above may be arrived at by mutual agreement. 
Section 5:  MISCELLANEOUS. 
a)  All grievances shall be presented by the grieving party in written form to indicate the
foreman and department of the grieving party, the date of the events complained of, a statement detailing the events
which cause the grievance, and the remedy sought by the grieving party. All grievances must set forth the specific
provision of the contract, by Article and Section, claimed to be violated. Copies of all written grievances and the
decisions relating to them shall be filed promptly with the Director of Human Resources. 
Section 1: 
ARTICLE XV
WORK WEEK, WORK DAY, AND WORK CONDITIONS 
The usual regular work day for employees of the Parks and Recreation Department shall at 7:00 A.M. and
end at 3:15 P.M. A time period of one-half (1/2) hour taken approximately in the middle of the work day at the
work day shall be the lunch break. This shall be unpaid time. Employees will receive eight (8) hours pay for the
day. There will be no afternoon work stoppage. If any portions of this section are inconsistent with State or
Federal Labor Laws, this section shall not apply. The previously mentioned work hours will be on a trial basis for a
period of one (1) year. If both parties are in agreement, the work hours shall remain for the duration of the contract. 
Forty (40) hours shall constitute a week’s work. The usual regular work week shall be Monday through
Friday. However, it is understood that some shifts may work at other times. 
Employees shall receive one (1) break of fifteen (15) minutes duration for each four (4) hour period of
work. 
Section 2: 
There will be no changes in wages, hours and working conditions without prior consultation with the Union
and providing the proposed changes are not in conflict with any provision of this Agreement. 
Section 3: 
It is agreed that if there are additional regular second and third shifts established, employees assigned to work
these shifts on a regular basis shall be paid the same premium now paid to the existing second and third shifts. 
Section 4: 
A Police Officer shall be on duty on all jobs where the safety of the employees requires the presence of a
Police Officer. A determination on this issue will be made by the Superintendent or his designee. The Town agrees
14
Page 15
to use good faith and reasonable efforts to secure the services of a Police Officer if it is determined that one is
necessary. If, after such efforts, the Town is unable to secure a Police Officer, the Town shall use other suitable
safety precautions at the work site. 
Section 5: 
The Union and its members, unless he/she is physically incapacitated, both collectively and individually, do
agree to guarantee that any emergency manpower needs of the Town and/or individual departments shall be met as
determined by management provided all emergencies are handled within the provisions of this Agreement. 
Section 6: 
During periods of extreme weather conditions, the Town will make all reasonable efforts to accommodate its
employees’ health and well-being. 
ARTICLE XVI
WAGES
Effective July 1, 2016 all employees covered by this Agreement shall be paid in accordance with the salary
schedule and license and certification schedule attached hereto and made a part hereof. When an employee is
promoted from one grade to another, he will be slotted into the new grade at a step at least equal to one step above
his step prior to advancement. If the employee is at step 6, he will receive an increase at least equal to the
difference between step 5 and step 6 at his grade prior to his promotion. 
a. Adjustment to base wage: 
July 1, 2016 – 0% 
July 1, 2017 – 1% 
July 1, 2018 – 1% 
b. Salary Schedule: New steps: Schedule B
Working Supervisors shall receive the following amounts in addition to their regular wages: 
Effective July 1, 2010: $1000.00 annually
This stipend will be paid in two (2) equal installments, one (1) during the third pay period in July and one (1) 
during the first pay period in December. 
All employees scheduled to work Tuesday through Saturday shall receive a 9% differential for
scheduled work performed on Saturdays. 
Section 1: 
ARTICLE XVII 
OVERTIME
15
Page 16
All time worked over forty (40) hours in any week or after eight (8) hours in any one (1) day shall
be paid for at the rate of time and a half (1½).  For the purpose of computing the forty (40) hours, time lost because
of paid sick time and vacation time shall be considered as time worked. 
Compensatory time provides employees with paid time off rather than the traditional paid overtime
policy. Compensatory time allows employees to use “Compensatory Time” with Department Head approval. The
parties recognize that it is the responsibility of the Town to insure that adequate staffing exists to fulfill all job
requirements. The accrual rate of compensatory time shall be the same as that used for the accrual of overtime
payments with the difference to be that the hourly rate payment for overtime would be converted to compensatory
time due the employee. The option to apply compensatory time in place of overtime payment is solely the
employee’s. There will be a maximum accrual of forty (40) hours. 
All overtime, except for call-outs (also known as “call-ins” or “callbacks”), must be approved in
advance by a supervisor. 
Section 2: 
Emergency work performed such as snow and ice removal, repair of water and sewer breaks, between
11:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. shall be paid at two (2) times the regular rate of pay. However, two (2) times the regular
rate of pay shall not apply to shift work scheduled at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance. 
There shall be no pyramiding of overtime. 
Section 3: 
Night and Saturday calls in all departments shall be rotated as evenly as is reasonably possible. 
Section 4: 
Call list for extra work and overtime work in each division shall be posted in an area where any or all
employees have access to same. 
Section 5:
Employees will not be required to report in on a call in or a call back unless they are guaranteed a minimum
of three (3) hours work or three (3) hours pay at time and one-half (1½).
Section 6:
It is understood that the nature of the work requires that each employee participate in the “on-call” program. 
Section 7:
Storm watch stipend: Effective November 1, 2013, the four (4) employees who are designated to be on-call
for the Department of Public Works to participate in snow plowing operations, will receive a $250 stipend annually
for snow plowing duties in recognition of limitations of employees activities while on call. 
Section 8:
The Parks Department will make every effort to keep overtime voluntary for qualified employees. The Union
agrees and has exclusive rights to provide the requested overtime labor. Any mandatory overtime will start with the
16
Page 17
least senior, qualified, employee according to the Divisional seniority list. It is the Union’s responsibility to track
seniority according to the rules of this contract and provide to the Town the labor needed to comply with this section. 
Qualified labor shall be determined by management and in accordance with other provisions of this contract. 
Management shall assign employees at its discretion should the Union fail to comply with the provisions of this
section. 
Section 1: 
ARTICLE XVIII
TRAVEL ALLOWANCE
a.  Town vehicles shall be used when available. 
b.  Town vehicles shall only be used in compliance with the Town of Framingham Policy on
Management of Vehicles for Employment-Related Purposes. 
Section 2: 
If use of a private automobile is authorized by the appropriate elected Department Head, a travel
allowance of equal to the rate approved from time to time by the Internal Revenue Service will be paid to the employee
for use of the automobile. 
ARTICLE XIX 
JURY DUTY
Any employee called for jury duty will receive the difference between his regular pay and his payment for
jury service. Employee must submit documentation as provided by the court of demand for jury duty and
completion of such. 
ARTICLE XX 
MILITARY LEAVE
Members of the bargaining unit will be covered by the Town of Framingham Policy on Military Leave. 
Section 1: 
ARTICLE XXI 
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE 
An employee shall receive three (3) consecutive work days leave without loss of pay for a death in the
immediate family. The immediate family as used herein shall consist of his spouse and the mother, father, sister, 
brother, child,ents grandchild, and grandparents of the employee or his spouse. 
17
Page 18
. All bereavement leave must be taken within fifteen (15) days of the date of death or within a reasonable extension
to be determined by the Department Head. Effective July 1, 1998, “immediate family” shall include the step-children
and step-parents of an employee. 
Section 2: 
An employee shall receive one (1) day leave without loss of pay to attend the funeral of relatives living in
his household. 
Section 3: 
An employee shall receive one (1) day leave without loss of pay to attend the funeral of either the employee's
or the employee's spouse’s uncles and aunts, and nieces and nephews. 
Section 4: 
The leave in Sections 1, 2, and 3 shall not be deducted from the employee's sick leave. 
Section 5: 
Management may request and the employee shall provide proof of death with regard to any leave taken under
the provisions of this Article. 
Section 1: 
ARTICLE XXII 
PAID SICK LEAVE 
Sick leave shall accrue at the rate of one and one quarter (1 ¼) days per month and shall be accumulative
without limit except as provided below. A doctor's certificate may be required after three (3) consecutive days out
sick or five (5) or more days per year. 
a. The town may require employees to explain in writing each absence due to illness in a calendar year in
excess of five (5) days in the aggregate that the employee wishes charged to paid sick leave. Available sick leave
shall not be granted until such written explanation, when required, has been received by the Department Head. 
Where the Town has reasonable basis to question the legitimacy of an employee’s use of sick leave, it may require
such employee to be examined by the Town’s physician or other medical practitioner to investigate any absences
due to illness exceed five (5) days in the aggregate in any calendar year. 
Employees are not permitted to call in sick in advance for multiple sick days. The only exception will be a doctor’s
certificate of illness attesting to the need of an employee to be on sick leave for more than one day. 
b.  Sick leave incentive- 
  No sick leave usage – town will buy back three (3) days from the employee’s sick leave bank to be
paid on the first pay period of January. If the employee uses one (1) day of sick leave, the Town
will buy two (2) days from the employee’s sick leave bank to be paid on the first pay period of
January. 
18
Page 19
  If the employees uses two (2) days of sick leave usage the town will buy one (1) day of sick leave
from the employee’s bank to be paid on the first pay period of January. 
  Employees who use no sick leave for three consecutive years, in the forth year the Town will increase
buy back to five (5) days from the employee’s sick leave bank. The amount of such buyback shall
remain at five (5) until the employee uses sick leave. Once sick leave is used the employee will revert
back to the first three provisions. 
OR
  An employee who uses no sick leave may have the option of adding one personal day to their benefit
leave time. 
  The year will run from January 1 to December 31. 
  The Union steward shall bring eligible employees to Management’s attention in a reasonable time
frame. 
  An employee who receives Workers Compensation benefits he/she shall accrue contractual benefits
only for the first three (3) months only until he/she returns to active employment. 
Section 2: 
Sick leave may be used for the care of the employee's spouse or children, but after three (3) days a doctor's
certificate may be required. 
Section 3: 
The Union agrees to use its best efforts to assure that sick leave will be used for the purpose for which granted. 
Any employee who fraudulently reports an illness or injury to secure the benefit of sick leave with pay shall be
subjected to disciplinary measures up to and including discharge. 
Section 4: 
Except for employees hired after July 1, 1987, the Town will pay an injured employee the difference between
workers’ compensation payments and the employee's normal week's pay for up to ninety (90) calendar days. For
employees hired after July 1, 1987, the Town shall be required to pay the difference for up to sixty (60) calendar
days. The provisions of this Section shall be applicable only after an employee has been out of work because of a
workmen's compensation injury for fifteen (15) consecutive work days. 
Section 5: 
Accrued personal sick leave may be used to supplement workmen's compensation payments. 
Section 6: 
An employee who uses no sick leave in any contract year shall accrue five (5) extra sick leave days for that
contract year (or twenty (20) sick leave days in all for that contract period) 
Section 7: 
19
Page 20
An employee who retires, terminates or otherwise leaves the employ of the Town of Framingham and who
has accrued sick days at the time of said severance from employment, may donate such accrued sick leave days to
the Sick Leave Bank up to a maximum of one (1) sick leave day for each year of the employee's service with the
Town. 
Section 1: 
ARTICLE XXIII 
LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
Leaves of absence for any purpose are subject to approval by the Division Director (i.e., the Director of Parks
and Recreation) and the Human Resources Director. 
Requests for leave of absence shall be made in writing to the appropriate elected Department Head. 
Such requests for leaves of absence, when recommended by the appropriate elected Department
Head, will be referred to the Human Resources Director along with that recommendation. 
The reply to the employee's request for leave will be made in writing. Such leaves of absence granted
will be without pay. 
Section 2: 
Seniority and other benefits will not accrue during the period of the leave of absence. 
Section 3: 
The applicant and the Union shall have an opportunity to appear before the appropriate Department Head
and/or the Human Resources Director to present case for application of leave. 
Section 4: 
An employee who is on leave of absence status and who fails to report for work on the first working day
following completion for the leave period shall be considered terminated from employment unless an extension was
requested in writing, recommended by the appropriate Department Head and approved by the Human Resources
Director. 
The applicant and the Union shall be given an opportunity to present the case for extension to the appropriate
elected Department Head and/or the Human Resources Director. 
ARTICLE XXIV 
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
All employees must reside in close enough proximity to meet the emergency manpower needs of their 
respective departments as determined by management. 
ARTICLE XXV 
20
Page 21
Section 1: 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Workmen's Compensation coverage, pension, and wash-up time shall remain as at present. Life and Medical
insurance must be bargained through the coalition bargaining process specified in MGL Chapter 32B, Section 19. In
the absence of Section 19, the Union reserves the right to bargain this insurance. 
Section 2: 
In the interest of safety of employees and the public, and in accordance with the law, where special licenses
to operate motor equipment is required, an employee without such license will not be required in any case to operate
such equipment. The Town and Bargaining Unit members shall be required to abide by the rules of the Safety
Committee. 
Section 3: 
The Town requires its mechanicsto provide their own basic tools necessary to perform their duties. The
Town agrees to replace any such tool which is broken on the job. Effective July 1, 2016, each mechanic shall be
reimbursed up to three hundred ($300.00) dollars per year for tools which he has purchased and which are necessary
to perform his duties. Purchases must be evidenced by paid receipts, and the tools must be stored at the Town
facilities. 
Section 4: 
The Town assumes the responsibility of having available for the use of its mechanics those metric tools
necessary to perform their duties. 
Section 5: 
Each permanent Public Safety Mechanic will receive a public safety apparatus stipend of $500 per year and
shall be payable in the first pay period of December. 
Section 6: 
The Town agrees to deduct from the employee’s earnings the amount shown on the designated authorization
form for the Union Pension Program. 
Effective January 1, 2011, the Town agrees its contribution to the LIUNA Pension Fund shall be $.21 per
hour. 
ARTICLE XXVI
LICENSING AND TRAINING CERTIFICATIONS
The town hereby agrees to provide annual incentives for Licensing and Training Certifications by offering 
stipends not to exceed $3,000 per year to employees who acquire and maintain the following valid licenses and
certifications in accordance with the “Reimbursement for Licensing and Training Certifications – Schedule A”. The
Town shall compensate the employee for the cost of the respective exam(s) only upon the successful completion of
said exam and the receipt of the certificate or license. The employee is responsible for the license application and
21
Page 22
renewal process and the costs associated therewith. The Town shall reimburse the employee for the renewal costs of
said licenses and certifications upon presentation of a valid receipt. If the employee fails to renew, or to maintain, a
current license or certificate, for which the Town had previously compensated the employee, the Town shall not again
compensate the employee for the re-testing fees. The licenses and certifications that are established as a progressive
process shall not be combined for purposes of reimbursement. The provision of compensation under this clause does
not alter the minimum requirements for a certification or license within a specific position description. 
The employee is responsible for reporting the current status and the renewal dates of all licenses and
certificates to the Division Head on July 1st of each year. The employee shall complete a form provided by the
Department in which the employee may request reimbursement and compensation. If the employee is not in
possession of the valid license or certification as of the first day in the fiscal year of the application, the stipend
shall be calculated from the next full quarter of the fiscal year in which the license or certification was acquired. 
The request for license and certification stipends must be generally relevant to the function of the Department in
which the employee is working. The applicability and number of these licenses and certificates shall be at the
discretion of the respective Division Director. 
All employees whose current position requires them to have a CDL will possess a CDL within six (6) 
months of employment in that position. The current list of non-CDL required positions includes the following: 
Parks Dept – Motor Equipment Operator I
Parks Dept. – Arena Night Supervisorr
The Union steward shal provide for review by the Director or his designee, on appropriate Town
forms, all requested stipend payments with photo copies attached. 
Section 1: 
ARTICLE XXVII 
UNION ACTIVITIES 
The Town will provide a bulletin board for the use of the Union for official notices and other non-
controversial matters. 
Section 2: 
A steward shall be appointed by the Union. The name of the steward and any alternate shall be given to the
Department Head of the Parks and Recreation Department upon ratification of this Agreement by the parties. Any
change in these positions shall be promptly reported.The steward shall be responsible to see to it that the provisions
of this Agreement are adhered to by the Town and the employees. Insofar as the work requirements of the Department
permit, Union officers and/or stewards will be excused from duty with pay, when required to help in the processing
and servicing of employees with grievances. Union officers and/or stewards shall give the employer reasonable
advance notice of their desire to conduct such Union business so that work schedules may be arranged accordingly. 
Two (2) employees may be absent from work at one time to conduct such Union businesswith prior approval of the
22
Page 23
employer. Additional employees may be absent from work at one time to conduct Union business,with prior approval
of the Department Head or his designee.Union business may be conducted on Town time with reasonable notice and
prior permission by the Department Head or his designee. 
Section 3: 
Night shift personnel shall be allowed to attend monthly union meetings subject to prior approval of the
Department or Division Head. Such personnel shall be required to use a sign-in sheet, shall be subject to recall to
duty, and shall not be entitled to overtime pay for attendance at such meetings. 
ARTICLE XXVIII 
PERSONAL DAY
There shall be sixteen (16) hours of personal time granted to employees each fiscal year. Newly hired full
time regular employees shall be granted personal leave according to the following schedule: 
First Day of Employment: 
July 1 – December 31 
January 1 – June 30 
Personal Days: 
2 days
1 day Personal time may be utilized in units of no
less than four (4) hours and cannot be carried forward to the next fiscal year. The use of personal time requires the
concurrence of the immediate supervisor. Employees shall provide preferably at least twenty-four (24) hours’ notice
in advance of the proposed utilization. Request for personal time shall be in writing on the form which has been
agreed to by the employer and the Union and shall be provided by the employer. The Town recognizes that the
circumstances may arise wherein it becomes impractical for the employee to give the preferred advance notice. In
such circumstances, the employee shall provide as much advance notice as possible by way of established
departmental protocols to his/her immediate supervisor and upon his/her return to work, will check in with the
supervisor to insure that their personal time has been properly accounted for. 
ARTICLE XXIX 
WAIVER
The Union and the Town agree that each had a right to bargain for any provision that they wished in this
contract and each expressly waives the right to reopen the contract for any further demands or proposals that could
have been prior to the effective date of this contract and that the present contract constitutes a complete agreement
on all matters and that if other proposals have been made, they have been withdrawn in consideration of this
Agreement. 
Section 1: 
ARTICLE XXX 
SICK LEAVE BANK 
23
Page 24
A sick leave bank for use by members of the bargaining unit covered by this Agreement who have exhausted
their own sick leave and who have serious illness shall be established. 
Section 2: 
Each new employee in the bargaining unit shall contribute two (2) of his sick days to the bank. 
Section 3: 
The number of days that can be drawn by an individual will be limited to sixty (60) sick leave bank days per
fiscal year. 
Section 4: 
The sick leave bank shall be administered by a sick leave bank committee consisting of six (6) members. 
Three (3) members shall be designated by the Employer to serve at its discretion and three (3) members shall be
designated by the Union to serve at its discretion. The sick leave bank committee shall determine the eligibility for
use of the bank and the amounts of leave to be granted. 
The following criteria shall be used by the committee in administering the bank and in determining eligibility
for sick leave withdrawals and the amount of said withdrawals: 
a) Adequate medical evidence of serious illness. 
b) Prior utilization of all eligible sick leave. 
Section 5: 
If, at anytime, the sick leave bank falls below one hundred (100) sick leave days, it shall be replenished by
the contribution of one (1) additional day of sick leave by each member of the unit staff covered by this Agreement. 
Such additional day will be deducted from the employee's annual fifteen (15) days of sick leave. 
ARTICLE XXXI
SICK LEAVE BUYBACK
Upon ordinary retirement or death, a bargaining unit member or his heirs shall be entitled to a buy-back of
his unused accumulated sick leave over one-hundred (100) days accumulation at the rate of one day for every five
days (e.g. if the employee had 120 days of unused accumulated sick leave, he would be entitled to a buy-back of four
(4) days. The maximum number of days which can be bought back is twenty (20) and the maximum value of such
buy-back is six thousand dollars ($6,000).  Employees shall provide a four (4) month notice if required by the Town
policy. For purposes of buy-back one day shall consist of one (1) day’s pay at the employee's prevailing base rate of
pay. 
ARTICLE XXXII 
LONGEVITY
Longevity pay shall be paid to all permanent employees covered by this Agreement, as follows: 
24
Page 25
10 Years
15 Years
20 Years
25 Years
30 Years 
Present: 
$200.00 per year
$250.00 per year
$300.00 per year
$350.00 per year
$400.00 per year 
July 1, 2011
$250.00 per year
$300.00 per year
$350.00 per year
$400.00 per year
$450.00 per year
ARTICLE XXXIII
TRAINING
Each eligible employee will receive a stipend of Four hundred dollars ($400.00) per year to attend and
participate in eight (8) hours of training, including safety training, per year. 
If requested by the town, the Massachusetts Laborer’s Council will provide an instructor and program for
this training. 
This stipend shall be effective for the calendar year commencing January 1, 1994, and shall be payable
each December thereafter. Effective July 1, 2016, with the addition of CPR and First Aide training, the stipend
shall be increased to six hundred dollars ($600) per year. 
The stipend shall not be considered an increase in base compensation, nor shall it be used in calculating any
other benefits hereunder. 
ARTICLE XXXIV
DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES
The Department Heads or appointing authority shall exercise full disciplinary authority consistent with
progressive discipline, as set forth in Section 24.1 of the Town’s Personnel Bylaw, and their responsibilities to
direct employees to perform the required work duties in order to achieve departmental goals and satisfactory
municipal service to the general public. 
All warnings, suspensions and discharges must be stated in writing and a copy given to the employee and
union. 
All disciplinary actions, including discharges, shall be applied in a fair manner and shall not be inconsistent
to the infraction for which disciplinary action is being applied. The following actions, though not inclusive, are
prohibited and may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination: 
  The use of profanity or objectionable/offensive language in the presence of any member of the public; 
  Use of profanity or objectionable/offensive language in the presence of any employee, once such conduct has
been identified as unacceptable by individuals present, even if it considered to be “shop talk;”
25
Page 26
  Theft of Town property, whether personal, public or private
  Physical fighting, with anyone, except for self-defense, while working; 
  Harassment, that creates a hostile work environment, of any sort; 
  Failure to wear/use appropriate safety equipment; 
  Failure to follow the written or oral orders of supervisory personnel; 
  Possession of alcohol or controlled substances in the workplace. 
  Abandoning post without authorization by supervisor. 
  Falsifying documents. 
  Violating Town of Framingham policies and procedures. 
  Not showing up for assigned shift without calling in to notify supervisor. 
26
Page 27
ARTICLE XXXV 
DURATION
The provisions of this Agreement will be effective July 1, 2016 and will continue and remain in full force
and effect through June 30, 2019 and shall be automatically renewed from year to year thereafter unless at least ninety
(90) days prior to the expiration date either party notifies the other in writing its desire to terminate this Agreement. 
Signed as of the day of  , 201___.
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM 
BOARD OF SELECTMEN 
BY: 
____________________________
____________________________
____________________________
____________________________
____________________________ 
MASSACHUSETTS LABORERS' 
DISTRICT COUNCIL
BY: 
____________________________
____________________________
____________________________
____________________________
____________________________
27
