MINUTES OF THE MEETING
OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
OF STRATEGIC FORECASTING, INC.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Strategic Forecasting, Inc., a Delaware corporation was called to order at 1:00 p.m. EST on June 8, 2006.
Board members present in DC were Don R. Kuykendall and Stephen Feldhaus. David Hoppmann was present by phone and present via VTC in Austin were George Friedman and invited Secretary of the Board, Meredith Friedman.
I.	Call to Order.
Don R. Kuykendall called the meeting to order at 1:00 p.m. and noted that a quorum was present.
II.	Approval of the Minutes.
The Minutes of the meeting of the Board of Directors, held on April 6, 2006, were approved unanimously.
III.       Opening Remarks
Don Kuykendall discussed the restructuring of the company, including the decision 90 days after hiring new senior staff sales personnel in the DC office to not continue them on payroll. Further, the decision was made to put the Public Policy department into maintenance mode. 
 
Don Kuykendall reminded the board that the IRS is still an issue and of the importance of keeping current with whatever arrangements are made with the IRS.
Negotiations are continuing with landlords of the DC office, Charles E Smith, who had put an eviction notice on the DC office door.
lV.	Financial Review
Don Kuyendall led the board through April and May sales summary and cash flow projections. 
CEO/Operations Review
George Friedman led the board through the following review of operations of the company.
Financial problems were exacerbated when chief public policy salesman had medical problems late last year and contracts in public policy were not renewed in timely fashion. An alternative was tried by substituting a sales team for the salesman but this was deemed not successful 90 days after hiring new sales personnel. 
New focus should be on website publishing through campaigns and partnerships such as with John Mauldin.
Simultaneous focus should be on large international and security consulting projects.
Decision was made to maintain current clients in public policy but not actively seek new clients.
Various cuts in personnel were discussed but rejected.
It was recommended that the company push publishing to create an immediate  revenue stream to cover debts and to create income for marketing more publishing products.
VII.     Recapitalization
Stephen Feldhaus led discussion on the proposed recapitalization. The discussion, a continuation of discussions that the board has been having since last October, revolved around the fact that George Friedman has informed the other board members that he will no longer work for the company without a substantial increase in his equity holdings in the company.  Mr. Feldhaus focused on the fact that, in his opinion, without George Friedman leading the company, the company has limited or potentially even no net value.  Mr. Feldhaus also discussed the fact that the current capitalization of the company makes it difficult to provide meaningful equity positions to employees such as Dr. Friedman. The board (other than Dr. Friedman) then discussed the need to provide additional equity to Dr. Friedman, as well as to other employees.  The board had previously agreed to explore a recapitalization of the company, and Dr. Friedman had agreed on the outline of a possible recapitalization plan under which he would agree to enter into a long term employment agreement with the company.  The other members of the board agreed unanimously on the importance of securing the services of Dr. Friedman on the basis of a long term employment contract, and authorized Mr. Kuykendall to obtain the necessary information in order to be able to evaluate the proposed recapitalization.  
David Hoppmann moved and Steve Feldhaus seconded the motion for Mr. Kuykendall to obtain the necessary information in order for the board to be able to consider the proposed recapitalization, and to present to the board a proposed plan of recapitalization together with such information.  The motion was approved unanimously.
VIII.	Next Meeting
Next board meeting is to be 1p.m. eastern on August 3.
IX.       Closing Remarks
           
George Friedman’s closing remarks referred to the interesting ride and the good news from publishing sales.
X.       Adjournment 
There being no further business to come before the meeting, upon motion duly made and seconded, the meeting was adjourned at 3:00 pm EST.
Respectfully submitted,
Meredith Friedman
Secretary
Approved:
Don Kuykendall, Chairman
Date:	3
