Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.8 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
Keywords: Radiotherapy,Brachytherapy,Optical fibre,Dosimetry,Radiation sensor,Radioluminescence
CrossMarkDomains[1]: springer.com
ModDate: 2016/10/18 15:48:45+02'00'
Subject: Cancer Nanotechnology, doi:10.1186/s12645-016-0020-y
Creator: Springer
Title: Optical fibre sensors: their role in in vivo dosimetry for prostate cancer radiotherapy
CrossMarkDomains[2]: springerlink.com
robots: noindex
doi: 10.1186/s12645-016-0020-y
CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
CreationDate: 2016/10/14 15:39:16+05'30'
Author: P. Woulfe
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2016-10-14T15:39:16+05:30
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Springer
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2016-10-18T15:48:45+02:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2016-10-18T15:48:45+02:00
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.8 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Radiotherapy,Brachytherapy,Optical fibre,Dosimetry,Radiation sensor,Radioluminescence
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: doi:10.1186/s12645-016-0020-y
xmp:dc:publisher: Springer Vienna
xmp:dc:description: Cancer Nanotechnology, doi:10.1186/s12645-016-0020-y
xmp:dc:subject: Radiotherapy; Brachytherapy; Optical fibre; Dosimetry; Radiation sensor; Radioluminescence
xmp:dc:title: Optical fibre sensors: their role in in vivo dosimetry for prostate cancer radiotherapy
xmp:dc:creator: P. Woulfe; F. J. Sullivan; S. O’Keeffe
xmp:crossmark:DOI: 10.1186/s12645-016-0020-y
xmp:crossmark:MajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
xmp:crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:crossmark:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:prism:url: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12645-016-0020-y
xmp:prism:doi: 10.1186/s12645-016-0020-y
xmp:prism:issn: 1868-6966
xmp:prism:aggregationType: journal
xmp:prism:publicationName: Cancer Nanotechnology
xmp:prism:copyright: The Author(s)
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:pdfx:doi: 10.1186/s12645-016-0020-y
xmp:pdfx:robots: noindex
xmp:pdfx:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:jav:journal_article_version: VoR
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:c1bc441c-91f6-43b9-9b35-a412390199e2
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:a72afae1-9809-419a-a447-6fcc8211b131
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:78b58ae6-a2f8-4e65-bfc6-6d3f2a619c8b
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2016-10-14T15:32:34+05:30
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:26bae7fb-f92e-4011-b4f8-702d1cc7a8c8
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2016-10-14T15:33:11+05:30
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkMajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrosMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: robots
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://crossref.org/crossmark/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: crossmark
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Crossmark Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Usual same as prism:doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The date when a publication was publishe.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: seq Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://prismstandard.org/namespaces/basic/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: prism
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Prism Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: This element provides the url for an article or unit of content. The attribute platform is optionally allowed for situations in which multiple URLs must be specified. PRISM recommends that a subset of the PCV platform values, namely “mobile” and “web”, be used in conjunction with this element. NOTE: PRISM recommends against the use of the #other value allowed in the PRISM Platform controlled vocabulary. In lieu of using #other please reach out to the PRISM group at prism-wg@yahoogroups.com to request addition of your term to the Platform Controlled Vocabulary.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: url
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The Digital Object Identifier for the article. The DOI may also be used as the dc:identifier. If used as a dc:identifier, the URI form should be captured, and the bare identifier should also be captured using prism:doi. If an alternate unique identifier is used as the required dc:identifier, then the DOI should be specified as a bare identifier within prism:doi only. If the URL associated with a DOI is to be specified, then prism:url may be used in conjunction with prism:doi in order to provide the service endpoint (i.e. the URL).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ISSN for an electronic version of the issue in which the resource occurs. Permits publishers to include a second ISSN, identifying an electronic version of the issue in which the resource occurs (therefore e(lectronic)Issn. If used, prism:eIssn MUST contain the ISSN of the electronic version.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: issn
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Volume number
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: volume
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Issue number
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: number
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Starting page
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: startingPage
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Ending page
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: endingPage
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The aggregation type specifies the unit of aggregation for a content collection. Comment PRISM recommends that the PRISM Aggregation Type Controlled Vocabulary be used to provide values for this element. Note: PRISM recommends against the use of the #othBOOKMARKS:
Optical fibre sensors: their role in in vivo dosimetry for prostate cancer radiotherapy
  Abstract
  Background
  Properties of radiotherapy dosimeters
  Optical fibre dosimeters
    Luminescence dosimetry
      Thermoluminescence dosimetry
      Optically stimulated luminescence
      Radioluminescence
        Plastic scintillating fibre dosimeters
        Inorganic scintillating fibre dosimeters
        Fibre Bragg gratings
  Cerenkov radiation (stem effect)
  Dosimeter characteristics summary
  Conclusions
  Authors’ contributions
  References
Page 1
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7
DOI 10.1186/s12645-016-0020-y
REVIEW  Open Access
Optical fibre sensors: their role in in vivo
dosimetry for prostate cancer radiotherapy
P. Woulfe1,2*, F. J. Sullivan3,4 and S. O’Keeffe1
*Correspondence: 
peter.woulfe@galwayclinic.
com
2 Department
of Radiotherapy Physics, 
Galway Clinic, Galway, Ireland
Full list of author information
is available at the end of the
article 
Abstract 
Review is made of dosimetric studies of current optical fibre technology in radiother-
apy for therapeutic applications, focusing particularly on in vivo dosimetry for prostate
radiotherapy. We present the various sensor designs along with the main advantages
and disadvantages associated with this technology. Optical fibres are ideally placed for
applications in radiotherapy dosimetry; due to their small size they are lightweight and
immune to electromagnetic interferences. The small dimensions of optical fibres allows
it to be easily guided within existing brachytherapy equipment; for example, within
the seed implantation needle for direct tumour dose analysis, in the urinary catheter to
monitor urethral dose, or within the biopsy needle holder of the transrectal ultrasound
probe to monitor rectal wall dose. The article presents the range of optical fibre dosim-
eter designs along with the main dosimetric properties required for a modern in vivo
dosimetry system to be utilised in a clinical environment.
Keywords:  Radiotherapy, Brachytherapy, Optical fibre, Dosimetry, Radiation sensor, 
Radioluminescence
Background
Dosimetry in radiotherapy has developed dramatically in recent years with evolv-
ing technology in a period of extensive clinical development. New radiation technolo-
gies have been developed and adopted for clinical use in prostate cancer treatment in
response to a need to deliver dose-escalated radiation therapy while minimising treat-
ment-related morbidity. This has occurred with the introduction of new advanced treat-
ment techniques, for example, volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT), flattening
filter free (FFF) beams and the introduction of Magnetic Resonance Imaging Linear
Accelerator (MRI-Linac).
Prostate cancer is the second most frequently diagnosed cancer and the sixth leading
cause of cancer death in males, accounting for 14 % (903, 500) of the total new cancer
cases and 6 % (258, 400) of the total cancer deaths in males in 2008 (Jemal et al. 2011).
Radical prostatectomy, external photon beam irradiation, and brachytherapy implanta-
tion are the usual methods for treating carcinoma of the prostate. The decision of which
procedure, or which combination of procedures, to use depends on a number factors
such as stage, grade, and the pre-treatment prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentra-
tion. Radioactive brachytherapy seed implants are generally used for early stage cancers, 
either as a monotherapy (100 % of the prescribed dose) or in conjunction with external
© 2016 The Author(s). This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),  which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and
indicate if changes were made.
Page 2
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 2 of 16
beam radiation therapy (67 % of the prescribed dose, referred to as a boost) (Khan and
Gibbons 2014). The permanent transperineal interstitial placement of 125I seeds is a
popular choice for low dose rate brachytherapy of prostate cancer. The deposited-seed
positions are imaged and the plan optimized in real time throughout the procedure. The
dose distribution is updated dynamically based on the actual positions as the seeds are
deposited. The clinical and technological improvements that have emerged over the last
decade in low dose rate prostate brachytherapy such as the use of ultrasound and com-
puted tomography-based treatment planning systems has led to a resurgence in the use
of the technique for localized prostate cancer (Phan et al. 2009).
The purpose of radiotherapy is to safely, accurately and efficiently deliver radiation to
treat various types of cancers. Recently, a number of radiation incidents in various coun-
tries have been reported (Mayles 2007; Williams 2007; Derreumaux et al. 2008; Shafiq
et al. 2009). The examples discussed in these reports demonstrate that newly devel-
oped radiation treatment techniques, and their implementation into the clinic, require
an increasing level of alertness to verify the safe and accurate delivery of the prescribed
treatment. To address these issues comprehensive quality assurance (QA) programs have
been introduced. These programs should verify the correct functioning of all compo-
nents in the radiotherapy chain including the treatment planning system (TPS)—against
known tolerances—and treatment delivery system. In addition to these QA programs
of the separate components required for a patient treatment, additional pre-treatment
verification checks for individual patients are often performed using, for instance, inde-
pendent dose or monitor unit (MU) calculation programs, and various QA devices such
as ionization chamber and diode arrays.
A dosimeter is defined as a device that provides a reading that is a measure of the
average absorbed dose deposited on its measuring body by ionising radiation. Codes of
practice in the United Kingdom (Lillicrap et al. 1990; Thwaites et al. 2003) define how
the dosimetric calibration of clinical beams is undertaken with ionization chamber rec-
ommendations. While there are many types of radiation dosimeters available, there is no
single dosimeter that can detect all the different forms of radiation, and consequently, 
different types of dosimeters may be required to detect different forms of radiation
depending on the application. Based on the application, an informed decision will be
required for the type of dosimeter to be used.
In vivo dosimetry is the most direct method for monitoring the dose delivered to the
patient receiving radiation therapy. When performed early in treatment, as a supplement
to the clinical quality assurance (QA) program, simple in vivo measurements are an
additional safeguard against major setup errors and calculation or transcription errors
that were missed during the pre-treatment chart check. In the absence of errors, routine
in vivo measurements uniquely document that treatment was delivered correctly within
a user-specified tolerance. Unlike other QA methods, in vivo dosimetry checks the dose
delivered to the patient rather than the individual components prior to treatment. There
is a growing interest in the need to perform such in vivo measurements in part owing to
increasing awareness of the potential risks associated with incorrect delivery or plan-
ning of radiation treatments, and because of the use of increasing complex delivery tech-
niques such as intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) and VMAT, and the move
towards more hypofractionated treatments delivered with large doses per fraction.
Page 3
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 3 of 16
The initial motivation for performing in vivo dosimetry (IVD) in brachytherapy was
mainly to assess doses to organs at risk (OAR) by direct measurements, because pre-
cise evaluation of OAR doses was difficult without 3D dose treatment planning. With 3D
image-guided brachytherapy now the norm, it is now possible to calculate 3D tumour
and OAR doses as well as dose volume histogram (DVH) parameters by the treatment
planning system (TPS). However, there are situations where significant dose calculation
uncertainties exists, in particular for low-energy photon-emitting sources (Iodine 125) 
and here IVD would contribute to more precise dose reporting. Furthermore, poten-
tial organ movement in between imaging and treatment contributes to uncertainties
in delivered dose, and IVD have a potential role for identification of organ or applica-
tor movements. Brachytherapy is typically administered with large doses per fraction
(>5 Gy), which means that the consequence of a fractional error may be substantial
when compared to typical external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) with delivery of smaller
doses per fraction (e.g. 2 Gy). IVD is extremely important in brachytherapy as an inde-
pendent method for detection of deviations or errors. However, for certain clinical situ-
ations TPS based dose calculations are currently associated with systematic deviations
due to lack of corrections for heterogeneities and scatter conditions. This is particularly
true for low-energy sources such as Iodine 125or 103Pd used in permanent implants of
prostate. Some dosimetry systems define specific points or volumes for dose reporting
for individual patients such as the American Brachytherapy Society (Davis et al. 2012) 
and this kind of reporting is important for patient related outcome measures (PROMS).
In the situation where the tumour and OARs move and/or get deformed, as is the case
during permanent prostate implants, IVD can provide additional information about the
dose delivered to the tumour and/or OAR for the given patient. Future developments
would have to be focused on the back end of the detection system utilised to process the
data (i.e. the readings of the detector) with automatic data display, requiring less man-
power, with no post data analysis or special expertise needed. Furthermore, to be suc-
cessful for widespread use, any new technological innovation for such systems will have
to be well integrated into the routine clinical application being targeted. Given existing
alternatives for accurate brachytherapy dosimeters, future requirements will likely be
made on in vivo dosimetry systems that can monitor the dose in real time, are sensitive
to displacements of all applicators involved in the treatment, can identify organ motion, 
and that can provide immediate alerts of any potential gross error during ongoing treat-
ments which alerts the clinician. The most common clinical in vivo dosimetry systems
used are thermoluminescent detectors (TLDs), metal-oxide semiconductor field effect
transistors (MOSFET), diodes, film and electronic portal imaging devices (EPIDs). These
systems have advantages and disadvantages based on their application and are fully
reviewed by Mijnheer et al. (2013). Not long after their clinical introduction for setup
verification, it was realised that EPID images contain dose information. Consequently, 
several groups investigated the dosimetric characteristics of various types of EPIDs
(Elmpt et al. 2008). Interest and development in EPID dosimetry has been accelerated
by the advantages of fast image acquisition, high resolution, digital format, larger EPIDs
with improved technology (Mijnheer et al. 2013). However, such technology requires
an increased investment in dosimetry and associated hardware to support it. With the
ongoing development, and soon to be commercially released, MRI-Linac (Stefanowicz
Page 4
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 4 of 16
et al. 2013), there has been an increased focus on other forms of in vivo dosimetry sys-
tems, such as optically stimulated luminescent dosimeters, radioluminescence dosim-
eters, plastic scintillation dosimeters and implantable MOSFETs (Reynolds et al. 2013).
Properties of radiotherapy dosimeters
The accuracy of any dosimeter measurement is the ratio of expected value to that of
the actual measured radiation. The precision of dosimetry measurements specifies the
reproducibility of the measurements under similar conditions and can be estimated
from the data obtained in repeated measurements. High precision is associated with a
small standard deviation of the distribution of measurement results (Podgorsak 2005).
Ideally, the dosimeter reading should be linearly proportional to the dosimetric quan-
tity. However, beyond a certain dose range a non-linearity generally sets in. The linearity
range and the non-linearity behaviour depend on the type of dosimeter and its physi-
cal characteristics. In general, a non-linear behaviour should be corrected for. A dosim-
eter and its reader may both exhibit non-linear characteristics, but their combined effect
could produce linearity over a wider range.
Integrating systems measure the integrated response of a dosimetry system. For such
systems the measured dosimetric quantity should be independent of the rate of that
quantity. Ideally, the response of a dosimetry system at two different dose rates should
remain constant. In reality, the dose rate may influence the dosimeter readings and
appropriate corrections are necessary, for example, recombination corrections for ioni-
zation chambers in pulsed beams in external beam radiotherapy.
The response of a dosimetry system is generally a function of radiation beam quality
(energy). Since the dosimetry systems are calibrated at a specified radiation beam qual-
ity (or qualities) and used over a much wider energy range, the variation of the response
of a dosimetry system with radiation quality (called energy dependence) requires cor-
rection. Ideally, the energy response should be flat (i.e. the system calibration should be
independent of energy over a certain range of radiation qualities) enabling the dosimetry
system to be used with various energies in both external beam radiotherapy and brachy-
therapy. In reality, the energy correction has to be included in the determination of the
quantity for most measurement situations. In radiotherapy, the quantity of interest is the
dose to water (or to tissue). As no dosimeter is water or tissue equivalent for all radiation
beam qualities, the energy dependence is an important characteristic of a dosimetry sys-
tem. Energy dependence has implications both for calibration of the dosimeter and for
conversion of detector reading into measured dose during patient measurements. Most
commonly used detectors exhibit higher energy dependence in brachytherapy than in
megavoltage beams, because the photoelectric effect causes an over-response in the
brachytherapy energy range.
The variation in response of a dosimeter with the angle of incidence of radiation is
known as the directional, or angular, dependence of the dosimeter. Dosimeters usually
exhibit directional dependence, due to their constructional details, physical size and
the energy of the incident radiation. Therapy dosimeters are generally used in the same
geometry as that in which they are calibrated. Directional independence is a very impor-
tant characteristic in the field of LDR (low dose rate) brachytherapy due to the individual
Iodine-125 seed placement which results in various orientations.
Page 5
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 5 of 16
Since the dose is a point quantity, the dosimeter should allow the determination of
the dose from a very small volume (i.e. one needs a ‘point dosimeter’ to characterize the
dose at a point). The position of the point where the dose is determined (i.e. its spatial
location) should be well defined in a reference coordinate system. Environmental vari-
ations such as temperature, pressure and humidity can cause variations in dosimeter
readout; corrections to the measured dose may need to be implemented with a reference
reading subtracted from measured reading.
Dosimeters should be rugged, easy to handle and not affected by the radiation itself. 
Dosimeters can be either active or passive types. Active dosimeters measure radiation
exposure in real time with immediate results of radiation detected. Passive dosimeters
do not provide real-time results, this is provided post-irradiation. Active type dosim-
eters provide numerous advantages over passive type dosimeters such as instant or
direct reading of radiation levels which is now an ideal requirement. This paper presents
a review of the state-of-the-art in optical fibre based sensor technology for radiation
dosimetry in oncology. The work provides an introduction to the different techniques
used and an overview of the developments in the application of these sensors to radio-
therapy, specifically external beam radiotherapy and low dose rate (LDR) and high dose
rate (HDR) brachytherapy. The authors have focussed their attention on prostate can-
cer and where possible an example of the sensor type implemented in a prostate cancer
treatment environment is provided.
Optical fibre dosimeters
Optical fibre dosimeters can have many advantages over existing systems such as TLDs, 
diodes or MOSFETs. A significant advantage is that optical fibres are composed of silica
(glass) or plastic resulting in a material perfectly suited for the use in an MRI environ-
ment, as they are non-magnetic and do not cause interference of the image, immune to
intense magnetic fields and radiofrequency (RF) present in this environment (Raaymak-
ers et al. 2009). Optical fibres can also be summated together (multiplexed) to a single
controller which in turn can form an array of detectors for 2d measurements. The devel-
opment of radiation-resistant fibres has also meant that optical fibres can be utilised in
areas of high levels of radiation. The small size of optical fibre sensors offers significant
advantages for application in prostate brachytherapy. The small dimensions of the sensor
(as low as 250 µm diameter) allows it to be easily guided within existing brachytherapy
equipment; for example, within the seed implantation needle for direct tumour dose
analysis, in the urinary catheter to monitor urethral dose, or within the biopsy needle
holder of the transrectal ultrasound probe to monitor rectal wall dose. The measured
radiation dose can be used to verify the calculated dose distribution that describes the
treatment received by the patient. The availability of real-time radiation dose measure-
ments during the brachytherapy procedure will allow for optimisation of the brachy-
therapy seed insertion during the procedure and result in high quality treatments. The
quality of a brachytherapy treatment is directly linked to patient survival and outcomes
(Hinnen et al. 2010). Radiation dosimetric methods are used for the estimation of dose
absorbed by radiation in a detector material using either thermoluminescence (TL) 
technique or optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) technique or radioluminescence
(RL) or any other technique using passive solid state detectors.
Page 6
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 6 of 16
Luminescence dosimetry
Luminescence occurs when a material is subjected to radiation and that material absorbs
some of the radiation and as a result, emits light with a different wavelength. The wave-
length of the emitted light is dependent on the luminescence material. Different types
and forms of radiation can be used to excite a material and it is these types of radiation
which give rise to different types or methods of luminescence. These are thermolumi-
nescence (excitation due to heat), photoluminescence (excitation due to optical or ultra
violet light) and radioluminescence (excitation is due to alpha, beta, gamma or x-rays).
Thermoluminescence dosimetry
Thermoluminescence (TL) is the emission of light from a solid due to heating, after it
has previously been excited by radiation. When exposed to radiation, the TL material
absorbs energy, which it then stores until it is heated. Germanium-doped silica (Ge-
doped SiO2
) type optical fibres have been demonstrated as potential novel forms of ther-
moluminescence dosimeters for radiation therapy dosimetry (Ramli et al. 2009). Abdul
Rahman et al. (2012) performed an investigation in November 2011 into the ability of a
high spatial resolution (~120 µm) Ge-doped SiO2 
fibre thermoluminescence dosimeter
to measure radiation. The optical fibres demonstrated good reproducibility (±1.5 %),
at fixed dose rate, the dosimeters were found to produce a flat response of better than
4 % (1 S.D) of mean TL distribution and showed good linearity (r2 = 0.998) of response
up to a dose of 50 Gy for photon and electron beams. Entezam et al. (2016) reviewed
the response behaviour, the fibres showed good reproducibility, energy, and field-size
response, it was demonstrated that dependency on the field size for the most sensi-
tive sample (the 42 µm core size fibre) was determined for photons produced at 6- and
10 MV and field sizes of 3, 6, 8, 10, 20, 25 and 30 cm. For each field size, measurement
was carried out for five fibre segments of the 42 µm core size fibre, the results being nor-
malized for all field sizes using the obtained value for 10 × 10 cm2 field size (Fig. 1).
Fading, the reduction of TL response as a function of time post-irradiation, depends
primarily on parameters such as storage temperature and radiation type. The analysis
of fading for flat and cylindrical fibres, fabricated by members of this group has been
Fig. 1  Sensitivity dependency of the 42 µm core size fibre on field size, measured for 6 MV X-rays. Repro-
duced from Entezam et al. (2016) with permission from Elsevier
Page 7
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 7 of 16
determined by Ghomeishi et al. (2015). For flat and cylindrical fibres irradiated simulta-
neously to a dose of 8 Gy using 6 MV photons, 15 days post-irradiation the TL response
for the flat and cylindrical fibres had reduced by 17 and 27 %, respectively, compared to
that obtained a day after irradiation.
One advantage of Ge-doped Si optical fibre dosimeters is that they are water resistant, 
and therefore, it becomes possible to locate the fibre dosimeter within a particular tissue
of interest; this suggests the possible use of Ge-doped SiO2 
optical fibres in a variety of
interface dosimetry situations, as in the application of radiation synovectomy (Karavida
and Notopoulos 2010). The potential radiotherapy dosimetric applications for doped sil-
ica fibres as TLDs have been reviewed by Bradley et al. (2012). The use of Ge-doped sil-
ica fibres has also been proposed by Issa et al. (2012) in brachytherapy, the optical fibres
dosimeters have been employed in obtaining doses at distances very close to the source
(2 mm). Dose measurements, obtained for separations from 2 up to 20 mm, were found
to be in good agreement with simulations of photon-mediated dose obtained using the
DOSRZnrc Monte Carlo code with agreement within 3 and 1 % for the 133Ba and 60Co
sources, respectively. A significant disadvantage of thermoluminescent dosimetry is that
the dose information is dependent on the post-irradiation of the material and so real-
time dosimetry is not possible.
Optically stimulated luminescence
In a similar process to thermoluminescent techniques, photoluminescence, or opti-
cally stimulated luminescence (OSL), emits the energy stored owing to irradiation, upon
exposure to light. When the insulator or semiconductor is subjected to radiation, elec-
tron hole pairs are generated, defects in the OSL material trap these electron hole pairs. 
This illumination of the material, frees the trapped electron hole pairs with the result of
luminescence from the material transmitted through the fibre and measured with a pho-
tomultiplier tube.
Carbon-doped aluminium oxide (Al2
O3
:C) (Yukihara et al. 2014) showed how the
response from OSL is linear and independent of energy and dose rate, exhibits little fad-
ing, temperature dependent and is sensitive to light. Europium-doped potassium bro-
mide (KBr:Eu) were reviewed by McKeever (2011). It was discovered that the signal from
KBr:Eu is unstable due to fading at room temperature, rapid OSL decay and its simpler
process of OSL production enables the material to be used in real-time monitoring of
radiation. Enhanced aluminium oxide doped with carbon and magnesium (Al2
O3
:C,Mg) 
(Rodriguez et al. 2011) were investigated for optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) in
radiation dosimetry. Findings show that the intensities of TL, OSL and RL signals of the
samples were similar to that of regular carbon-doped aluminium oxide (Al2
O3
:C).
Dunn et al. (2013) commissioned optically stimulated luminescence dosimeters
(OSLDs) as a replacement for thermoluminescence dosimeters (TLDs) for applica-
tion within radiotherapy, a product from Landauer Inc. known as “nanoDots” showed
supra-linearity, reproducible fading (3 %) and little signal depletion per readout (0.03 %).
Marckmann et al. (2006) developed a novel idea to overcome Cerenkov radiation by cou-
pling OSL (Al2
O3
:C) to the end of a polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) optical fibre to
result in simultaneous RL/OSL signals providing real-time radiation monitoring using
RL and post-radiation using OSL. The characterisation of a fibre based Al2
O3
:C OSL
Page 8
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 8 of 16
dosimeter by Anderson et al. (2009) for its response to 192Ir, demonstrates the suitabil-
ity of such a device for HDR brachytherapy. The system demonstrated excellent linearity
in the tested dose rage (0–4.3 Gy), with reproducibility of approximately 1.3 %. It was
also estimated that measurements with a 5–50 mm source to probe distance would be
associated with a 5 % uncertainty.
Radioluminescence
Plastic scintillating fibre dosimeters  Scintillating fibres work by converting incident
radiation energy into visible light, as they are exposed to X-ray radiation, electrons in
the fibre are excited to higher energy levels through either Compton or photoelectric
effect. The fibre core is doped with scintillating fluorescent particles, which fluoresce
when irradiated by ionising radiation, and cladded with PMMA. A major advantage of
these dosimeters in radiotherapy is their water equivalence making them an ideal dosim-
eter in radiotherapy dosimetry. However, recent studies (Buranurak et al. 2013) identified
the effect of temperature on a fibre coupled organic plastic scintillator in applications
such as external beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy. The study showed that the light
yield in the peak regions of the scintillators decreases linearly with increasing tempera-
ture. Temperature coefficients of −0.15 ± 0.01 and −0.55 ± 0.04 % K−1 for blue BCF-12
and green BCF-60 from Saint-Gobain Crystals were, respectively, observed in the study. 
Another study (Beddar 2012) showed significant differences from measurements inside
patients to those measurements in anthropomorphic phantoms due to the similar effects
of temperature.
Figure 2 shows the properties of four scintillating organic fibres which were used from
Saint-Gobain Crystals (2015). These were BCF10, BCF12, BCF20 and BCF60. It shows
that BCF10, BCF12 emit a blue colour whereas BCF20, BCF60 both emit a green colour
with a resultant higher emission peak. They range from 0.25 to 5.00 mm in diameter, 
have a polystyrene core with fluorescent dopants and a PMMA cladding.
Suchowerska et al. (2011) showed a fibre optic scintillating dosimeter, consisting of
a plastic scintillator coupled to an optical fibre for brachytherapy. These sensors were
small enough (0.5 mm) to be inserted into a No. 16 French urinary catheter, to perform
in vivo dosimetry to determine the urethral dose during high dose rate (HDR) treatment
to the prostate. The background signal created by Cerenkov and fibre fluorescence was
Fiber Emission Emission Decay 1/e  # of Photons Characteristics/ Applications
Color Peak, nm Time, ns Length m  per MeV
BCF-10  Blue  432  2.7  2.2  ~8000 General purpose; optimised for
diameters >250µm
BCF-12  Blue  435  3.2  2.7  ~8000 Improved transmission for use in
long lengths
BCF-20  Green 492  2.7  >3.5  ~8000 Fast green scintillator
BCF-60  Green 530  7  3.5  ~7100 3HF formulation for increased
hardness
Fig. 2  Four examples of scintillating fibres from Saint-Gobain Crystals (McKeever 2011)
Page 9
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 9 of 16
0.1 % of the signal and the sensor had the capability of real-time readout. Klein et al. 
(Klein et al. 2012) demonstrated a plastic scintillating fibre (BCF-60) mounted onto an
endorectal balloon to verify doses in vivo during intensity-modulated radiation therapy
(IMRT) and volumetric arc therapy (VMAT) for prostate cancer. The sensor measured
doses that correlated with ionization chamber measurements and it was found that
treatment planning system calculations were within 1 % of expected values. A proposed
dosimeter for in vivo dosimetry in HDR brachytherapy was investigated (Therriault-
Proulx et al. 2013), whereby a single fibre with multipoint plastic scintillators was devel-
oped for Iridium-192 HDR brachytherapy treatment verification in a water phantom. It
contained a three-point detector containing BCF-10, BCF-12 and BCF-60 scintillating
elements. A comparison of measured doses at different source-to-detector distances
were investigated, with the result that the system was suitable for measuring source
position uncertainty to less than 0.32 ± 0.06 mm.
A clinical trial of a plastic scintillating fibre dosimeter, BrachyFOD, (Suchowerska
et al. 2011) enrolled 24 patients receiving HDR brachytherapy to the prostate. After 14
patients, the dosimeter design was improved for more accurate readings to improve clin-
ical reliability: a dosimeter self-checking facility; a radiopaque marker to determine the
position of the dosimeter, and a more robust optical extension fibre as depicted in Fig. 3. 
The results demonstrated a maximum measured dose difference of 9 % from the calcu-
lated dose from the TPS for the remaining patients in the trial indicating the importance
of in vivo dosimetry in brachytherapy.
In a further study (Gagnon et al. 2012), the performance of a plastic scintillator BCF-
60 was compared with a range of traditional small field dosimeters for stereotactic QA, 
the results compared output factors and dose profiles with a good level of agreement
with diodes and EBT2 Gafchromic film. Currently, the only commercial optical fibre
dosimeter for radiotherapy is the Standard Imaging Exradin W1 Scintillator (2014), a
1 mm core polystyrene-based fibre that is coupled to a PMMA optical fibre for transmis-
sion of the optical signal.
Inorganic scintillating fibre dosimeters  Inorganic scintillators are generally in crystal form
grown at high temperatures. They are made of alkali halides, or oxides, and often require an
Fig. 3  a Design of the BrachyFOD. a 4-mm-long 0.5-mm diameter Bicron BC400 scintillator is coupled to a
0.5-mm diameter (0.48-mm core) polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) PMMA optical fibre. The entire dosimeter
is covered with a black polyvinyl toluene PVT buffer tubing. b Design of the RFOD. The scintillator, spacer, and
platinum radiopaque marker are all 0.5 mm in diameter and 4 mm long. Reproduced from Suchowerska et al. 
(2011) with the permission from Elsevier
Page 10
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 10 of 16
activator impurity, e.g. Na(Tl), CsI(Tl). Due to the crystal form of the scintillator, it is pos-
sible to incorporate the material into the sensing region in a number of different ways, e.g. 
coating the fibre, coupling it to the time, or embedding it within the fibre. Distinct advan-
tages include real-time dosimetry, small size and good spatial resolution. In evaluating the
scintillation efficiencies of different phosphors, a radiation dosimeter (Jang et al. 2011) to
detect tritium in real time was developed, composed of a scintillator material, an optical
fibre bundle and alight measuring device, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Each scintillator interacts
with electron or beta radiation and generates scintillation photons between 455 nm and
550 nm wavelength of light. Three kinds of inorganic scintillators were tested at different
distances between the fibre optic sensor and source. These were Gd2
O2
S:Tb, cerium-doped
YAG (Y3
Al5
O12
:Ce) and CsI:Tl. The results show that the scintillation efficiencies of CsI:Tl, 
Y3
Al5
O12
:Ce and Gd2
O2
S:Tb are 8, 5 and 15 %, respectively. The Gd2
O2
S:Tb type scintilla-
tor was found to give the greatest scintillation response of photons.
An optical fibre dosimeter has been developed by McCarthy et al. (2011; O’Keeffe et al. 
2013) by coating the end of an exposed PMMA optical fibre, after the cladding has been
removed, with Gd2O2S:Tb. The scintillating phosphor, supplied by Phosphor Technolo-
gies Ltd (2014) is mixed with an epoxy mix and injected into a cylindrical mould con-
taining the exposed PMMA fibre optic core and allowed to cure. The radiation-sensitive
scintillating material tip of the sensor fluoresces on immediate exposure to ionising
radiation. The resultant emitted fluorescent light penetrates the PMMA optical fibre and
propagates along the fibre to a distal scientific grade spectrometer from Ocean Optics
(Dunedin, FL), where the intensity of the peak wavelength of the fluorescent light is meas-
ured. Initial characterization measurements of this sensor have been carried out, with
its response being evaluated in water equivalent phantoms to assess whether it would
be suitable for potential in vivo applications in either brachytherapy or external beam
radiotherapy dosimetry. The results demonstrate that the fibre has a high sensitivity and
good repeatability across a range of beam energies and types, and demonstrate a linear
response from low doses of the order of centigray up to at least 16 Gy in a single delivery.
An optical fibre sensor (Woulfe et al. 2016) based on radioluminescence, whereby
radiation-sensitive scintillation material is embedded in the core of a plastic optical
fibre, is illustrated in Fig. 5. Three sensors were fabricated, using different inorganic scin-
tillators, identified as being most suitable for brachytherapy applications: thallium doped
Fig. 4  Fiber-optic sensor tip to detect beta rays. a Schematic diagram of sensor tip and b picture of sensor
tip. Reproduced from Jang et al. (Jang et al. 2011) with permission from Elsevier
Page 11
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 11 of 16
caesium iodide (CsI:Tl), terbium doped gadolinium oxysulphide (Gd2
O2
S:Tb, GOS) and
europium-doped lanthanum oxysulphide (La2
O2
S:Eu, LOS). Terbium doped gadolinium
oxysulphide (Gd2
O2
S:Tb, GOS) demonstrated the highest sensitivity to the 125I brachy-
therapy seeds (Woulfe et al. 2016). The sensor is designed for in vivo monitoring of the
radiation dose during radioactive seed implantation for low dose rate brachytherapy, 
in prostate cancer treatment, providing oncologists with real-time information of the
radiation dose to the target area and/or nearby critical structures. The radiation from
the brachytherapy seeds causes emission of visible light from the scintillation material, 
which penetrates the fibre, propagating along the optical fibre for remote detection using
a multi-pixel photon counter. The sensor demonstrates a high sensitivity to Iodine-125, 
the radioactive source most commonly used in brachytherapy for treating prostate can-
cer. The developed optical fibre based sensor has a number of significant advantages
for application in brachytherapy. The small dimensions of the sensor allow them to be
guided within existing brachytherapy equipment; for example, within the seed implan-
tation needle (see Fig. 5b), in the urinary catheter to monitor urethral dose, or along
the transperineal ultrasound probe to monitor rectal wall dose. This allows for real-time
monitoring of the radiation dose to the target area or nearby critical structures. Fur-
thermore, the construction of the sensors is such that they are completely biologically
separate from their monitoring environment, and therefore, offer no possibility of con-
tamination or other form of threat to their target operating environment, i.e. internal
human tissue.
Fibre Bragg gratings  Fibre Bragg grating (FBG) based sensors work by monitoring the
wavelength shift of the returned Bragg signal which changes as a function of the meas-
ured. The Bragg wavelength is related to the refractive index of the material and the grat-
ing pitch. The light incident on the grating reflects a narrow spectral component at the
Bragg wavelength, and hence in the transmission spectrum this component is missing. 
Work (Mihailov 2012) has concentrated on developing radiation-resistant FBGs for use
in temperature and strain measurement applications in nuclear environments.
The outcome of a project investigating the use of FBGs as high dose radiation sensors
was first presented by Krebber et al. (2006). The work is based on the Kramer–Kronig
dispersion relations, which can be used to show that an increase of attenuation has to
be accompanied by a change of refractive index. The FBGs were written in a hydrogen
doped Ge-doped fibre for wavelengths of 650, 820, 1285 and 1516 nm. The radiation
induced refractive index change was calculated from the Bragg wavelength shift and
Fig. 5  Optical fibre based radioluminescent radiation probe for in vivo brachytherapy. a Optical fibre based
radiation probe for in-vivo brachytherapy. b Optical fibre sensor within brachytherapy needle for direct
tumour dose monitoring. Reproduced from Woulfe et al. (2016) with permission from SPIE
Page 12
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 12 of 16
a wavelength shift from 850 to 1216 nm was demonstrated to be independent of dose
rate for radiation doses greater than 2 kGy. Although small changes in temperature are
accounted for within the sensor system, the sensor requires a highly stable setup, with
stress-free attachment of the FBG along with a constant, steady temperature. Fibre Bragg
gratings, written in Ge‐doped silica fibres, have been shown to be capable of monitoring
high‐radiation doses (Avino 2014).
Cerenkov radiation (stem effect)
One of the primary disadvantages of using plastic scintillation detector systems is the
generation of radiation induced light. This light is a form of noise in the received spec-
trum of light. It can be attributed to Cerenkov emission. A term known as the stem
effect is used to describe Cerenkov light and other light which can be produced in a scin-
tillation optical fibre dosimeter. Cerenkov radiation is generated when a charged parti-
cle passes through a medium with a velocity greater than that of light in that medium. 
Cerenkov emission only occurs when the refractive index of the material is greater than
one. This emission of light generates a cone of light which spreads out at an angle. Cer-
enkov emissions are only produced above a certain energy threshold. For any radiation
with energy below this threshold level, the presence of fluorescent light generated in the
optical fibre should be considered. A number of different techniques have been shown
to minimise the effects of Cerenkov light. These are background subtraction, filtering, 
and chromatic removal. These techniques help separate and remove the stem effect from
the radiation signal (Archambault et al. 2006). The background subtraction is done by
placing a second bare optical fibre next to the original sensing fibre. The bare fibre also
produces the Cerenkov radiation and can be subtracted from the sensing fibre. The sec-
ond method called spectral discrimination uses a colour CCD camera to measure both
the scintillation and Cerenkov signal over different wavelength ranges. The Cerenkov is
subtracted with the result that the scintillation signal is left behind. The third method is
chromatic separation of the signal and Cerenkov emissions, through the use of optical
filters. Another method of using a rigid air core light guide between the scintillator and
the optical fibre was proposed to prevent Cerenkov light production (Law et al. 2006).
Work by Law et al. have shown that both Cerenkov and fluorescent light generated in
an optical fibre contribute a varying background signal that depends on the length of
fibre exposed to radiation. They showed that the magnitude of the Cerenkov and fibre
fluorescence is between 1 and 0.1 % of the signal, for the same source to fibre scintillator
distance. Yoo et al. (2013) fabricated a novel fibre optic Cerenkov radiation sensor for
measuring beta particles. Instead of using a scintillator, transparent liquids with various
refractive indices were used as a Cerenkov radiator which served as a sensing material. 
The results showed that the amount of Cerenkov radiation due to low energy beta parti-
cles increased as the refractive index of the Cerenkov materials was increased.
Dosimeter characteristics summary
An overview of the various types of dosimeters is depicted in Table 1 characterising their
applications with emphasis on both advantages and disadvantages.
Page 13
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7
Table 1  
Dosimeter 
characteristics 
summary 
Dosimeter
Advantages
Disadvantages
Characteristics 
Thermoluminescence dosimetry (
TLD) Plastic 
Scintillating fibre 
optic 
dosimeter 
Inorganic 
Scintillating fibre 
dosimeter 
Phosphor 
coated 
fibre
Used in 
Clinical 
QA 
dosimetry 
Linear 
from 0.
01 Gy to 
300 Gy 
Can 
be 
made 
small 
for 
point 
dose 
measurements 
Low 
cost 
and 
come in 
different 
sizes 
Monitors 
beta, 
gamma, X-
ray 
and 
neutron 
radia- 
tions. 
Corrections for 
each 
type 
are 
needed 
Little 
energy 
dependence 
Rapid 
measurement time 
of 
around 2 s 
Linear 
from 0.
01 Gy to 
1 kGy 
Small (
1 
×
 1 
×
 0.
2
cm3
) 
Stable 
for 
days 
Reusable, re-
readable (
0.
03 % 
signal 
loss 
over 
190 
readings. Can 
be 
optically 
reset 
using 
UV 
Used in 
radiotherapy type 
applications 
Can 
measure 
small 
volumes 
Long 
distance 
transmission, 
Immunity to 
electromagnetic 
interference 
Used in 
radiotherapy and 
low 
dose 
personnel 
dosimetry 
applications 
Low 
cost 
and 
easy 
manufacture 
High 
scintillation 
efficiency 
3.
23 % 
variation 
detected at 
90 kV 
50 μA 
Accuracy of 
2 % 
found 
under 
15 MV 
100 MU 
radiotherapy 
testing
No 
real 
time 
measurement. 
Readout 
time 
can 
be 
consuming 
Supralinear from 
300 Gy to 
1 kGy 
TLD 
devices are 
re-
useable 
but 
suffer 
from 
sensi- 
tivity 
with 
repeated use
Dose 
range: 0.
10 mSv–
10 Gy 
Energy 
response: 
Beta (
MAX):
0.
766 MeV–
5 MeV, 
Photon: 
5 keV–
6 MeV, 
Neutron (
TLD):
Ther- 
mal–
6 MeV, 
Neutron (
CR39):
200 keV–
6 MeV 
Supralinear 
response >2 Gy 
Sensitivity to 
light 
and 
temperature 
during 
irradia- 
tion 
and 
readout 
Room 
temperature 
fading of 
the 
OSL 
signal. 
Only 
two 
materials are 
commercially used in 
OSL 
dosimetry:
Al2O3:C
and 
BeO
Useful 
from 0.
01 Sv to 
100 Sv for 
X-
ray 
and 
gamma 
radiation 
Effects of 
Cerenkov 
radiation 
Temperature 
dependent
Used 
for 
photon 
energies 
above 
100 keV 
High 
radiation 
exposure (
50 Gy to 
500 Gy) 
induces 
Range 
from 
50 kV to 
15MV X-
ray 
significant 
permanent 
attenuation in 
plastic 
optical 
fibres
Page 13 of 16
Page 14
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 14 of 16
Conclusions
Radiation dosimetry has gained huge interest from many scientific disciplines and has
led to the development of a huge number of publications across all the different types
of dosimeter interests. This paper reviews a number of optical fibre based methods of
dosimetry for radiation monitoring in prostate cancer therapy. Their small size, light-
weight and flexibility have allowed their dosimetric performance to be demonstrated
successfully in a range of measurement scenarios and have been demonstrated as being
particularly effective for in vivo dosimetric verification of treatments such as HDR and
prostate seed brachytherapy. Table 1 summarises the main characteristics of the prin-
ciple radiotherapy dosimetry techniques based on optical fibres. Radioluminescence is
the predominant technique used with RL showing the most potential within the area of
in vivo dosimetry. PSDs have demonstrated significant advantages in the area of radi-
otherapy dosimetry, owing to their near-water equivalence, and this is reflected in the
increasing number of publications in this area. Commercial interest has also focused
on PSDs with the first optical fibre dosimeter for radiotherapy applications to reach the
market, the Exradin W1, based on this technology, and further PSDs are also set to enter
the market shortly. However, the recent reports on temperature dependence of this type
of dosimeter must be investigated, and if necessary, accounted for, to ensure the reliabil-
ity of the measurements.
Given existing alternatives for accurate brachytherapy dosimeters, future advance-
ments will likely be made on in vivo dosimetry systems that can monitor the dose in
real time, are sensitive to displacements of all applicators involved in the treatment, can
identify organ motion, and that can provide immediate alerts of any potential gross error
during ongoing treatments. Multiplexing of existing single-point optical fibre sensors
will also play an important role in the future, allowing for volumetric dose measure-
ments. Recently, it has been shown that it is possible to develop detectors composed
of multiple different colour PSDs (mPSD) using a single optical transmission line and
capable of measuring the dose accurately (François et al. 2012). Insertion of additional
detector catheters may be performed with the purpose of optimizing detector position-
ing, e.g. by inserting an additional interstitial needle for housing a dosimeter probes
in the tumour region. A smaller invasive impact may be achieved by inserting a steri-
lized dosimeter in the urethral catheter for urethral dose measurements. With a gamma
analysis, an error criterion would be based not only on a dose difference but could also
combine it with a distance-to-agreement criterion. In such an analysis, the upfront
knowledge of the geometrical uncertainties of the detector and source positioning could
be incorporated into the model to decide on relevant distance-to-agreement criteria.
It is the opinion of the authors that optical fibre sensors have an important role to
play in in vivo dosimetry in radiotherapy for prostate cancer, providing direct real-time
monitoring of the radiation delivered to the prostate and nearby critical structures, such
as the urethra and rectal wall.
Authors’ contributions
SOK contributed with Optical Fibre Technology and FS contributed with the Clinical Aspects. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Author details
1 Optical Fibre Sensors Research Centre, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland. 2 Department of Radiotherapy Physics, 
Galway Clinic, Galway, Ireland. 3 Prostate Cancer Institute, National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland. 4 Depart-
ment of Radiotherapy, Galway Clinic, Galway, Ireland. 
Page 15
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 15 of 16
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 20 April 2016 Accepted: 6 October 2016
References
Abdul Rahman AT, et al. An investigation of the thermoluminescence of Ge-doped SiO2 optical fibres for application in
interface radiation dosimetry. Appl Radiat Isot. 2012;70(7):1436–41.
Andersen CE, et al. Characterization of a fiber-coupled Al2O3: C luminescence dosimetry system for online in vivo dose
verification during I192r brachytherapy. Med Phys. 2009;36(3):708–18.
Archambault L, et al. Measurement accuracy and Cerenkov removal for high performance, high spatial resolution scintil-
lation dosimetry. Med Phys. 2006;33(1):128–35.
Avino S. et al. Radiation dosimetry with fiber Bragg gratings. In: SPIE 9157, 23rd International conference on optical fibre
sensors, vol 9157, 2 June 2014.
Beddar S. On possible temperature dependence of plastic scintillator response. Med Phys. 2012;39(10):6522.
Bradley DA, et al. Review of doped silica glass optical fibre: their TL properties and potential applications in radiation
therapy dosimetry. Appl Radiat Isot. 2012;71(Supplement):2–11.
Buranurak S, et al. Temperature variations as a source of uncertainty in medical fiber-coupled organic plastic scintillator
dosimetry. Radiat Meas. 2013;56:307–11.
Davis BJ, et al. American brachytherapy society consensus guidelines for transrectal ultrasound-guided permanent
prostate brachytherapy. Brachytherapy. 2012;11(1):6–19.
Derreumaux S, et al. Lessons from recent accidents in radiation therapy in France. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 
2008;131(1):130–5.
Dunn L, et al. Commissioning of optically stimulated luminescence dosimeters for use in radiotherapy. Radiat Meas. 
2013;51–52:31–9.
Elmpt van W, et al. A literature review of electronic portal imaging for radiotherapy dosimetry. Radiother Oncol. 
2008;88(3):289–309.
Entezam A, et al. Thermoluminescence response of Ge-doped SiO2 fibres to electrons, X- and γ-radiation. Radiat Phys
Chem. 2016;121:115–21.
François T-P, et al. Development of a novel multi-point plastic scintillation detector with a single optical transmission line
for radiation dose measurement. Phys Med Biol. 2012;57(21):7147.
Gagnon J-C, et al. Dosimetric performance and array assessment of plastic scintillation detectors for stereotactic radio-
surgery quality assurance. Med Phys. 2012;39(1):429–36.
Ghomeishi M, et al. Sensitive fibre-based thermoluminescence detectors for high resolution in-vivo dosimetry. Sci Rep. 
2015;5:13309.
Hinnen KA, et al. Long-term biochemical and survival outcome of 921 patients treated with I-125 permanent prostate
brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010;76(5):1433–8.
Issa F, et al. Establishment of Ge-doped optical fibres as thermoluminescence dosimeters for brachytherapy. Appl Radiat
Isot. 2012;70(7):1158–61.
Jang KW, et al. Fiber-optic radiation sensor for detection of tritium. Nucl Instrum Methods Phys Res Sect A. 
2011;652(1):928–31.
Jemal A, et al. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin. 2011;61(2):69–90.
Karavida N, Notopoulos A. Radiation synovectomy: an effective alternative treatment for inflamed small joints. Hippokra-
tia. 2010;14(1):22–7.
Khan FM, Gibbons JP. Khans’ the Physics of Radiation Therapy. United States: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 2014.
Klein D, et al. In-phantom dose verification of prostate IMRT and VMAT deliveries using plastic scintillation detectors. 
Radiat Meas. 2012;47(10):921–9.
Krebber K, Henning H, Udo W. Fibre Bragg gratings as high dose radiation sensors? Meas Sci Technol. 2006;17(5):1095.
Law SH, et al. Optical fiber design and the trapping of Cerenkov radiation. Appl Opt. 2006;45(36):9151–9.
Lillicrap SC, et al. Code of practice for high-energy photon therapy dosimetry based on the NPL absorbed dose calibra-
tion service. Phys Med Biol. 1990;35(10):1355.
Marckmann CJ, et al. Optical fibre dosimeter systems for clinical applications based on radioluminescence and optically
stimulated luminescence from Al2O3:C. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 2006;120(1–4):28–32.
Mayles WPM. The Glasgow Incident; a Physicist’s Reflections. Clin Oncol. 2007;19(1):4–7.
McCarthy D. et al. Optical fibre X-ray radiation dosimeter sensor for low dose applications. In: Sensors, 2011 IEEE. 2011.
McKeever SWS. Optically stimulated luminescence: a brief overview. Radiat Meas. 2011;46(12):1336–41.
Mihailov SJ. Fiber Bragg grating sensors for harsh environments. Sensors. 2012;12(2):1898.
Mijnheer B, et al. In vivo dosimetry in external beam radiotherapy. Med Phys. 2013;40(7):070903.
O’Keeffe S, et al. Radiotherapy dosimetry based on plastic optical fibre sensors. In: Fifth European Workshop on Optical
Fibre Sensors. 2013.
Party IW, Thwaites DI, DuSautoy AR, et al. The IPEM code of practice for electron dosimetry for radiotherapy beams of
initial energy from 4 to 25 MeV based on an absorbed dose to water calibration. Phys Med Biol. 2003;48(18):2929.
Phan J, et al. Late rectal complications after prostate brachytherapy for localized prostate cancer: incidence and manage-
ment. Cancer. 2009;115(9):1827–39.
Phosphor technologies Ltd. 2014. [URL: "http://www.phosphor-technology.com"] http://www.phosphor-technology.com.
Podgorsak EB. Radiation oncology physics: A handbook for teachers and students. Vienna: International Atomic Energy
Agency; 2005.
Page 16
Woulfe et al. Cancer Nano (2016) 7:7  Page 16 of 16
Raaymakers BW, et al. Integrating a 1.5 T MRI scanner with a 6 MV accelerator: proof of concept. Phys Med Biol. 
2009;54(12):N229.
Ramli AT, et al. The thermoluminescence response of doped SiO2 optical fibres subjected to alpha-particle irradiation. 
Appl Radiat Isot. 2009;67(3):428–32.
Reynolds M, Fallone BG, Rathee S. Dose response of selected ion chambers in applied homogeneous transverse and
longitudinal magnetic fields. Med Phys. 2013;40(4):042102.
Rodriguez MG, et al. Thermoluminescence, optically stimulated luminescence and radioluminescence properties of
Al2O3:C, Mg. Radiat Meas. 2011;46(12):1469–73.
Saint Gobain Crystals. 2015 [URL: "http://www.crystals.saint-gobain.com"] http://www.crystals.saint-gobain.com.
Shafiq J, et al. An international review of patient safety measures in radiotherapy practice. Radiother Oncol. 
2009;92(1):15–21.
Standard Imaging Inc. 2014. [URL: "http://www.standardimaging.com/exradin/exradin-scintillator"] http://www.standardimaging.com/exradin/exradin-scintillator.
Stefanowicz S, et al. Dosimetry in clinical static magnetic fields using plastic scintillation detectors. Radiat Meas. 
2013;56:357–60.
Suchowerska N, et al. Clinical trials of a urethral dose measurement system in brachytherapy using scintillation detectors. 
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;79(2):609–15.
Therriault-Proulx F, Beddar S, Beaulieu L. On the use of a single-fiber multipoint plastic scintillation detector for 192Ir
high-dose-rate brachytherapy. Med Phys. 2013;40(6):062101.
Williams MV. Radiotherapy near misses, incidents and errors: radiotherapy incident at Glasgow. Clinical Oncology. 
2007;19(1):1–3.
Woulfe P, O’Keeffe S, Sullivan FJ. Optical fibre luminescence sensor for real-time LDR brachytherapy dosimetry in Euro-
pean workshop on optical fibre sensors. 2016.
Yoo WJ, et al. Development of a Cerenkov radiation sensor to detect low-energy beta-particles. Appl Radiat Isot. 
2013;81:196–200.
Yukihara EG, McKeever SWS, Akselrod MS. State of art: Optically stimulated luminescence dosimetry—Frontiers of future
research. Radiat Meas. 2014;71:15–24.
