Keywords: Policy transfer,Policy innovation,Renewable energy,Technology transfer,International cooperation,Socio-technical analysis,Low-carbon technologies
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
ModDate: 2020/02/13 15:52:01+01'00'
CreationDate: 2020/02/12 02:31:22+08'00'
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
Subject: Sustain Earth, doi:10.1186/s42055-019-0019-4
Author: Stefan Bößner
Title: Policy transfer processes and renewable energy penetration: a comparative analysis of Peru, Thailand, and Uganda
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Policy transfer,Policy innovation,Renewable energy,Technology transfer,International cooperation,Socio-technical analysis,Low-carbon technologies
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s42055-019-0019-4
xmp:dc:publisher: Sustainable Earth
xmp:dc:description: Sustain Earth, doi:10.1186/s42055-019-0019-4
xmp:dc:subject: Policy transfer; Policy innovation; Renewable energy; Technology transfer; International cooperation; Socio-technical analysis; Low-carbon technologies
xmp:dc:title: Policy transfer processes and renewable energy penetration: a comparative analysis of Peru, Thailand, and Uganda
xmp:dc:creator: Stefan Bößner; Tim Suljada; Francis X. Johnson; Aina Bruno; Jorge Rodriguez Morales; Mengyin Hu; Padmasai Lakshmi Bhamidipati; James Haselip
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2020-02-13T15:52:01+01:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2020-02-13T15:52:01+01:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2020-02-12T02:31:22+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:723c63dd-9f1a-436c-8526-d381596210ac
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:ca6dd96b-697f-4164-a350-507ee024182b
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:723c63dd-9f1a-436c-8526-d381596210ac
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2020-02-12T02:37:07+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Francis X. Johnson
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3597-8108
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Results
  Conclusions
Introduction
Conceptual foundations of policy innovation, policy diffusion and policy transfer
  Policy transfer
  Policy transfer vs. policy diffusion
Analytical framework and comparative analysis of policy transfer
  Approach, methodology and case study context
  Thailand
  Uganda
  Peru
Results: Causes and motivations for policy transfer
  Causes and motivations
  Actors involved in the policy transfer process
    Actors in favour of policy transfer concerning renewable energy
    Actors against and resistance to policy transfer concerning RE
  Object of the policy transfer
  Spatial scale of the policy transfer
  Mechanisms of policy transfer
  Constraints on policy transfer
  Policy success and policy failure
  The transfer process and the policy making cycle
Discussion and conclusions
Abbreviations
Acknowledgments
Authors’ contributions
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Author details
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2
https://doi.org/10.1186/s42055-019-0019-4 
Sustainable Earth
RESEARCH  Open Access
Policy transfer processes and renewable
energy penetration: a comparative analysis
of Peru, Thailand, and Uganda
Stefan Bößner1, Tim Suljada1, Francis X. Johnson1* [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3597-8108"] , Aina Bruno2, Jorge Rodriguez Morales3, Mengyin Hu4,
Padmasai Lakshmi Bhamidipati5 and James Haselip5
Abstract
Background: Low-carbon technologies must be widely adopted at a large scale to address climate change and
enhance access to affordable, reliable and sustainable energy. The uptake of those technologies is often supported
by specific policies developed at a national or regional level and those policies, like the technologies themselves,
can diffuse from one place to another. This paper sheds some light on this ‘policy transfer’ and investigates the
dynamics, the actors and the processes involved. We illustrate what happens when renewable energy support
policies in one country inspire renewable support policies in another country using three case studies in Peru,
Thailand and Uganda as examples.
Results: Using an adapted version of the policy transfer framework first elaborated by Dolowitz and Marsh (Polit
Stud 44:343–57, 1996; Governance 13:5–23, 2000), we describe the policy transfer process in the three case study
countries according to several criteria. We find that policy transfer is not a straightforward process where a
‘borrower’ country simply adopts policies from a ‘lender’ country, but instead a complex process where many actors
- national and international – interact to shape the outcome of the process. And while experiences particularly in
the EU as well as international developments have influenced the policy transfer in case study countries
significantly, domestic issues also play a key role in shaping the transferred policies and in adapting them to local
contexts. Moreover, the policy transfer process is not an one-off event, but a continuous process where iterative
learning helps the policies to evolve over time.
Conclusions: Policy transfer is a complex matter, involving many stakeholders during a continuous process over
time. The Dolowitz and Marsh framework proved useful to analyse policy transfer and the actors involved although
questions for further research remain. For instance, against what kind of criteria should the ‘success’ of a policy
transfer be measured? Moreover, while comparing three illustrative case studies is a first, useful step, having a larger
set of case studies and data might enhance our understanding of the details of the processes involved even
further.
Keywords: Policy transfer, Policy innovation, Renewable energy, Technology transfer, International cooperation,
Socio-technical analysis, Low-carbon technologies
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:francis.johnson@sei.org"] francis.johnson@sei.org
1Stockholm Environment Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2020 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 2 of 18
Introduction
The global concerns raised by climate change led to the
adoption of the Paris Agreement in which parties draft
their own national determined contributions (NDCs), a
process reflective of differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities in the light of different national
circumstances. Indeed, under the Paris Agreement, de-
veloped countries should continue taking the lead by
undertaking economy-wide absolute emission reduction
targets, but developing countries are also expected to en-
hance their mitigation efforts [1].  The agreement also
calls upon the international community to cooperate in
implementing their NDCs under Article 6, the details of
which are still being negotiated [2].
Global uptake of Renewable Energy (RE) technologies
supports achievement of the NDCs as well as the UN Sus-
tainable Development Goals (SDGs) [3, 4]. International
cooperation includes the transfer of technologies and
know-how between more industrialised and less industria-
lised countries, which is a guided and intentional process
[5–8].  Other related concepts include ‘technology diffu-
sion’, which emphasise the spontaneous spreading of tech-
nologies by market-forces and ‘technology innovation’,
which emphasises the novelty or improvement of a prod-
uct or technology [9–12]. While the boundaries of those
three concepts are often not clear-cut, the aim of stimulat-
ing demand for technologies such as RE in as many re-
gions as possible contributes to global learning curves,
thus making these new technologies more cost-
competitive and more adaptive to local contexts [13]. The
rapid cost reductions experienced for wind and solar
power during the past few decades, for example, are the
result of market developments in the European Union
(EU),  China and other regions of rapid growth where
enabling policies have been in place for many years
[14, 15].
Such enabling policies are the focus of this paper. Al-
though technology transfer and diffusion have long been
studied, the question of how the policies and institutional
arrangements supporting those technologies might ‘flow’
from one country to another (and how they are adapted
to local contexts) only emerged recently in the academic
literature (See e.g. [16–22]).
This article describes how knowledge of renewable en-
ergy policy spreads (or is transferred) across different
countries or regions and how those policies are designed
and what institutional setups those policies create in dif-
ferent countries. This framework of policy diffusion (in
this paper referred to as policy transfer), is based on the
analytical tools and conceptual contributions made by
Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24] on policy transfer analysis,
as well as on the complementary literature. It draws
from an analysis of three case studies on RE in Uganda,
Peru, and Thailand and is structured as follows. Section 
2 of the paper reviews briefly the links between institu-
tions, technology change, and policy transfer as a strat-
egy for low-carbon technology deployment. Section 3
provides the overall approach and framework for the
comparative analysis. Section 4 includes the results of
the analysis and aims to shed some light on how policy
transfer operates. The analysis will look at the causes
and motivations behind policy transfer, the actors in-
volved in the processes, the object of the transfer, the
spatial and temporal scale, the mechanisms, the drivers
and barriers observed in the processes, as well as the
success or failure and the stages of policymaking in
which policy transfer takes place.
The paper contributes to improving the understanding
of how technology transfer, as an external intervention,
connects with ongoing internal processes and institu-
tional conditions at the national and local level.
The paper focuses particularly on feed-in tariffs and
renewable energy auctions as policy instruments to be
analysed due to the significance of those instruments in
the three case study countries and the prevalence of
these instruments among renewable energy policy in-
struments used in the EU and around the world [25].
Conceptual foundations of policy innovation,
policy diffusion and policy transfer
In order to meet the objectives of the Paris Agreement
(PA), fundamental changes in how we produce, distrib-
ute and consume goods and services are necessary to
allow for rapid decarbonisation [26]. These transforma-
tions are often summarised as transition pathways from
one system to another, for instance from a carbon-
intensive economy to a low-carbon one [27].  However,
this transformation is subject to various challenges. For
instance, new mitigation technologies are initially more
expensive than their fossil fuel-based counterparts even
though learning curves and constant innovation have
made renewable energies cost-competitive in many parts
of the world [28]. Moreover, vested interests in preserv-
ing high-carbon practices and habits or dominant ‘re-
gimes’  as they are called in the literature [27, 29, 30]
present stumbling blocks on those transition pathways
since those regimes often benefit from historic institu-
tional support [29, 31].  In order for new technologies
and new practices to successfully challenge those old re-
gimes, it is therefore important to either change the eco-
nomics of those new technologies (i.e. make them
cheaper) or to change the institutional set-up to level
the playing field. Here, institutions are understood from
a social science perspective namely as the rules, norms,
and behaviors that sustain social structures such as reli-
gion, family networks or government agencies [32]. For
instance, EU power markets, for decades designed
around centralised, fossil-fuel-based electricity, will have
Page 3
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 3 of 18
to be adapted to an increasing share of flexible, de-
centralised renewables production to meet EU emission
reduction targets [33, 34].  New institutional set-ups,
manifest in a re-arrangement of competencies of actors
involved, as well as new policies, will have to be found.
Therefore, besides technological innovation, policy
innovation is needed to reflect new realities. For in-
stance, policy mechanisms can shield nascent (or niche)
technologies from market forces and allow for experi-
mentation, a process which is often referred to as ‘niche
management’  [35, 36].  Besides shielding new technolo-
gies, policymakers can also take an active role in creating
markets for technologies thus providing a demand ‘pull’
in addition to a technology ‘push’ [37]. Other strategies
involve increased research and development (R&D)
spending in the nascent phase of technology innovation
or rendering new, innovative technologies more visible
by, for example, adopting informational policies [37].
In that sense, technological innovation cannot be suc-
cessful without policy innovation. It is worth noting that
a successful process of policy innovation will depend
largely on the adaptive capacity of the country to absorb,
assimilate and harness the knowledge regarding low-
carbon technologies. This ‘adaptive efficiency’  refers to
the willingness and ability of a society to acquire new
knowledge, to innovate, to take risks through experimenta-
tion, and to eliminate failed political and economic organi-
zations and institutions that produce inefficient or unfair
outcomes [38].
Policymakers and other innovation system actors, the
prime movers of such institutional setups, have at least
two options to adapt institutions to their needs. They
can look at past national experiences from similar prob-
lems and try to adapt those past experiences to current
issues, or they can look beyond their own jurisdiction
and see how other policymakers in other countries or re-
gions responded to similar problems [23, 39].
This looking beyond national borders is indeed the
core of this paper, which investigates what happens
when policies spread from one place to another, a
process that is somewhat analogous--and/or coincident
with--the spread of technologies. Before elaborating on
the intellectual framework applied in the case study, it
is, however, useful to describe some differentiation in
the literature.
Policy transfer
Policy transfer is commonly defined as when ‘[…] know-
ledge about policies, administrative arrangements, institu-
tions and ideas in one political setting (past or present) is
used in development of policies, administrative arrange-
ments, institutions and ideas in another political setting’
[24].  Often, countries where policies originated are re-
ferred to as ‘lender’ countries while countries adopting the 
transferred policies are often referred to as ‘borrowers’
[24]. However, the question of whether and how policies
cross jurisdictions is not a new one, and several different,
related concepts can be found in literature.
For instance, Rose [39],  speaks of ‘lesson drawing’
which emphasises the voluntary nature of the process
([39],  p. 9).  Furthermore, lesson-drawing implies a
process of prospective evaluation, which not only en-
compasses the assessment of the policy already being
implemented, but also the appraisal of whether this pol-
icy can be successfully implemented in the borrower
country [39]. Policy convergence, another concept, simi-
larly preoccupied scholars from the early 1990s and tried
to answer the question if and why countries become
more alike in their governance of societal issues, be it
due to elite networks, harmonization of policies or emu-
lation in an ever increasingly connected world [40].
Policy transfer vs. policy diffusion
Another concept, sometimes used interchangeably with
policy transfer, is policy diffusion. Marsh and Dolowitz
argue that while policy transfer literature would emphasise
agency, policy diffusion literature would emphasise the
structural causes (government set ups, economic pressure,
media landscape etc.) of policies crossing from one juris-
diction to another [20]. Both strands of literature would
have large commonalities as both would identify four
methods of policy diffusion/transfer, namely (1) mimicry
(to seem more progressive for instance);  (2) coercion
(think of policies imposed by international lenders on
Greece during the financial crisis);  (3) learning (lesson
drawing from the success or failure elsewhere) and (4)
competition (such as lowering taxes and red tape to at-
tract investment) although evidence for some methods re-
mains patchy at best [20].
It is clear from the description above, that all of these
concepts - policy diffusion, policy transfer, lessons learn-
ing and policy convergence - are strongly interrelated
concepts. Some focus on the question of “what” is trans-
ferred (policy diffusion) while others are more occupied
with the question of why (convergence, lessons learning).
All of the concepts offer some explanatory values spe-
cific to them, but we chose to base our further analysis
on the Dolowitz and Marsh model since it has a strong
conceptual foundation and has been developed by iter-
ation, drawing on the range of concepts. Following
Dolowitz and Marsh, we will use the term “policy trans-
fer” throughout the following sections.
Analytical framework and comparative analysis of
policy transfer
The comparative analysis of policy transfer developed in
this section is structured mainly around the set of ana-
lytical and developed by Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24].
Page 4
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 4 of 18
This analytical framework, in turn, gathers contributions
from the literature in the fields of policy diffusion, policy
transfer, and policy convergence as well as from other
sources in policy comparative studies and international
studies (Rose 2001, [39–43]).
While theoretical reflections about policy transfer in-
vestigate how to conceptualise the transfer of policies
and institutions from one country to another, the analyt-
ical framework elaborated by Dolowitz and Marsh pro-
poses several attributes which make analysing policy
transfer more concrete and systematic. The authors sug-
gest that in order to better understand the transfer of
policies, one could look first at why policies are transferred
and at whether it was a voluntary transfer or a more coer-
cive one. Other criteria to look at is who is involved in the
transfer (which stakeholders),  and what instrument (pol-
icies, entire programmes or lessons) is transferred. Dolowitz
and Marsh also suggest to investigate at which level the
transfer happens (within a nation, between nations) and to
also analyse the constraints of the transfers and the motiva-
tions for the transfer (all based on [23]; and [24]).
However, in order to make this framework more flex-
ible to our case study contexts, we chose to both sim-
plify their model to reflect the different socio-economic
contexts of the case study countries, but also to enrich it
with several attributes to further our understanding of
the policy transfer process. The principal expansion we
make to the framework is to look at which stage of the
policy making cycle [44] policy transfer might happen, a
step of analysis not found in Dolowitz and Marsh.
Our analytical framework addresses the key aspects of
policy transfer and contains the following categories:
“causes and motivations”,  “actors”,  “object of transfer”, 
“temporal and spatial scale”,  “mechanisms of transfer”,
“drivers and barriers”, “policy success or failure” as well
as the “policy-making stage” of the policy transfer.
Figure 1 provides a graphic representation of our analyt-
ical framework. In section 4, each category contains a
table showing the specific criteria used in our analysis.
These eight analytical attributes of the policy transfer
process were applied to case studies, as discussed in the
section below, which also gives an overview of the
methods applied and provides some case study context.
Approach, methodology and case study context
Following the literature review (included in section 2)
and development of the initial research, three country
case studies were chosen using recent or current policies
and institutions that could be compared. The cases iden-
tified were in Uganda, Thailand and Peru, based on the
following criteria:
 The aim of geographical diversity to help to provide
a global perspective;
 Different socio-economic levels, including two
middle income (Peru, Thailand) and one
low-income country (Uganda) as compared to
high-income EU countries;
 Experience with different renewable energy
instruments, specifically that renewable energy
auctions and feed-in tariffs were considered and/
or used;
 Engagement in international cooperation, including
with EU member states, where feed-in tariffs and
renewable auctions were common policy
instruments; and
Fig. 1 Analytical framework for policy transfer processes. Source: Authors’ elaboration based on Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24]
Page 5
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 5 of 18
 Participating researchers had some experience in
these countries.
The main research questions were then applied to the
country cases: 
place, if so, who the important actors were and what in-
stitutional arrangements influenced Thai renewables
policies. In Thailand, 12 stakeholders were engaged and
a series of semi-structured interviews were conducted in
April 2017 in Bangkok, Thailand.
 How is policy transferred from one jurisdiction to
the other?
 Which are the important actors that facilitate that
transfer?
 How do the policies and institutional arrangements
in the “borrower” country differ from the policies
and institutional arrangements in the “lender”
country?
 Are there discernible differences between the three
countries in the way they borrow or receive policies
and/or institutions?
Semi-structured stakeholder interviews conducted in
the three case study countries are the primary sources for
the analysis to address our research questions. Stake-
holders in the three case studies included development
agencies, academics, development banks, electricity regu-
latory authorities, and independent consultants. Based on
material gathered during those stakeholder engagement
processes along with background literature, we analysed
the policy transfer process using the adapted Dolowitz
and Marsh model in the three case studies. The policy
context for the three country cases are introduced briefly
below. Where information on case studies came from the
literature, sections below will indicate the corresponding
papers. Otherwise, sources of information are stakeholder
interviews.
Thailand
Thailand’s successful economic growth in recent years
did not only drive up emissions [45] but raised concerns
of the country’s energy security [46] due to the country’s
increasing energy consumption. Although Thailand still
sources its energy needs to 88% from fossil fuels, the
12th National Economic and Social Development Plan
for the period of 2012 to 2027 calls for the country to
move towards a low carbon society [47]. Based on those
concerns about sustainability but also about energy se-
curity, Thailand experimented early with support instru-
ments for renewable energy. In 2007, the so-called
“Adder programme” was launched which guaranteed re-
newable energy producers a top-up of the regular stand-
ard tariff. This adder scheme was later replaced by a
fixed FiT in 2013 while competitive bidding for FiT con-
tracts was introduced between 2016 and 2017. It was
this period and the evolution from the Adder to the FiT
programme which was the subject of the analysis focus-
ing on the questions whether policy transfer had taken 
Uganda
Similar to the Thai case study, we looked at the transfer
process which occurred when the country designed and
implemented a FiT scheme for investment in on-grid RE.
This policy was an important step since rural electrifica-
tion rates were at a low 10% in 2014 [48]. The elaboration
and adoption of Ugandan FiTs can be separated into three
different phases with the first one beginning in 2007. Each
phase exhibited different institutional arrangements and
different engagements with other jurisdictions and inter-
national entities. Especially phase II and II (2010–2011
and beyond) saw increasing cooperation with other, non-
Ugandan actors such as the German Development Bank,
the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW), which led to
the adoption of the Global Energy Transfer Feed-in Tariff
programme (GET-FiT) which attracted some significant
RE investment. In Uganda, semi-structured interviews
were conducted with 14 stakeholders ranging from the
representative members of energy regulatory authority, bi-
lateral development bank, multinational consultancy,
international research organization etc.
Peru
The Peru case study looked at the design process of RE
auctions as a support instrument for RE in the Latin
American country. Interestingly, besides increasing na-
tional pressure by citizens and NGOs for clean energy
sources and a fruitful trip of then vice minister of en-
ergy, Pedro Gamio, to Germany from which he returned
as a staunch supporter of renewables [49],  it was also
international pressure which influenced the Peruvian re-
newables policies. In 2006, Peru and the United States of
America negotiated a trade promotion agreement which
specifically asked for the adoption of stringent environ-
mental policies [50].  For the Peruvian case study, we
conducted 25 semi-structured individual interviews and
a group interview with 13 specialists.
Results: Causes and motivations for policy transfer
Before describing case study results across the eight ele-
ments of the analytical framework, it is important to
note that concepts like policy transfer are at best an
illustration of the real-world process of policymaking be-
yond borders. In practice, as we will show, policies are
not always only ‘imported’ from the industrialised North
to the less-industrialised South. This north-south per-
spective neglects the fact that often, policies are dis-
cussed, designed and implemented to respond to specific
Page 6
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 6 of 18
national characteristics as much as international influ-
ences. Furthermore, a North-South perspective some-
how assumes reduced agency of local policymakers who
are simply ‘policy takers’  from policy ‘makers’  in other
countries. This rather dichotomic framing of policy
transfer does not correspond to the realities on the
ground where policies respond to both domestic and
international developments and where the flow of com-
munication is not always only from the North to the
South but also from the South to South and sometimes
even from South to North. This was particularly evident
in the Ugandan case, as described in section 4.2.2. How-
ever, for the sake of clarity and for the purpose of ad-
dressing our research questions in a systematic manner,
this paper focuses primarily on examples where policies
flowed from the North to the South, highlighting where
relevant the broader flows of information in the process
of policy transfer.
Causes and motivations
The first analytical element of our framework addresses the
motivation for policy transfer, i.e. the question of why ac-
tors engage in policy transfer. According to Dolowitz and
Marsh, policy transfer can be a voluntary and a rational
process, by which actors learn from another political setting
as a rational and intentional decision aimed at addressing a
recognized problem or issue. However, policy transfer can
also derive from external pressures, like the direct impos-
ition of policies from one jurisdication to another. More
often, however, a mix of both, coercive and voluntary ele-
ments, can be observed. Accordingly, policy transfer can be
understood as a continuum between the two extremes of
coercion and voluntariness [23, 24]. Figure 2 provides an
overview of what drives policy transfer. 
One can see that there are many motivations and trig-
gers for a policy transfer to occur. While some of them
are more coercive in nature like ‘economic pressure’, for
example exercised when international financial organisa-
tions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) de-
mand the implementation of certain policies in exchange
for loans, others are more voluntary in nature such as
using evidence and experiences from abroad to legitim-
ate domestic decisions taken [23].
Thus, legitimization, functional interdependence be-
tween countries, the velocity of technological change,
the competition between countries (e.g. for leading the
trends of modern policies), as well as the pressure of the
political economy between countries, and the trends and
challenges in the international agenda, all are important
causes of policy transfer [23, 24].
Our analysis showed several different causes and moti-
vations in our case study countries– some more voluntary,
some more coercive - for policy transfer in the field of re-
newable energy policy in case study countries (Table 1).
In the case of Peru, both voluntary and coercive el-
ements were present during different stages of the
process. In the first stage, voluntary lesson-drawing
and prospective evaluation of renewable energy pol-
icies were carried out by public and private actors.
Stakeholders specifically mentioned the leadership of
the ministry of energy and its vice minister, Mr. Pe-
dro Gamio, who visited countries like Germany to
learn about renewable energy and who himself was an
energy law consultant before becoming a  policy
maker [49].  In addition, the growing awareness about
the country’s vulnerability to climate change impacts
after the release of the Stern Review in 2006 and the
ensuing domestic political debate indicates that policy
Fig. 2 Causes and motivations as a continuum between pure coercive and pure voluntary policy transfer. Source: Authors elaboration based on
Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24]
Page 7
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 7 of 18
Table 1 Principal causes and motivations for policy transfer concerning RE
Countries  Peru
Causes/motivations
Pure Voluntary causes
Mixtures  Legitimation  Ka
Electoral Context
Uncertainty  ✓
Externalities
Technological Change
Economic Pressures  K
Competition
International Consensus/ trends  K
Others
Pure coercive causes
Source: Authors’ elaboration based on Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24]
aThe letter K refers to key causal factors observed over the policy transfer process 
Thailand
K
✓
K
✓
✓ 
Uganda
✓
K
✓
✓
Collaborative
transfer also involves uncertainties and international
trends as causal factors.
However, during the second stage of the policy transfer,
coercive factors became more prominent. In 2006, Peru
signed a trade agreement with the United States of America
(the ‘United States-Peru Trade Promotion agreement’)
which made the upgrade of Peruvian environmental gov-
ernance part of the trade deal and as a result, a renewable
energy support act (Legislative Decree 1002) was imple-
mented. This exogenous pressure, combined with inter-
national trends on climate change mitigation policies also
led to the creation of the Ministry of Environment in Peru.
In the case of Thailand and Uganda, the cause of the
policy transfer seemed to be more voluntary in nature.
In Thailand, energy security concerns have been a main
driver as well as the objective to legitimise a renewable
energy goal. Thailand’s successful economic growth dur-
ing the previous decades had resulted in a rapid and
steady increase in energy consumption while domestic
reserves were insufficient to meet the rising demand,
covered largely by imports of natural gas [51, 52]. The
need to shift away from reliance on rapidly dwindling
domestic natural gas and lignite resources while also re-
ducing dependence on expensive and potentially inse-
cure energy imports led to structural reforms aimed at
reducing imports, enhance energy conservation and
boost renewable energy uptake.
In this context, the policy transfer process was primar-
ily to legitimize the policy goal of increasing the share of
renewable energy to 8% by 2011 [53, 54]. RE received a
further boost after the change in government in 2001, as
well as by the broad support of the government after the
coup d’état in 2006, which updated the national energy
policy to establish a Feed-in Premium (FiP) (called
‘Adder’) for Renewables energies (RE) [55–57]. 
Similar to Thailand, energy security concerns were im-
portant for introducing a new RE support policy and for
attracting private investments in the renewable energy sec-
tor in Uganda. The country suffered major consecutive
droughts in the period between 2005 and 2007, which put
stress on the hydropower system, the main source of elec-
tricity in Uganda. Combined with high oil prices, high
diesel generation costs and a shortfall in the electricity sup-
ply, this led to an urgent need to diversify energy supply
and to exploit the potential of modern technologies. In this
way, uncertainty with regards to energy supply coupled
with the need to reduce reliance on emergency thermal en-
ergy created a fertile ground for FiT policies to be intro-
duced. In addition, some Ugandan policymakers and the
national Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) sought to
legitimize their RE policies by looking to other countries
(especially Germany, Spain) in order to draw lessons.
A comparison between the three countries reveals,
that motivations for a policy transfer were rather dif-
ferent. Uganda and Thailand were concerned with en-
ergy security and uncertainties evolving around
energy access, while environmental concerns were
high on the agenda in Peru. Also, the implementation
of Peruvian renewable support instruments seemed to
be more related to international pressure since the
US-Peru trade agreement had some significant influ-
ence on environmental regulations and the subse-
quent adoption of renewable support instruments.
Relevant actors in all three countries (see below)
looked for lessons learnt to other, mainly European
countries with Germany being often quoted (and in-
deed visited) to learn about renewable energy support
instruments. This look beyond national borders was
often done in order to lend legitimacy to domestic
policies, especially in Peru and Thailand.
Page 8
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 8 of 18
Actors involved in the policy transfer process
When it comes to policy transfer, a wide array of actors
can participate in the process. Although policymakers
usually take the most prominent roles, other actors such
as non-governmental organisations (NGOs) or private
sector players do influence the process as well. Often, the
roles of the actors, their influence on the policy transfer
process and their configuration changes along the way.
The Dolowitz and Marsh model identifies nine groups of
actors involved in the policy transfer process: elected offi-
cials, political parties, bureaucrats and civil servants, pres-
sure groups (which can sway the government’s policies
from outside government [58]), policy entrepreneurs and
experts, transnational corporations, supra-national organi-
zations (with strong influence as information dissemina-
tors and advocator of key policy issues at the international
level), think tanks and consultants.
When looking at the case studies, our analysis, based on
stakeholder engagement, showed that the role of actors in
the policy transfer process varies depending on the stage
the policy transfer is in – from initial elaborations to final
adoption – and on whether the policy transfer is more
voluntary or more coercive in nature. Moreover, different
actors can intervene in the policy transfer process either
by advancing the policy transfer or by hindering it, de-
pending on their stated interest and their power to do so.
Often, those cleavages run along the regime-niche dichot-
omy, as it was the case in Thailand where incumbent ac-
tors of the fossil fuel-based regime initially opposed
regulation to support RE (Table 2).
Actors in favour of policy transfer concerning renewable
energy
In the first stage of the policy transfer in Peru, political
parties, bureaucrats/civil servants, pressure groups and
foreign governments were involved in the development
of a regulatory framework for the promotion of RE. 
Although the support of political parties in the Congress
was limited, bureaucrats advocated and elaborated sev-
eral proposals for a regulatory framework, while some
pressure groups such as NGOs, international develop-
ment partners, networks, and associations as well as uni-
versities supported the institutional change towards
green energy. To this voluntary action of mainstreaming,
lesson-drawing and advocacy on renewable energy, key
coercive components intervened in the process in a sec-
ond stage, namely because of the trade negotiations
mentioned above.
In the last stage, predominantly voluntary, the role of
actors was centred on the design and the implementa-
tion of the support scheme. Thus, three main actor
groups were involved: bureaucrats/civil servants, consul-
tants, and foreign governmental bodies. Bureaucrats
from the Vice Ministry of Energy pre-defined the type of
support scheme that was going to be further developed
and adopted in Peru and decided on renewable energy
auctions. The final design of the support scheme came
mainly from government officials in the Ministry of
Energy and Mines (MEM), the Regulatory agency for the
energy and mining sector-Organismo supervisor de la
inversion en Energía y Minería (OSINERGMIN), consul-
tants, state agencies, power companies and foreign orga-
nisations such as the Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) from Germany, a large coalition
of actors when it comes to policy transfer in Peru.
In the case of Thailand, the type and role of the actors
were also related to the stage of the policy transfer as
well as to the fact that the transfer process was largely a
voluntary one, based on lesson-drawing, particularly
from RE support programmes in Germany and the UK.
In the first stage of the development and evolution of
Thailand’s FiT policy for RE (the Adder programme),
many actors participate in the process of developing the
Adder scheme. Elected officials, such as the former
Table 2 Actors involved in the policy transfer process concerning renewable energy
Countries Actors  Peru
Elected officials
Political parties  ✓
Bureaucrats/civil servants  K
Pressure groups  ✓
Policy entrepreneurs/experts  ✓
Transnational corporations  ✓
Supra-national organizations
Think tanks
Consultants  ✓
Others  K- [Foreign Governments (US)]
Source: Authors’ elaboration based on Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24]
*The letter K references to key actors in the policy transfer process 
Thailand
K*
✓
✓
✓
K
✓
✓ 
Uganda
K
K
✓
✓
✓
✓
Page 9
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 9 of 18
Ministers of Energy contribute decisively to legitimizing
the Adder program and civil servants of governmental
agencies such as the Department Alternative Energy De-
velopment and Efficiency (DEDE) and the Energy policy
and planning office (EPPO) were very active in the
process of designing renewable energy policies. It is im-
portant to note, that delegations from the ministry of
energy as well as from EPPO took part in a tour
throughout Europe in order to learn from those coun-
tries’ experiences with RE support instruments.
Pressure groups including power utilities and private
small power producers interested in grid-interconnection
of small-scale RE also had a relevant role in the policy
transfer process. The private power producers, though not
involved in the earlier phases of policy transfer, exerted a
certain influence in the later phases of public consultation
to modify Thai FiT policy as well as for its substitution
with RE auctions between 2013 and 2017. Likewise, policy
entrepreneurs and experts from policy research institu-
tions, universities and local NGOs were involved a great
deal in the learning processes and recommending the suit-
able RE instruments as well as giving suggestions to adapt
the FiT policy according to the Thai context. Finally, think
tanks played a relevant role in policy lesson-learning in
the early phase of transfer, and in regulations drafting for
the Ministry of Energy while international agencies partic-
ipated in the policy transfer process, mainly acting as pol-
icy consultants.
As for the case of Uganda, the principal actors involved
in designing RE support policies – which one could group
into three distinct phases - were the ERA, policymakers
from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development
(MEMD), as well as external consultants especially during
the Phase II of the FiT program and Phase III (GETFiT)
according to interviews stakeholders. In the first phase of
the FiT, which was exploratory in nature (Uganda being
among the first African countries to introduce FiTs), ERA
and MEMD were driving the process of policy adoption
and diffusion. The instrument was inspired by the Ger-
man FiT model which was chosen as a model over a US-
style instrument of renewable energy standards. Moreover,
German institutions such as the GIZ/KfW were in talks
with Ugandan policy makers about the potential design of
the policy instrument. Other actors, while not directly in-
volved, created an environment conducive to RE support
policies through their advocacy for liberalization and
power sector reforms. The FiT in the first phase built on
this core principle: promoting decentralized and small-
scale power generation by independent players. In this
phase, ERA and MEMD focused on legitimizing the FiT
program. In determining the FiT rates, the elected officials
and political pressure groups played an influential role. In
Phase II of the Uganda Renewable Energy Feed-In Tariff
(REFiT),  external consultants such as CAMCO were 
involved to review the FiT and provide expert judgment.
This also served the purpose of convincing those stake-
holders which resisted (elected officials) and of legitimizing
the policy instrument. Quite interestingly, CAMCO also
brought with them some expertise from their experiences
with FiTs in countries such as South Africa. Therefore, one
could argue that the policy transfer process in Uganda was
not only between the global North and the global South,
but also between to Southern countries.
Phase III combined a FiT premium scheme with RE
auctions and external consultants, independent advisors
and organizations such as The United Nations Environ-
ment Programme (UNEP),  the Frankfurt School of
Finance and Management and the German GIZ played
an influential role in shaping and implementing the pol-
icy instrument. Together with local consultancies such
as CAMCO, they were involved in drawing on key les-
sons and experiences (both positive and negative) from
Germany and South Africa (in particular), adapting and
matching the different ideas to suit the local economic
and political context, and also providing support in
building capacities of the local institution to be able to
successfully implement the policy/program.
Actors against and resistance to policy transfer concerning
RE
However, actors can not only play a supporting role for pol-
icy transfer processes to take place, but can also hinder the
process. Often, those actors assuming a more hindering
role are found in the fossil fuel-based regime, which often
opposes or at least doesn’t support an increased renewable
energy uptake. In the case of Peru, the main pressure group
against RE penetration policy was the National Society of
Mining, Oil, and Energy- Sociedad Nacional de Petróleo
Minas y Energía (SNMPE), an industry association repre-
senting oil, natural gas, and hydroelectric industry. Orga-
nized in the SNMPE, the incumbents of the energy sector
resisted the promotion of RE which was seen as a measure
which would also introduce more competition to the en-
ergy market. Other civil servants opposed or were resistant
to the implementation of the regulations, such as bureau-
crats from the MEM who considered hydro and thermal
electricity production as the priority in Peru. Finally, al-
though not in open opposition, Congress generally showed
limited support for the various proposals to enact the regu-
latory framework for RE [49, 59].
In the case of Thailand, utilities, particularly the Electricity
Generating Authority of Thailand (EGAT), were the princi-
pal players opposing RE policies according to the stake-
holders engaged. Interestingly, the structure of Thailand’s
power market with a single vertically integrated utility, the
state-owned EGAT, owning and managing the large major-
ity of power generation assets and the entirety of the trans-
mission network gives EGAT some significant leverage to
Page 10
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 10 of 18
oppose legislation for a more decentralised and diverse mar-
ket. Not surprisingly, EGAT imposed a strong resistance to
the policy transfer of RE support instruments.
As for the case of Uganda, the opposition or resistance
was not expressed outright by any consolidated interest
group. Instead, it was expressed primarily by selected in-
dependent elected officials who expressed concern about
the tariff rates and the way those rates were calculated.
Furthermore, there was resistance from one of the inde-
pendent power producers, who was expecting a higher
tariff rate. In the end, however, Uganda reached a com-
promise as a result of stakeholder negotiations between
ERA and the power producer.
When comparing the actor coalition in the three
countries, it is clear that policy transfer is often a multi-
stakeholder endeavour. Different types of actors have in-
fluenced the policy transfer and implementation process
in all three countries, although the process is often
driven by elected officials and national bureaucrats.
International organisations have been playing a more
prominent role in Peru where trade negotiations coin-
cided with deliberations on renewable support instru-
ments but both Thailand and Uganda also made use of
connections with international entities such as the GIZ.
Quite interestingly, the Ugandan policy transfer process
incorporated insights from other sub-Saharan African
countries, namely South Africa, thus conforming that
policy transfer is often not a clear-cut North-South
process where policies flow from the North to the South,
but that lessons and best practice examples can also flow
from Southern countries to other Southern countries.
Nevertheless, Europe can still serve as an example.
For instance, regime actors such as utilities and fossil
fuel lobby organisations worked against implementing
and transferring renewable energy support policies,
particularly in Thailand and Peru, a situation not un-
like the one experienced in Germany (see [60]). Ugan-
dan regime actors seemed to have assumed a less
confrontational role. 
Object of the policy transfer
When it comes to what exactly is transferred in policy
transfer, there is a variation from an entire policy program
is transferred, while in other cases, only a policy idea may
be transferred. Moreover, even if a policy programme is
transferred, the details and nature of the instruments and
institutional set-ups which translate these programmes
into action might differ in the borrowing country from the
instruments in the lender country [24, 61].
According to Dolowitz and Marsh, we consider eight
categories for analysing the objects of transfer: policy goals,
policy content, policy instruments, policy programmes
(which, according to Dolowitz and Marsh are specific ac-
tions to deliver on policies),  institutions, ideologies, ideas
and attitudes and negative lessons (Table 3).
In Peru, we observed that several objects had been
transferred, namely the policy content, policy instru-
ments as well as negative lessons learnt from renewable
energy support in Spain and Germany. The knowledge
for designing policies as well as the specific instruments
to achieve the local renewables target was a central elem-
ent of the policy transfer. For example, the Legislative De-
cree 1002 contains some elements from the German
“Renewable Energy Sources Act”,  the EU country’s well-
known flagship renewable support instrument. Similarly,
Decree 1002 contains elements from the Spanish Royal De-
cree 436/2004 [49]. Experiences from Spain and Germany
also provided important lessons on why RE auctions would
be the most appropriate support scheme in the Peruvian
context, with particularly the regulatory agency OSINERG-
MIN gathering lessons learnt from Spanish and German
partners in the implementation of their particular FiT
schemes [62].
In the case of Thailand, the implementation process of
the Feed in premium (FiP) program Adder indicates that
the chief objects of policy transfer were ideas and atti-
tudes, negative lessons learnt and policy instruments
themselves. The process began with a review of renew-
able support instruments that were effective in a variety
Table 3 Objects of the policy transfer
Country
Object of the P.T.
Policy goals
Policy content
Policy instruments (tools for achieving goals)
Policy programs (specific means of the course of action)
Institutions
Ideologies
Ideas and attitudes
Negative lessons (what does not work)
Source: Authors’ elaboration based on Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24] 
Peru
✓
✓
✓
✓ 
Thailand
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓ 
Uganda
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Page 11
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 11 of 18
of countries, followed by the selection of those measures
that were feasible in Thailand’s context, and in the end,
several focused studies on selected instruments.
In addition, the policy transfer process also processed
lessons learned from the Renewable Portfolio Standard
(RPS) scheme in the UK and from several states in the
US, as well as lessons concerning China’s decision to
shift from RPS to a FiT program. Finally, the policy
instruments of FiT/FiP drew on key elements of the
German FiT scheme, in particular, the price mechanism,
in order to legitimize the Thai renewable energy policy.
In the case of Uganda, the object of the policy transfer
has been centred mainly on the policy goals, the policy con-
tent and the policy instruments. Lessons from countries
such as Germany were applied in the design of the instru-
ment and helped to shape the specific context of the FiT.
Besides some lessons from Germany, the Ugandan case also
revealed that experiences from the US RPS scheme were in-
corporated into the Ugandan FiT policy. Moreover, Ugan-
dan regulators gathered information, ideas, and knowledge
not only from instruments applied in the industrialised
North but also from a number of developing country con-
texts (including Brazil, South Africa and Sri Lanka) thus
adding to the observation that sometimes, policy transfer is
a process also happening from South to South.
As was the case in Thailand, the FiT in Uganda also
drew on the key elements of the German FiT scheme, in
order to legitimize the RE policy. Furthermore, the Phase
III i.e. the GET-FiT program drew heavily on the policy
program developed by the Deutsche Bank Asset Man-
agement Team in order to offer an innovative strategy
for developing countries to attract capital in their RE
sector. This program was modified and adapted to make
it relevant to suit the local context. It was more than just
a policy instrument; it encompassed a package of instru-
ments, offering direct incentives, risk mitigation strat-
egies, standard agreements and capacity strengthening of
local institutions. Hence, while in the initial phases, the
object of policy transfer remained limited to policy goals
and policy instruments, the latter phase III broadened
the instruments itself by adding elements such as risk
mitigation strategies which go beyond traditional RE
policies such as FiTs.
Comparing what actually is transferred in the policy
transfer process across case study countries reveals that 
not only is policy transfer not always a journey from
North to South but also that policies are rarely imple-
mented without adaptation to local contexts. Indeed, all
three countries, while seeking inspiration from abroad,
spend some significant time to make the different pol-
icies and programmes “work” in local contexts. During
this process, negative lessons learnt in other countries
proved to be an important factor in all three case study
countries and elements of renewable support policies
and strategies from abroad (Europe, but also Sub-
Saharan Africa and Asia) found their ways into national
policies and programmes, particularly in Peru.
Spatial scale of the policy transfer
With regards to the spatial aspect of the policy transfer,
policymakers can look to three levels of governance: the
international, the national and the local level. Not only
can sub-national units of government draw lessons from
each other but also the national government can draw
lessons from lower levels of government, which in turn
can draw upon the national government. Finally, the
lesson can be drawn from the international level be it
voluntarily or more in a coercive manner due to, for in-
stance, economic pressure, as described above (Dolowitz
and Marsh [23, 24] (Table 4).
Our analysis shows that actors in all three case study
countries looked to other countries for positive as well
as negative experiences in RE development. Generally,
those ‘borrowing’ countries were also those with a longer
experience of FiTs although some inspiration was also
sought in countries like Brazil or Sri Lanka.
In the case of Peru, the policy transfer happened not
only from abroad but knowledge was also acquired from
local experiences. But as described above, Germany and
Spain where the main jurisdictions, Peruvian policy
makers drew lessons from, particularly when choosing
renewable auctions as support instruments over fixed
feed-in tariffs. Thus, the regulatory framework follows
elements from German and Spanish legislation as a “hy-
brid” with adaptations to the Peruvian context [49].
In Thailand, Germany was also an important country
when it comes to the transfer of knowledge and policies.
However, the German experience was not the only juris-
diction Thai stakeholders looked to for lessons when de-
signing their policies. The UK, the USA and China also
Table 4 Spatial scale of the lesson drawing
From
To 
Germany Spain  EU  South
Africa
Peru (local experience) ✓  ✓
Thailand (local experience) ✓  ✓
Uganda  ✓  ✓  ✓
Source: Authors’ elaboration based on Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24] 
UK  US  China
✓✓✓
✓
Page 12
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 12 of 18
provided for some inspiration. For example, the Chinese
experience influenced the decision to switch to FiTs and
the establishment of an independent regulatory agency in
2008 is said to have been modelled after the UK’s office of
Gas and Electricity Markets (OFGEM) [46, 63, 64].
In the case of Uganda, the spatial scale heavily in-
volved drawing positive and negative lessons from the
experiences of Germany and Spain with regards to FiT
and renewable auctions, and also lessons from the US
with regard to Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPS).
These lessons served as important sources of knowledge
for choosing and designing the Ugandan FiT instrument.
Also, successful experiences in South Africa with RE
auctions influenced the implementation of phase III of
Ugandan renewables support, Uganda being only the
second country (after South Africa) which experimented
with auctions.
When looking at all three case study countries, it is clear
that Europe, particularly Germany, has provided inspir-
ation for local policy makers on how to design renewable
energy support policies. Other jurisdictions such as the
US, the UK or Spain also provided for some significant
knowledge transfer. But besides this North-South transfer,
the Ugandan case study shows that knowledge, ideas and
lessons can also flow between countries of the global
South while experiences in Thailand show that policy
transfer might also happen often between countries which
are geographically close to each other.
Mechanisms of policy transfer
One important part of the analysis is to address the
question of how policy transfer is carried out, or how
the mechanisms of policy transfer work [23, 24, 65].
Dolowitz and Marsh propose several mechanisms of
policy transfer: copying (which implies very little or no
changes to the policy), hybridization and synthesis, emu-
lation (which implies some adaptations to local contexts)
and inspiration where little (or nothing) is actually
drawn from other jurisdictions (Table 5).
In the case of Peru, policy transfer was mainly carried
out using inspiration and emulation as mechanisms. For
example, inspiration was the mechanism of policy transfer
during the period 2006–2008 when leading bureaucrats 
from the MEM were inspired by solar and wind projects
in Germany, which motivated them to launch similar pro-
cesses to increase renewables penetration in Peru.
Emulation was then used to design the regulatory frame-
work and the design of the specific support scheme in the
form of auctions based on experiences in Germany and
Spain. Indeed, by choosing auctions over Feed-in tariffs,
Peruvian stakeholders chose to adapt experiences from
abroad to local contexts.
In Thailand, the degree of transfer went from copying
to hybridization, especially as for the design and imple-
mentation of the FiP scheme, Adder. During the early
phase (2002–2007), policymakers were keen on copying
the German FiT policy that had proven successful for
RE, but local political, institutional and market contexts
such as the quasi monopoly of EGAT forced the policy
transfer to involve some degree of adoption and adjust-
ments. For instance, the regulatory and administrative
design of renewable energy support drew on the experi-
ence of the Thai Very Small Power Producer (VSPP)
net-metering program and the policy transfer was finally
implemented in a form that combined traits of German
FiT policy with traits from Thailand’s previous Small
Power Producers (SPP) bidding scheme and net-metering
regulations.
In Uganda, the transfer evolved from inspiration and
emulation to hybridization. Similar to the experience in
Thailand, regulators were inspired by the German FiT
scheme in phase I, which played a key role in inspiring
renewable support in Uganda. However, German RE
policy instruments where not simply copied, but were
modified to the Ugandan context and the support in-
struments which were finally adopted did also include
lessons learnt from other countries in the region such as
South Africa and Rwanda. Nevertheless, German actors
such as the KfW supported Ugandan government in set-
ting up a programme which went beyond simple FiTs.
As part of the new GETFiT programme, the World Bank
could be called upon to issue partial risk guarantees to
RE project thus lowering the risk profile, an instrument
which goes beyond simple FiTs.
A comparative view of the three case study countries re-
veals that while initially the policy transfer might start out
as a copying mechanism, experiences in Uganda, Thailand
Table 5 Evolution of policy transfer mechanisms
Policy transfer process
Peru  2006→2007
Inspiration
Thailand  2002→2007
Copying and emulation
Uganda  2005→2007
Inspiration
Source: Authors’ elaboration based on Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24] 
2007→2008
Inspiration
2009→2013
Emulation
2007→2010
Inspiration and Emulation 
2008→2009
Emulation
2013→2017
Hybridization
2012→2014
Emulation and Hybridization
Page 13
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 13 of 18
and Peru show that policies and support instruments are
not transferred without modifications. Indeed, in every
country, stakeholders soon adapted lessons learnt from
other countries to local contexts in order to implement
suitable RE support instruments, policies and programmes.
Constraints on policy transfer
When looking at policy transfer as a practice, it is also
useful to investigate its constraints. Dolowitz and Marsh
propose the following set of constraints or barriers: the
level of complexity (assuming that the more complex
the policy is, the more difficult the transfer will be), past
policies (if innovation is hindered by those past policies),
structural and institutional feasibility and a set of fea-
tures which they call ‘ideology, cultural, proximity, tech-
nology, economic, bureaucratic and language’.
In our analysis we chose to supplement this constraint
category with potential drivers of policy transfer,
i.e. looking at what kind of factors might support the
process (Table 6).
In the Peruvian case, there were two main barriers re-
lated to the policy transfer process. The first constraint
was a mix of technology and ideological constraints
since some pressure groups had been vocal in their op-
position to RE support policies, citing economic reasons
(RE was perceived as being too expensive) as well as
technological reasons (RE was perceived as European
model which was thought not to work in Peru because
of lack of technical experience). The second main barrier
was the availability of large reserves of natural gas and
the high potential of hydroelectricity production, with
both sources appearing more competitive and less bur-
densome on the taxpayer compared to renewable energy
and needed support schemes.
However, there were also multiple drivers of the policy
transfer process and many of them coincide with the differ-
ent aspects of the causes and motivations observed above.
For example, the external pressure to adopt the Legislative
Decree 1002 in order to comply with the requirements of
the US-Peru Trade Agreement can be considered an im-
portant driver for Peruvian environmental policies and sub-
sequently for policy adoption. Furthermore, and despite the 
pressure from certain lobby groups, environmental aware-
ness and lobby work by other stakeholders played a sup-
porting role in the policy transfer process.
The Thai case study revealed a somewhat complex
picture, describing both barriers and drivers. Thai RE
support policies clearly benefited from an active interest
of policymakers and policy entrepreneurs within minis-
tries who actively worked on renewable support policies,
making use of political and bureaucratic resources. Ideo-
logical features played a role as well since energy security
was seen as a co-benefit of increasing the share of renew-
able energy. On the other hand, stakeholder engagement
in Thailand also revealed some barriers to renewable sup-
port policies.
One major shortcoming was the structure of the electri-
city market which - in its centralized form and dominated
by the state-owned incumbent utility EGAT - was seen as
counter-productive to increased renewables uptake. Indeed,
in this case, structural feasibility posed a constrain on the
policy transfer process and limited regulatory resources
were identified as a barrier. Those limited resources were
also cited for the development of a lucrative secondary
market for RE permits after the Adder programme was
adopted, where permits would be traded amongst stake-
holders, without capacity actually being build. In the same
vein, the authority of the regulatory body was assessed as
having insufficient powers to regulate RE uptake. Here, past
policies and structural constraints clearly had a negative im-
pact on the policy transfer process.
In the case of Uganda, structural feasibility proved to be a
driver and not a barrier to the policy transfer process. Ac-
cording to interviewed stakeholders, a coherent, rather inde-
pendently elaborated support framework for RE under the
leadership of ERA but facilitated by international consultan-
cies and institutions drove the policy transfer process for-
ward. Nevertheless, along the way, a certain number of
tensions arose between the independent regulator ERA and
different ministries for instance about the tariff rates. Also,
the failure to attract private investment in renewables in
Uganda might have put a break on RE development in the
first phase of the support policies, but lessons learnt were
later used to build a large coalition with national and inter-
national institutions in phase III to boost RE uptake.
Table 6 Main drivers and barriers
Complexity of the policy
Constraints set by past policies
Structural and institutional features
Political, bureaucratic and economic resources
Ideological and cultural features
Source: Author’s elaboration based on Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24]
* Drivers (D)/Barriers (B) 
Peru
B*
B/D*
B*
D/B*
B* 
Thailand
B*
B*
D/B*
D* 
Uganda
B*
D*
B/D*
Page 14
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 14 of 18
Comparing case study countries suggests that barriers
which might arise during the process have the potential
to stymie policy transfer. For instance, the complexity of
policies in the lender countries often make it difficult for
the borrower countries to adopt the same policies with-
out significantly amending them and adapting them to
local contexts. This make contextual factors such as how
institutions are functioning and cooperating with each
other a key factor of successful policy transfer. Also, pol-
icy decision taken in the past, as seen in Thailand, often
hinder policy transfer since for instance market struc-
tures in the lender countries are more conducive to RE
support than in borrower countries. Contextual factors
such as the state of the economy were found in all case
studies, while the Peruvian case was the most explicit in
acknowledging how international pressure can influence
the policy transfer process.
Policy success and policy failure
Whether policies and their transfer can be deemed “suc-
cessful” and against which criteria such a success is to be
measured is still debated in the literature. Nevertheless,
Dolowitz and Marsh propose three factors which might
have a negative impact on the policy transfer [23, 24].
First, the borrowing country might have insufficient infor-
mation about the policy, its institutions and how it oper-
ates in the lending country, thus leading to uninformed
transfer. They further suggest the category of incomplete
transfer when essential elements of the borrowed policy
are not transposed. Lastly, inappropriate transfer, would
occur when contextual factors such as political, economic
or even ideological ones are overlooked [24].
As for the Peruvian case the process could be assessed
as a successful policy transfer since the process was nei-
ther uninformed, incomplete or inappropriate. Knowledge
from abroad has been applied to the policy framework
(e.g. Legislative Decree: DL 1002) and negative lessons
and recommendations obtained from the interaction with
actors in Germany and Spain for the design of the policy
instrument informed the policy’s implementation.
The fact that in Thailand, the FiT was transferred
from abroad and that it has been adopted in Thai con-
texts indicates, in general, a successful process. The
short-term RE targets set in the energy policy 2008 were
not fully achieved by 2011 [57] and the difficult institu-
tional structure as well as the significant revision of FiT
mechanisms, indicate some level of incomplete and in-
appropriate transfer. Nevertheless, the policy’s imple-
mentation helped to establish Thailand as a pioneer in
renewables promotion in the region.
In the case of Uganda, the analysis points to a general
success of the policy transfer, across the three phases
with some shortcomings in phase I, notably with attract-
ing private investment in RE capacity. Private investment 
gained traction in the later phases, when FiT premiums
and auctions where implemented as well as in phase III,
when the GETFiT programme came to fruition. Under
the Phase III GET FiT program, 17 projects were im-
plemented with a total installed capacity of nearly 160
MW [66].
Overall, all three countries have implemented RE support
policies. This process was not necessarily a straight-forward
one and bumps in the road necessitated amending and
adapting the policies, particularly in Thailand and Uganda.
However, the method used to analyse these case studies
does not seek to assess whether policy transfer was indeed
successful in boosting the share of renewable energies or
whether it was successful from a socio-economic point of
view. Rather, they focus on the process of policy transfer it-
self, concluding that policies seem to have successfully
transferred from one jurisdiction to another. Moreover, it
might be argued that what constitutes a “success” when it
comes to a policy transfer, is still open for debate.
The transfer process and the policy making cycle
This last category is an addition to the Dolowitz and
Marsh framework (although actors discuss it as an area
of further research) and is based on public policy theory
and the commonly used policy cycle. In a nutshell, pol-
icy making can be understood as a cycle, starting from
agenda-setting and policy formulation,  leading to deci-
sion making and implementation to finally evaluation of
the policy [44].  Assessing when in the policy making
process local policies are inspired by foreign policies and
when lessons and knowledge is transferred thus gives a
more complete understanding of how policies, lessons
and knowledge flows from one jurisdiction to another
(Table 7).
In the case of Peru, elements from abroad influenced
particularly the early stages of the policy making cycle.
For instance, increasing environmental awareness in the
wake of the Stern report led policy makers to look to
other countries to find solutions to increase the share of
renewable energies.
Similarly, in Thailand, the clearest form of policy
transfer was at the beginning of the policy cycle. Several
stakeholders consulted argued that Thai governmental
delegations were in contact with ministerial colleagues
Table 7 Policy-making stage of the transfer process
Peru Thailand Uganda
Problem definition and agenda setting ✓  ✓  ✓
Policy formulation  ✓  ✓  ✓
Decision making and policy implementation ✓  ✓  ✓
Policy evaluation  ✓  ✓
Source: Author’s elaboration based on Dolowitz and Marsh [23, 24] and Jann
and Wegrich [58]
Page 15
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 15 of 18
in the EU (such as German officials) as well as with in-
stitutions such as the GIZ to learn from the German FiT
experience. Nevertheless, once implemented, changes to
the Adder program (and the replacement of the scheme
with FiTs) have entailed some bilateral form of communi-
cation as well, not only on the political level but also be-
tween EPPO and German utilities. Therefore, while policy
transfer might have been the strongest in the initial
phase, the transfer might have happened throughout
the policy-making cycle while at the same time, Thai
policymakers clearly took into consideration national
and local specificities.
In Uganda, policy transfer was also the most promin-
ent in the beginning of the policy making cycle. How-
ever, elements of policy transfer were observed in the
later stages, particularly during the evaluation of phase I
where policy makers then reached out to international
organisations and independent consultants to adapt
international RE support policies to local needs.
It is interesting to note that in all three countries, the
beginning of the policy making cycle (problem defin-
ition, agenda setting and policy formulation) were the
most susceptible to the transfer of policies, lessons and
knowledge from one jurisdiction to the other. However,
the difficulty of quantifying those transfers and the in-
sufficient sample size are not sufficient to make this a
general conclusion.
Discussion and conclusions
Low-carbon technologies, including especially renewable
energy technologies, need to be much more widely de-
ployed in order to meet climate and energy policy goals.
But technological innovation, while necessary, is only one
aspect of this endeavour. The right policy environment has
to be in place as well, to support technological innovation
and increase the uptake of low-carbon technologies. Some
countries joined the efforts on climate change and renew-
ables earlier than others and have therefore acquired signifi-
cant experience as to what works in terms of a facilitative
policy environment. In the same vein, their experiences can
also provide valuable lessons as to what did not function
and what negative impacts (on society, on the economy
etc.) were felt due to specific policies. It is therefore logical
that countries with less experiences in one issue area look
to those first mover countries for lessons learnt and know-
ledge gained. When it comes to policies, this dynamic of
lesson learning is often referred to as policy transfer.
Our paper contributes to deepen the understanding
of the policy transfer process by shedding light on
many details of this process by comparing experiences
in three case study countries on three continents.
Further research will be needed to confirm or nuance
our insights and the sample of three countries while
illustrative is not sufficient to draw general 
conclusions about cases of policy transfer in all con-
texts. Nevertheless, several observations can be made.
Our empirical findings show that policy transfer con-
cerning support instruments for renewable energy tech-
nologies has occurred in the three countries analysed
and that the processes have followed different paths of
learning and implementation.
With regards to the causes and motivations behind
policy transfer, we observed that efforts to legitimize cer-
tain national policy decisions as well as the feared im-
pacts of climate change proved to be key motivations to
look for other countries’ experiences with tackling these
issues. Also, uncertainty with regards to issues such as
energy security (in the case of Thailand) and/or future
climate patterns (in the case of Uganda) proved to be a
prime motivation for the policy transfer process. As the
case of Peru has shown, developments in the inter-
national governance landscape such as trade negotia-
tions can also have an impact, thus pointing to the fact
that in some contexts, coercion might also play a role in
the policy transfer process.
When it comes to the different actors involved in the
processes of a policy transfer, the empirical findings
show that both actors from inside the government and
actors from outside can play an important role. Likewise,
the type and role of the actors were not the same in each
stage of the policy transfer, pointing to the fact that dif-
ferent stages – from problem definition to policy adop-
tion- might encourage a different set of actors to
become active. For example, while governmental stake-
holders and bureaucrats in the administrations of studies
countries often initiate the policy transfer, lobby groups
or external experts and consultancies often join the
process later on (Uganda, Thailand, Peru).  Sometimes,
those external stakeholders are specifically invited in
later stages to adapt policies from one jurisdiction to the
specific circumstances on the ground (Uganda). It there-
fore seems that policy transfer usually involves a rather
large panoply of actors which can both hinder or drive the
policy transfer process forward and whose configuration
changes along the process of the transfer. Moreover, in all
three case study countries we observed that stakeholders
from lender countries were involved in the process.
Concerning the object of transfer, policy goals, policy con-
tent, policy instruments and lessons learnt based on the nega-
tive experiences in the lender countries, are all present in the
policy transfer processes of the three borrower countries ana-
lysed. It is important to note, that lessons and best practice
examples did not only come from OECD countries like
Germany, Spain, the UK, or the US, but also from China (in
the case of Thailand) and South Africa in the case of Uganda,
thus pointing to a South-South conduit for policy transfer in
addition to the more commonly studied north-south trans-
fer. Nevertheless, Germany and its flagship energy transition
Page 16
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 16 of 18
laws were mentioned quite often by local stakeholders
as a source of inspiration in all three case studies.
When it comes to the mechanism of policy transfer, it is
noteworthy that no transfer process was carried out by
purely copying other countries RE support instruments. In
Uganda and Peru, we observed an inspirational phase at
the beginning of the policy transfer process while
Thailand came closest to emulating German FiTs. How-
ever, local circumstances soon made it necessary to adapt
foreign policies to local contexts. This was the case in
Thailand, where the support instrument had to be adapted
to the highly centralised and monopolised electricity mar-
ket and in Uganda, where RE support policies went be-
yond simple economic instruments and also included
adapting the institutional set up. In the case of Peru, the
policy transfer process included two stages of inspiration,
and a final stage of emulation, related to the policy regula-
tory framework and design of the support scheme respect-
ively. In the same vein, elements of policy transfer can be
found in all stages of the local policy making cycle. How-
ever, it seems that while information flowed from lender
to borrower countries throughout the process, that the
stages most susceptible to incorporate lessons and know-
ledge from abroad where the stages of agenda-setting and
policy formulation, although quantifying this dynamic is
difficult and these observations remain anecdotal.
Another observation to be made is that contextual
factors in borrower countries (adopter countries) play a
prominent role in the policy transfer process and can
both constitute a barrier and a driver for those pro-
cesses. For instance, renewable support in Peru was also
hindered by the presence of large gas reserves (deemed
to be cheaper) while the structure of the electricity mar-
ket was deemed not very beneficial for RE deployment
in Thailand, thus illustrating the importance of past pol-
icies and institutional features impacting policy transfer.
Economic issues such as increasing costs of renewable
subsidies have been observed in Uganda, an experience
not unlike the one in Germany where generous feed-in
tariffs were not adapted to falling technology costs, thus
driving up overall costs for society of the instrument.
When it comes to the question of whether the policy
transfer in the target countries was a success, our observa-
tions, although qualitative in nature, point to a careful
positive assessment. Although bumps have been observed
along the way and policies had to be adapted to local con-
text in a quite substantial manner, there was little evidence
for uninformed, incomplete or inappropriate policy trans-
fer. According to the Renewable Energy Policy Network,
all countries still have dedicated RE support policies in
place as of 2018 [25].
Our study shows that the conceptual model of policy
transfer offers a number of different analytical tools that
facilitate an evaluation of the design and implementation 
of different policies and institutions in one country or
region can be applied in other countries or regions. This
conceptual model and the comparative analysis of the
three cases found that technology and policy transfer are
more appropriately seen as continuous and evolving pro-
cesses of change rather than one-off events. Furthermore,
policy transfer is significantly influenced by contextual
factors such as the institutional set up in the borrower
country or economic factors. And while inspiration and
knowledge are often sought in first mover countries in the
OECD, who had some significant experience in RE sup-
port, transferred policies had to be adapted to local con-
texts, often in dialogue with a diverse set of stakeholders.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that the speed of commu-
nication and the increasing integration of information sys-
tems around the world is likely to affect policy learning and
policy transfer into the future. At the same time, there must
be a willingness across different countries or regions for
international cooperation in order for policies to be suc-
cessfully transferred or for significant learning to occur.
Abbreviations
DEDE: Department of Alternative Energy Development and Efficiency;
DL: Legislative Decree; EGAT: Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand;
EPPO: Energy Policy and Planning Office; ERA: Electricity Regulatory
Authority; ERC: Energy Regulatory Commission; EU: European Union;
FiP: Feed-in Premium; FiT: Feed-in-tariffs; GET FiT: Global Energy Transfer
Feed-in Tariff; GIZ: Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit;
IMF: International Monetary Fund; IS: Innovation Systems; KFW: Kreditanstalt
für Wiederaufbau; MEM: Ministry of Energy and Mines; MEMD: Ministry of
Energy and Mineral Development; MLP: Multi-level perspective;
NDCs: National Determined Contributions; NGO: Non-Governmental
Organizations; R&D: Research and development; RE: Renewable Energy;
REFiT: Renewable Energy Feed-In Tariff; RES: Renewables Energies;
RPS: Renewable Portfolio Standard; SDGs: Sustainable Development Goals;
SPP: Small Power Producers; TiS: Technological Innovation Systems;
UNEP: The United Nations Environment Programme; US: United States of
America; USAID: United States Agency for International Development;
VSPP: Very Small Power Producer
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank all interview respondents and reviewers for their
time and their valuable contributions. Harro van Asselt developed the initial
concept for the analysis of policy diffusion and provided background
material on energy and climate policies. Anne Nyambane (SEI) provided
useful background material for the article. Clarisse Kehler Siebert (SEI)
conducted a review and provided editing and reference support for an
earlier version of the paper. Oliver Johnson (SEI) provided useful inputs and
Aurélie Faure-Schuyer (CEPS) reviewed an earlier version of the paper.
Authors’ contributions
SB substantially re-worked and re-analysed many sections of the paper and
added additional insights from the literature to create the final version of the
paper, based on initial case study information and an earlier draft. TS
established the initial comparative framework for the study, supervised the
Master’s students who participated in the research, and provided initial
material for the paper. AB further elaborated the conceptual framework for
the comparative analysis and carried out the Peru case study. FXJ integrated
the various components of the study and organised the structure of the
paper and the comparisons. JERM developed a more systematic approach to
the conceptual framework and comparisons and edited the case study
materials further. MH conducted a case study in Thailand. PLB conducted the
case study in Uganda. JH supported the case study in Uganda and
provided material on technology transfer. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Page 17
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2  Page 17 of 18
Funding
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 642242.
Availability of data and materials
There are no statistical datasets but results from interviews and related
materials are available on reasonable request.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The research was based on interviews and observations. Interviewees were
aware of and approved the writing of this paper. All conclusions remain the
sole responsibility of the authors.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
1Stockholm Environment Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. 2Amphos 21
Consulting, Barcelona, Spain. 3Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
4KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. 5Technical University
of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
Received: 12 November 2018 Accepted: 28 November 2019
References
1.  Bodansky D. The Paris climate change agreement: a new hope? Am J Int
Law. 2016;110(2):288–319.
2.  IISD (2018). Earth Negotiations Bulletin- A Reporting Service for Environment
and Development Negotiations 12 747. International Institute for
Sustainable Development-IISD. Retrieved from http://enb.iisd.org/.
3.  Nerini FF, Tomei J, To LS, Bisaga I, Parikh P, Black M, et al. Mapping
synergies and trade-offs between energy and the sustainable development
goals. Nat Energy. 2018;3(1):10.
4.  Pradhan P, Costa L, Rybski D, Lucht W, Kropp JP. A systematic study of
sustainable development goal (SDG) interactions. Earth’s Future. 2017;5(11):
1169–79.
5.  Audretsch DB, Lehmann EE, Wright M. Technology transfer in a global
economy. J Technol Transfer. 2014;39(3):301–12.
6.  Murphy K, Kirkman GA, Seres S, Haites E. Technology transfer in the CDM:
an updated analysis. Clim Pol. 2015;15(1):127–45.
7.  Ockwell DG, Mallett A, editors. Low-carbon technology transfer: from
rhetoric to reality. Abingdon: Routledge; 2012.
8.  Wahab SA, Rose RC, Osman SIW. Defining the concepts of technology and
technology transfer: A literature analysis. Int Bus Res. 2012;5(1):61.
9.  Adams R, Jeanrenaud S, Bessant J, Denyer D, Overy P. Sustainability-oriented
innovation: A systematic review. Int J Manag Rev. 2016;18(2):180–205.
10. Comin D, Hobijn B. An exploration of technology diffusion. Am Econ Rev.
2010;100(5):2031–59.
11. Mulder KF. Innovation for sustainable development: from environmental
design to transition management. Sustain Sci. 2007;2(2):253–63.
12. Popp D, Hascic I, Medhi N. Technology and the diffusion of renewable
energy. Energy Econ. 2011;33(4):648–62.
13. IRENA. The power to change: solar and wind cost reduction potential to
2025: International renewable energy agency; 2016. Retrieved from: https://
www.irena.org/publications
14. IRENA. Rethinking energy 2017: accelerating the global energy
transformation: International renewable energy agency-IRENA; 2017.
Retrieved from: https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/
Publication/2017/IRENA_REthinking_Energy_2017.pdf
15. Lo K. A critical review of China's rapidly developing renewable energy and
energy efficiency policies. Renew Sust Energ Rev. 2014;29:508–16.
16. Battistella C, De Toni AF, Pillon R. Inter-organisational technology/
knowledge transfer: a framework from critical literature review. J Technol
Transfer. 2016;41(5):1195–234.
17. Eleftheriadis IM, Anagnostopoulou EG. Identifying barriers in the diffusion of
renewable energy sources. Energy Policy. 2015;80:153–64. 
18. Lai PC. The literature review of technology adoption models and
theories for the novelty technology. JISTEM-J Inf Syst Technol Manag.
2017;14(1):21–38.
19. Li Y, Sui M. Literature analysis of innovation diffusion. Technol Invest. 2011;
2(03):155.
20. Marsh D, Sharman JC. Policy diffusion and policy transfer. Policy Stud. 2009;
30(3):269–88.
21. Negro SO, Alkemade F, Hekkert MP. Why does renewable energy diffuse so
slowly? A review of innovation system problems. Renew Sust Energ Rev.
2012;16(6):3836–46.
22. Shipan C, Volden C. Policy Diffusion: Seven Lessons for Scholars and
Practitioners. Public Adm Rev. 2012;72(6):788–96.
23. Dolowitz D, Marsh D. Who learns what from whom? A review of the policy
transfer literature. Polit Stud. 1996;44:343–57.
24. Dolowitz D, Marsh D. Learning from abroad: the role of policy transfer in
contemporary policy-making. Governance. 2000;13(1):5–23.
25. REN Secretariat (2019). Renewable 2019. Global status report. Available at: https://
www.ren21.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/gsr_2019_full_report_en.pdf
26. Rockström J, Gaffney O, Rogelj J, Meinshausen M, Nakicenovic N,
Schellnhuber H. A roadmap for rapid decarbonization. Science. 2017;
355(6331):1269–71.
27. Geels F, Schot J. Typology of sociotechnical transition pathways. Res Policy.
2007;36(3):399–417.
28. IRENA. Renewable power generation costs in 2018: International renewable
energy agency-IRENA; 2018. Retrieved from: https://www.irena.org/-/media/
Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2019/May/IRENA_Renewable-Power-
Generations-Costs-in-2018.pdf
29. Geels F. Technological transitions as evolutionary reconfiguration processes:
a multi-level perspective and a case-study. Res Policy. 2002;31(8):1257–74.
30. Geels F. The multi-level perspective on sustainability transitions: responses
to seven criticisms. Environ Innov Soc Transit. 2011;1(1):24–40.
31. Carlsson B, Stankiewicz R. On the nature, function, and composition of
technological systems. J Evol Econ. 1991;1(2):93–118.
32. Miller S. In: Zalta EN, editor. Social institutions, the Stanford Encyclopaedia of
philosophy: Metaphysics research lab, Stanford University; 2014. https://
plato.stanford.edu/entries/social-institutions/.
33. Hassel A, Jansen J, Egenhofer C, Xu Z, De Jong J. Improving the market for
flexibility in the electricity sector: report of a CEPS task force. Centre for
European Policy Studies: Brussels; 2017.
34. Hiroux C, Saguan M. Large-scale wind power in European electricity
markets: time for revisiting support schemes and market designs? Energy
Policy. 2010;38(7):3135–45.
35. Hegger D, Vliet JV, Vliet BJMV. Niche management and its contribution to
regime change: the case of innovation in sanitation. Tech Anal Strat Manag.
2007;19(6):729–46.
36. Schot J, Geels F. Strategic niche management and sustainable innovation
journeys: theory, findings, research agenda, and policy. Tech Anal Strat
Manag. 2008;20(5):537–54.
37. Grubb M, McDowall W, Drummond P. On order and complexity in
innovations systems: Conceptual frameworks for policy mixes in
sustainability transitions. Energy Res Soc Sci. 2017;33:21–34.
38. North D. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1990.
39. Rose R. What is lesson-drawing? J Public Policy. 1991;11(1):3–30.
40. Bennett C. What is policy convergence and what causes it? Br J Polit Sci.
1991;21(2):215–33.
41. Clark J. Policy diffusion and program scope: research directions. Publius J
Fed. 1985;15(4):61–70.
42. Haas P. Do regimes matter? Epistemic communities and Mediterranean
pollution control. Int Organ. 1989;43(3):377–403.
43. Majone G. Cross-National Sources of Regulatory Policymaking in Europe and
the United States. J Public Policy. 1991;11(1):79–106.
44. Jann W, Wegrich K. Theories of the policy cycle. In: Fischer F, Miller GJ,
editors. Handbook of public policy analysis. Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis;
2007. p. 43–63.
45. World Bank, Thailand | data, 2018. Retrieved from: https://data.worldbank.
org/country/thailand. Accessed 27 Sept 2018.
46. IEA (2016). Partner country series - Thailand electricity security assessment.
International energy agency. Retrieved from: https://www.iea.org/publications/
47. NESDB. The twelfth National Economic and social development plan: Office
of the National Economic Development Board; 2016.
Page 18
Bößner et al. Sustainable Earth (2020) 3:2
48. World Bank, Access to electricity, rural (% of rural population) | data, 2018.
Retrieved from: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/. Accessed 27 Sept 2018.
49. Gamio P. Personal communication with A. Bruno, April 2016; 2016.
50. USTR. The United States - Peru trade promotion agreement. Final text:
Office of the United States Trade Representative; 2018. Available: https://
ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements/peru-tpa/final-text.
Accessed 27 Sept 2018
51. EPPO. Energy Statistic (2017). Available at: http://www.eppo.go.th/index.
php/en/en-energystatistics/indicators.
52. IRENA. Renewable energy auctions in developing countries: International
Renewable Energy Agency-IRENA; 2013. Retrieved from: https://www.irena.
org/publications
53. Sarochawikasit, R. (2007). Renewable Energy Development and Environment
in Thailand. Available at: http://www.jst.go.jp/astf/document2/en_22doc.pdf.
54. UN. (2011). Thailand Energy Report. Available at: http://www.un.org/esa/
agenda21/natlinfo/countr/thai/energy.pdf
55. Bijoor S, Greacen C. Citizen-oriented power sector reform in Thailand; 2007.
p. 1–22. Available at: https://www.academia.edu/1555157/CITIZEN-
ORIENTED_POWER_SECTOR_REFORM_IN_THAILAND
56. Tongsopit S, Greacen C. Thailand’s renewable energy policy: FiTs and
opportunities for international support; 2012. p. 1–24. Available at: http://www.
palangthai.org/docs/ThailandFiTtongsopit&greacen.pdf. Accessed 1 Dec 2016
57. Tongsopit S, Greacen C. An assessment of Thailand’s feed-in tariff program
in: renewable energy. Elsevier Ltd. 2013;60:439–45.
58. Hoberg G. Sleeping with an elephant: the American influence on Canadian
environmental regulation. J Public Policy. 1991;11(1):107–31.
59. Coronado J. Personal communication with A. Bruno. 2016;2016.
60. Bößner, S. (2016). Turning energy around: coal and the German
Energiewende. SEI Discussion Brief. Available at: https://www.sei.org/
publications/coal-and-energiewende/
61. Bulmer S, Padgett S. Policy Transfer in the European Union: An
Institutionalist Perspective. Br J Polit Sci. 2005;35(1):103–26.
62. Mendoza E. Personal communication with A. Bruno. 2016;(April 2016).
63. MoEN (Thailand). (2007). Energy Industry Act. Available at: http://www.
thailawforum.com/laws/Energy
64. Siteur, J. (2012). Rapid deployment of industrial biogas in Thailand: factors of
success, institute for industrial productivity. Available at: http://www.
iipnetwork.org/IIP-10.BiogasCaseStudy.Pdf.
65. Gilardi F. Transnational diffusion: norms, ideas, and policies. In: Carlsnaes W,
et al., editors. Handbook of international relations. 1st ed. Thousand Oaks:
SAGE Publications; 2012. p. 453–77.
66. Global Energy Transfer Feed-in Tariff- GET FiT (2017). Annual Report, 2017.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations. 
Page 18 of 18
