Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
Title: Improving collaborative knowledge production for climate change mitigation: lessons from EU Horizon 2020 experiences
Keywords: Science-policy interface,Knowledge use,Boundary organisations,Climate change,Mitigation,Co-production
ModDate: 2018/12/04 02:13:32+01'00'
Subject: Sustain Earth, doi:10.1186/s42055-018-0007-0
Author: Daan Boezeman
CreationDate: 2018/11/30 06:01:01+08'00'
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Science-policy interface,Knowledge use,Boundary organisations,Climate change,Mitigation,Co-production
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s42055-018-0007-0
xmp:dc:publisher: Sustainable Earth
xmp:dc:description: Sustain Earth, doi:10.1186/s42055-018-0007-0
xmp:dc:subject: Science-policy interface; Knowledge use; Boundary organisations; Climate change; Mitigation; Co-production
xmp:dc:title: Improving collaborative knowledge production for climate change mitigation: lessons from EU Horizon 2020 experiences
xmp:dc:creator: Daan Boezeman; Heleen Coninck
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2018-12-04T02:13:32+01:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2018-11-30T06:01:01+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2018-12-04T02:13:32+01:00
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:95712226-93b0-4562-85d3-c14605d6e64c
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:5f5a12e3-e146-4501-a6cf-b0276e51d203
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:f9bccdd5-bce8-4f20-995e-258f6e0931e4
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2018-11-30T06:24:50+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Daan Boezeman
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6207-2112
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://sprBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Plain english summary
Climate action and the need for robust knowledge
CARISMA’s design: Engagement on different levels
Experiences with communication, translation and mediation
Structural challenges of boundary organisations
  Knowledge use and the role of researchers
  Incentive structures for ongoing collaboration
Balancing flexibility and stability
Seven directions to move forward
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Authors’ contributions
Authors’ information
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Publisher’s Note
Author details
References
Page 1
Boezeman and Coninck Sustainable Earth 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s42055-018-0007-0 
(2018) 1:6  Sustainable Earth
GUIDELINES  Open Access
Improving collaborative knowledge
production for climate change mitigation:
lessons from EU Horizon 2020 experiences
Daan Boezeman1* and Heleen de Coninck2
Abstract
Scientific knowledge is key to climate mitigation governance. However, effective exchange between science and
policy is challenging. Science-policy theory suggests collaboration, stakeholder participation and iterative communication
as key principles for improving the science-policy interface. The Horizon 2020 project “Coordination and Assessment of
Research and Innovation in Support of climate Mitigation Actions” (CARISMA) attempted to implement these principles.
To help other projects learn from CARISMA’s experiences, this Guideline article critically discusses how the CARISMA
project fared. CARISMA’s activities included stakeholder engagement through feedback loops, interviews with Advisory
Board members, and an information platform. Experiences were discussed in a workshop with science-policy
practitioners. Theory and workshop participants’ insights led to the identification of seven practical directions
towards a more effective exchange between science and policy, aimed at policymakers, funding agencies and
researchers: 1) Know the researcher’s role; 2) Work with policy dynamics; 3) Use alternative communication means; 4)
Allow for flexibility in projects’ deliverables and milestones; 5) Be realistic about the possibility of stakeholder engagement;
6) Adjust funding criteria; 7) Invest in stable knowledge infrastructures.
Keywords: Science-policy interface, Knowledge use, Boundary organisations, Climate change, Mitigation, Co-production
Plain english summary
Addressing climate change requires scientific knowledge.
The academic literature formulates various theories on
how to improve the use of scientific knowledge in policy.
However, effective exchange between science and policy
is challenging in practice. Scientific knowledge often
mismatches the needs of policy makers. Therefore,
improving the effective exchange between science and
policy is an important challenge for those working in ap-
plied research projects and in research funding agencies.
In this Guideline article we draw on the European Union
Horizon 2020 project “Coordination and Assessment of
Research and Innovation in Support of climate Mitiga-
tion Actions” (CARISMA) to share practical experiences
and formulate recommendations to improve the so
called ‘science-policy interface’.
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:d.boezeman@fm.ru.nl"] d.boezeman@fm.ru.nl
1Institute for Management Research, Radboud University and PBL
Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, Postbus 9108 6500,
Nijmegen, HK, The Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
CARISMA aimed not to develop new knowledge per se,
but rather assess, synthesise and exchange existing know-
ledge. The project design was based upon theory-informed
principles. Those principles are genuine two-directional
communication, translation of knowledge towards different
audiences, and active mediation in conflicts about know-
ledge. These principles informed the use of ‘stakeholder
feedback loops, two advisory bodies that contain a broad ’
group of stakeholders and a climate mitigation knowledge
platform. Realising a productive collaboration between sci-
entists and policy makers and producing knowledge that
was directly useful in policy was difficult. Firstly, we con-
clude that supplying readily applicable knowledge for policy
is often not realistic. Researchers have more useful roles in
the science-policy interface than only a consultant like role
of direct knowledge supply. Facilitating learning by present-
ing alternatives, new uncertain knowledge or engagement
in collaborative reflection was also highly valued. Secondly,
we that incentives and requirements are not always aligned
towards collaboration between science and policy. The
temporary project funding makes it difficult to invest in
© The Author(s). 2018 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Boezeman and Coninck Sustainable Earth (2018) 1:6  Page 2 of 8
permanent knowledge exchange infrastructure, such as
online platforms. Creating practical mechanisms that
stimulate collaboration are important. Based on CARISMA
experiences, we formulate seven recommendations to im-
prove the exchange between science and policy.
1. Know the researcher’s role
2. Work with policy dynamics
3. Use alternative communication means
4. Allow for flexibility in projects’ deliverables and
milestones
5. Be realistic about the possibility of stakeholder
engagement
6. Adjust funding criteria
7. Invest in stable knowledge infrastructures
Climate action and the need for robust
knowledge
Addressing climate change relies on scientific knowledge
[1]. However, both producing policy-relevant knowledge
and crafting evidence-based policy are challenging [2].
All too often, decision-makers find that research results
are published too late to be of use, or are beside the
point. In turn, researchers are confronted with policy
questions that are hard to answer in a scientifically
sound way. These observations influences a burgeoning
literature with principles on organising more open and
collaborative knowledge systems [3] and research pro-
jects [4] that inform funding schemes for societal chal-
lenges [5].  In response, the Horizon2020 project
CARISMA (Coordination and Assessment of Research
and Innovation in Support of climate Mitigation Ac-
tions) has had the ambition to coordinate and support
the maintenance, assessment and communication of cli-
mate change mitigation knowledge for decision-makers
in both the public and the private sector.
The organisation of CARISMA was built upon the
general theoretical principles of collaborative knowledge
production. From the start, the project plan acknowl-
edged that climate mitigation is a ‘wicked issue’ [6]. Such
stubborn issues are characterised by multiple perspec-
tives on what ‘the problem’  actually is, and therefore
what knowledge is needed to address it. In wicked prob-
lems, yesterday’s  solutions may become tomorrow’s
problems. When preferences for what needs to be done
vary and stakes are high, knowledge may become con-
tested [2, 7, 8]. Stimulating participation and facilitating
reciprocal communication between experts, policy-
makers and societal stakeholders was central to CARIS-
MA’s project design to improve mutual understanding
and facilitate knowledge exchange. With this design,
CARISMA aimed to circulate knowledge simultaneously
perceived as salient (meaning politically useful, feasible
and timely), credible (scientifically sound) and legitimate 
(societally acceptable), following the criteria of Cash and
colleagues [9].
This Guideline aims to offer both practical lessons
for practitioners of the science-policy interface and
propose suggestions to strengthen the interface. We
reflect on the key choices CARISMA made in the
project design, the practical forms it used to forge col-
laboration and the problems it encountered doing so.
We build on our observations of the project made
during formal interviews, reflection workshops, infor-
mal talks and documents analysis, and confront these
observations with the scientific theory on these mat-
ters. In line with the theory on which we draw, a first
draft essay [10] functioned as a starting point of a
workshop with practitioners of the science-policy
interface, involving also other Horizon2020 projects
focussing on decarbonisation pathways in combination
with explicit collaborative and participatory objectives
(TRANSrisk, REINVENT and DEEDS).  During this
workshop the reflections were refined, tested and
jointly elaborated in a series of lessons for the design
of projects that seek to bring science and policy to-
gether. The last section of this Guideline summarises
seven directions that we recommend for improving
the navigations of the interface between science and
policy. Those directions were validated in an extensive
review by policymakers and researchers.
CARISMA’s design: Engagement on different
levels
CARISMA was funded as a ‘Coordination and Support
Act’  under the EU Horizon 2020 programme with a
budget of approximately 1.5 million euros in 2014–2018.
As such, the project was supposed not to develop new
scientific knowledge per se, but rather provide synthesis,
assessment and communication of existing climate
knowledge. Nevertheless, identifying and addressing
knowledge gaps was part of the project. Embedded in
various work packages (i.e. innovation, mitigation op-
tions, policy, governance, international cooperation), the
project was to support and develop mitigation policies
by first providing an overview of technical and social
options, evaluate them in economic, environmental, so-
cial and political terms, and communicate in terms to
facilitate public and private governance processes with
‘useful’  knowledge. Given the diversity of the relevant
that were to be integrated, the project involved natural
scientists, economists, social scientists and legal scholars
based t universities and think thanks.
The academic literature highlights three central activ-
ities of effective boundary organisations that intermediate
between science and politics [9, 11]. First, communication
is to be iterative and two-directional. Second, information
needs to be continuously translated for multiple audiences
Page 3
Boezeman and Coninck Sustainable Earth (2018) 1:6  Page 3 of 8
involved. Third, conflicting interests about knowledge re-
quire active mediation.
Two-directional engagement in CARISMA was orga-
nised at different levels. ‘Feedback loops’ were a key elem-
ent of the project. Actively targeting stakeholders, those
loops were to harvest questions, provide answers via as-
sessment and identify follow up questions, etc. In various
rounds, ‘generalist’ stakeholders were queried about miti-
gation knowledge needs, as well as for inputs in the pro-
ject. The double advisory board, one representing the
policy community and the other the business world, were
regularly consulted and interviewed extensively once (in
late Fall 2015) [12] for advice on the project. On a more
concrete level, stakeholders were engaged on specific
topics in work packages. In the work packages, stake-
holder needs were assessed and workshops consistently
included both practitioners and researchers. In CARIS-
MA’s case, the (potential) stakeholder group was broad.
Involved stakeholders varied from practitioners technical
options to those working on governance arrangements for
technology transfer or innovation. Also, stakeholders
worked in both the private and public sector. This made it
hard to serve all needs and choices were necessary. Yet it
also provided the opportunity to be useful to different pol-
icy communities.
Experiences with communication, translation and
mediation
Several key issues regarding the three central activities
stand out. Realising iterative and two-directional
communication via feedback loops proved difficult in
practice. With a flying start in the first year, knowledge
needs expressed were quite broad. Questions included
how to embed mitigation options in socio-economic
planning, how to create market conditions for particular
transitions, and under what conditions do options and
policies ‘work’ [13]. In general, those questions are very
hard to credibly answer via ‘normal’  scientific research
[14] and readily available bodies of knowledge on those
issues which could be assessed and synthesised were
limited. While some questions were out of the project
scope, addressing the questions required choices to be
made on which issues the development of new expertise
was to be based. This yielded a need to redirect the
project and also deciding on what loops could not be
followed up.
In addition, gradually, commitment to the feedback
loops faded. Time investment for both researchers and
practitioners was substantial, while other priorities
loomed. During CARISMA’s kick-off meeting, many re-
searchers implicitly resonated what is termed the ‘linear
model’  of science-policy relations: filling a reservoir of
knowledge to be transferred to policy [7]. Complete the
substantive tasks of the grant agreement and then move 
to communication. Moreover, the linear model still in-
forms ideas of policy officials and knowledge institutions
developed at the European level, albeit sometimes in an
‘inverted’ form. For example, when a new project or or-
ganisational form is set up to facilitate ‘knowledge trans-
fer’. The fading enthusiasm risked the feedback loops to
remain single shots.
In science-policy workshops, the importance of
interaction in multiple cycles was stressed in order to
gradually develop both more useful knowledge by re-
searchers and better answerable questions by practi-
tioners. Thus, iterative communication is much more
than the active circulating of knowledge in attractive
communicative formats such as policy briefs,
one-pagers, infographics or tweets. Notwithstanding
the importance of form, iterative and two-directional
communication is about learning via dialogue. Learn-
ing by both researchers and policymakers on their
respective roles and expectations requires investments
by both.
Active mediation in conflicting interests about know-
ledge was therefore necessary. Informed by the advisory
board’s feedback, the CARISMA coordinator, supported
by the project officer with the European Commission
(not a project member),  continuously pushed outcome
(salient products), rather than output (deliverables). An
internal review system was set up involving both re-
searchers and advisory board members. This measure
aimed to institutionalise that publications were interro-
gated on their epistemic credibility as well as on their
policy salience. In project meetings, policy processes,
such as those surrounding the Paris Agreement imple-
mentation, were reviewed and discussed for links where
the CARISMA work could add value, and follow-up ac-
tion was agreed.
On a more systemic level, however, it seems the case
that CARISMA aimed to commensurate two conflicting
ideas. On the one hand, CARISMA was about assess-
ment. This means compiling evidence, making it more
readily accessible and presenting it in salient ways. On
the other hand, CARISMA was about research. The pro-
ject also aimed to fill knowledge gaps on mitigation
options and policies, and “upstreaming stakeholders in
the production of knowledge”. The conflict was not just
about how to allocate resources among the two ideas,
but also about how to advise policy: providing an over-
view of (dis)agreements in different studies or providing
novel research results?
Structural challenges of boundary organisations
The aforementioned conflicting ideas about project
goals and difficulties of maintaining ongoing feedback
loops also signify two more structural challenges
CARISMA faced.
Page 4
Boezeman and Coninck Sustainable Earth (2018) 1:6  Page 4 of 8
Knowledge use and the role of researchers
The first issue concerns the question on how knowledge
ends up in policy [1, 15]. And, more importantly, what
does that mean for the possible roles of those working
in the borderlands of science and policy [16, 17]? A
dominant perspective held by many stakeholders, and
what seems the holy grail for many CARISMA re-
searchers as well, is the need to provide ‘actionable’
information. Actionable is then equal to those mitigation
options, suggestions and data that can directly inform
officials working on policies.
In this rationalist view, the policy process is por-
trayed as a process dominated by ‘puzzling’:  know-
ledge is used to make policies more evidence-based.
Researchers can have a ‘consultant’ role in which they
develop and supply knowledge for clear and stable
problems. Unfortunately, research has shown this type
of ‘instrumental use’  (see Table 1 below) to be very
rare, especially in dense and noisy policy arenas. Of
course, practical problems are important, to which we
return later. But the main argument here is that this
type of use is usually restricted to those policy issues
that are uncontested, depoliticised and scientifically
relatively structured. None of these conditions apply
to climate mitigation policy.
Political science conceives the role of knowledge
much more strategic and underscores that policy-
making is about ‘powering’.  This more cynical take
suggests concrete knowledge gets used predominantly
to underline standpoints when real decisions already
taken. This is termed ‘symbolic use’.  Some of the
stakeholders warned CARISMA to provide knowledge
to be impartial. Still, a supposedly impartial know-
ledge claim can always become ammunition in parti-
san debates. Involving multiple normative viewpoints
and disclosing the procedures in which knowledge is
translated can strengthen the perceived legitimacy of
the boundary organisation in question.
Interestingly, studies on policy change come up with
even different types of knowledge use. Already in the
1970s, Carol Weiss [18] argued that knowledge finds
its ways to policy in a more indirect and conceptual
manner. Knowledge offers ongoing reflection, doubt
and alternatives to policymakers. In her ‘enlighten-
ment’  type of knowledge use, the policy and research
Table 1 Typology of knowledge use based on [8]
Policymaking as puzzling Policymaking as powering
Direct informing Instrumental use  Symbolic use
Indirect informing Enlightenment use  Political use
The different types of knowledge use can be organised according to whether
they inform policies directly or more indirectly. Depending on whether the
policy process is about rational ‘puzzling’ for optimal solutions or about
organising ‘power’ for decisions, types of knowledge use are different 
communities gradually learn to see alternative prob-
lems and solutions. This view links up with contem-
porary ideas that a key role for researchers is to ‘open
up’ issues [3, 19]. Researchers then either act as honest
brokers of alternatives [16].  Their role is then raising
new questions and bring in knowledge-based alterna-
tives. They remain in an intermediate position between
knowledge production and use. Alternatively they can
take a role of participatory knowledge producers [17],
in which they take a more active position in developing
new knowledge and facilitating broader deliberation.
These roles are often especially related to wicked prob-
lems such as climate change, in which value disputes
loom and science is inherently incomplete [20].
The final suggested variant is termed ‘political use’,
building on the idea that knowledge is a strategic re-
source in political power disputes. Some knowledge
cannot get used until a paradigmatic shift in the way an
issue is conceptualised happens, or when a political
landslide brings a different group in power, and hence a
‘window of opportunity’ opens up [21]. Researchers can
act as entrepreneurs to push knowledge to negotiation
tables. This requires the uneasy task of being at the
table at the right moment and being keenly aware of
political processes.
It is up to CARISMA and other projects to acknow-
ledge that there are several types of knowledge use [8,
15, 18] and that there are multiple valuable roles re-
searchers can play [16, 17].  Sometimes researchers can
play a consultant role, tailoring knowledge in such a
form that it can directly be used in policy. However, one
needs to acknowledge that silver bullet knowledge solu-
tions are not always realistic. It may find its way into the
policy realm, but only as other ideas, models, data and
narratives have softened up the community for its ac-
ceptance. During interviews with stakeholders and the
advisory boards, the importance of other roles was also
emphasised as valuable.
The appreciation of a ‘learning space’  to reflect on
new, yet not directly implementable, ideas was also
expressed by CARISMA’s advisory board members and
stakeholders. CARISMA documents, but especially
meetings were named by some interviewed stakeholders
a ‘learning space’: to keep up with new ideas and allow-
ing for dialogues to explore also uncertainties and the
limits of knowledge. Hence, to facilitate learning and
reflection, researchers can play a role to open up ways of
thinking with alternatives, criticise core policy assump-
tions, or provide novel, yet not readily applicable, new
insights. Also, sometimes researchers have to be messen-
gers that knowledge is incomplete or uncertain. A medi-
ating role may be in situations be useful, e.g. in
illuminating conflicts in which knowledge is disputed
with alternative claims.
Page 5
Boezeman and Coninck Sustainable Earth (2018) 1:6  Page 5 of 8
The lesson for CARISMA is that it should be aware
of the possibility of multiple useful roles, which empha-
sise different tasks (e.g. supplying knowledge, bridging
fields or facilitating stakeholders to learn) and require
different skills (e.g. in communication and process sup-
port).  The project goal of synthesising and assessing
knowledge of mitigation options in factsheets and data-
bases, requires a supplying role in researchers focussing
on the scientific credibility of knowledge. Engagement
with stakeholders can then be less intensive and is
about making information more accessible and under-
standable. The goal to facilitate collaborative learning
about policy-relevant issues stakeholder engagement
must be more intensive. Negotiating roles and being
transparent about what a researcher can and cannot do,
within what timeframe and within what normative
starting points, is important to maintain credibility and
trust in case of disputes over knowledge.
Incentive structures for ongoing collaboration
The second issue is that researchers and policymakers
respond to communities with different cultures. Col-
laboration via several iterative cycles is not necessarily
rewarded. A stream of literature suggests that the
practical mismatches in timing, language and mes-
sages are a result of differences in cultures, reward
systems and codes of conduct [2, 20].  To counter
these problems, formal incentives and requirements
were created, such as reserving a substantial part of
the project budget for outreach and follow up ques-
tions in the final project year and an internal proced-
ure for reviewing products on both scientific validity
(credible) and policy relevance (salience).
An example of the importance of incentives and re-
quirements are the well-known publication criteria at
universities, which often push researchers to do novel
research, rather than providing rigorous assessments
of current knowledge. On the other hand, via funding
criteria of modern demand-led research programmes,
CARISMA researchers were pushed to develop
activities to work with stakeholders and disseminate
information in ways fitting knowledge needs of policy-
makers such as the feedback loops in the project
design. While the project design made a substantial
time and budget reservation for a final outreach stage
and follow up questions, there was a pressure on re-
searchers to spend time on products pushed by their
universities or research organisations rather than
investing in better tailoring their outreach. In CAR-
ISMA this issue was addressed by the project coordin-
ator pushing project members for salience. In one of
the reflection workshops it was also suggested that it
would incentivise collaboration of researchers and pol-
icy makers could write short proposals for funding 
follow up questions (see also [20],). This would require
not earmarking all project budget over the partners in
advance incorporating more budgetary flexibility. Pol-
icymakers usually have less of such formal incentive
mechanisms to keep them committed in projects to
take their part in a continued dialogue and help de-
velop questions that are suitable for the realm of
research. Just as researchers have to become aware of
the “ridiculous deadlines” of politics, as one civil ser-
vant expressed it in a meeting, policymakers have to
learn to be patient with researchers, who need to do
their assessment work in a credible way.
Another example are the requirements of detailed
and delineated activities with deliverables to get
boundary projects funded. Bi-directional engagement
of the two communities takes place not only in formal
CARISMA reports and workshops, but importantly
also in the continuous informal contacts, exchanges,
and meetings in very different venues and occasions.
Such activities of large science-policy consortia are
opaque, while reward structures favour producing
visible (and promised) products: deliverables. Such
structures, designed to guarantee legitimacy and trans-
parency, risk overlooking the ongoing activities that
are crucial to realise them. In CARISMA,
In addition, projects are funded on temporary bud-
gets, and new consortia take over after projects have
ended. In these circumstances it is less attractive to in-
vest in more permanent exchange infrastructure, that
is more resource intensive and takes time before re-
searchers and policy makers start using it. By the time
such infrastructure starts paying off for the project,
the project may have already ended. This was espe-
cially a challenge for CARISMA’s interactive platform,
to which we return in the next section. Combined
with the phenomenon of quick personnel turnover,
both with researchers and rotating civil servants, the
temporary character of funding makes it difficult to
build lasting relations and trust, and render continued
collaboration and dialogue challenging.
Balancing flexibility and stability
In the CARISMA project, the EU project officer was
open to the possibility to adapt the original project
plan. This was important for CARISMA’s impact.
While initially not foreseen, the decision was gradually
made to change the initial plan of an interactive,
CARISMA-based online platform into an information
platform ([URL: "http://climatechangemitigation.eu/"] http://climatechangemitigation.eu/) that in-
tegrates multiple EU projects, creating a venue for
research results. Not building new venues for ex-
change and new channels for dissemination, but rather
strengthening the existing flows in the science-policy
interface, could be effective, as the platform offers the
Page 6
Boezeman and Coninck Sustainable Earth (2018) 1:6  Page 6 of 8
‘boundary infrastructure’  that enables the collabor-
ation between scientists and policymakers. It offered
the certainty to publics as a venue to find useful
knowledge on mitigation options and lower transac-
tion costs of searching. Credibility can be enhanced by
reviewing content, salience by ongoing feedback on
the content.
However, the platform can also be problematic as it
is facing an institutional environment – of a
time-bound research project – that threatens its con-
tinuity, which is crucial for its effectiveness. This insti-
tutional environment favours the set-up of new
projects rather than continuing existing ones, and de-
pends on ad-hoc funding. There is no embedding in a
permanent organisation that safeguards its continu-
ation. The challenge for the platform is not to make it
work, notwithstanding that daunting task, but to
maintain the platform to work. In CARISMA, the
follow-up Coordination and Support Action, the
DEEDS project, will adopt the platform so its contin-
ued operation is safeguarded for the next three years.
This was made possible by a push on the part of the
Commission, by a constructive attitude of those man-
aging stakeholder engagement in DEEDS and CAR-
ISMA, and the practical coincidence that the project
period of the two projects overlapped.
Seven directions to move forward
Effective work at the science-policy interface needs a
significant effort of all actors involved as well as an in-
stitutional environment that incentivises commitment
of researchers and policymakers. This commitment
should facilitate cross-boundary cooperation, rather
than dissolving the productive differences between the
two communities altogether. Answers are needed on
the question how continued collaboration can be
made more rewarding for all actors involved. Drawing
upon the lessons of the CARISMA project and the
reflection workshop in which the structural challenges
of boundary organisations were discussed in relation
to EU funded projects, we identify the following seven
directions forward to make the science-policy ex-
change more effective:
1) Reflect and act on the role of project researchers.
Multiple roles in a project are useful. While hard
to mix in a single person, a project team can
contain multiple roles. Especially in domains
characterised by scientific uncertainties, clear
communication of the roles taken is important to
maintain credibility and trust.
2) Work with the dynamics of the policy process.
Topics in the agenda-setting phase require other
types of knowledge than topics that facing 
decisions. The former may allow novel ideas while
the latter is about substantiating or amending a
decision at hand. The criteria and timing to which
knowledge should respond varies with the phase.
3) Explore and try alternatives in communication.
Involving science journalists and influential
societal actors can help translating research
findings in salient messages. They can also act as
ambassadors. Using alternative communication
means requires a clear understanding of the
different audiences of the project and the routes
via which knowledge reaches them.
4) Incorporate and appreciate flexibility in projects.
The system of ex-ante promised deliverables favours
unidirectional exchange and mismatches in pace of
research and policy, if not be approached with some
flexibility. Flexibility regarding deliverables requires
cooperative attitudes of both funding officials,
project coordinators and researchers. The project
coordinator needs possibilities to reallocate budget
to emerging issues, while staying within the general
scope of project goals.
5) Be realistic about and prepared for stakeholder
involvement. Involving stakeholders is vital for
both relevance and robustness of research.
Different rationales for involvement are legitimate,
but manage expectations, including those of the
funding agency or client. Involvement requires
substantial investment of time and resources of all
actors. This points at two conditions: researchers
and policymakers need to be prepared to spend
time (or they will not start), and the time spent on
cooperation needs to be rewarding (or they will
not continue).
6) Reconsider funding criteria. Demonstrating how
collaboration is guaranteed should be an
eligibility criterion for funding. Collaboration
could be rewarded by funding small joint projects
between researchers and policymakers that
address follow-up questions from the project’s
assessments. A small part of future project
budgets can be reserved for the purpose. Small
budget extensions are also an option, but risk
high transaction costs if this would require new
procedures with funders.
7) Invest in stable knowledge infrastructures. Ad hoc
funding is problematic for knowledge
infrastructures that require ongoing maintenance,
such as online platforms. Invested human capital
in the form of human relationships between people
at the science-policy interface risk discontinuation,
but are crucial. This needs rethinking how and
with what criteria to fund Coordination and
Support Actions.
Page 7
Boezeman and Coninck Sustainable Earth (2018) 1:6  Page 7 of 8
Fig. 1 Seven directions for strengthening the science-policy interface
The seven directions address both the direct actors
involved (see Fig. 1) as well as the institutional envir-
onment in which they operate. They should not be
understood in isolation but are highly interrelated.
For example, investing in a skillset of participating
researchers, stakeholders and project coordinators is
of no avail if an enabling operating environment is
absent. A favourable science-policy environment re-
mains ineffective if it is not effectively navigated.
Abbreviations
CARISMA: Coordination and Assessment of Research and Innovation in
Support of climate Mitigation Actions; DEEDS: DialoguE on European
Decarbonisation Strategies; REINVENT: Realising Innovation in Transitions for
Decarbonisation; TRANSrisk: Transitions Pathways and Risk Analysis for
Climate Change Mitigation and Adaption Strategies
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank all interview respondents, workshop participants
and two anonymous reviewers for their time and their valuable
contributions to the paper.
Funding
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 642242.
Availability of data and materials
The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available
from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Authors’ contributions
DB designed the research, collected the data and wrote the first draft. DB
and HC organised the reflection workshop and revised the draft based on
the results. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 
Authors’ information
During the research phase Daan Boezeman worked as a researcher and
lecturer at the chair group Political Sciences of the Environment at the
Radboud University. In 2017 he moved to PBL Netherlands Environmental
Assessment Agency and is an affiliated researcher at his former institution.
Heleen de Coninck is an associate professor at the Department of
Environmental Sciences of the Radboud University, project coordinator of
the CARISMA project, and coordinating lead author in the IPCC special
report on 1.5 degrees.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The research was based on interviews, observations and a reflection
workshop with practitioners following Chatham House Rules. Statements are
anonymised and cannot be traced to individual participants. Participants
were aware of and approved the writing of this paper. All conclusions
remain the sole responsibility of the authors.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Author details
1Institute for Management Research, Radboud University and PBL
Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency, Postbus 9108 6500,
Nijmegen, HK, The Netherlands. 2Department of Environmental Science,
Radboud University, PO Box 9010 (Mailbox 89), Nijmegen, GL 6500, The
Netherlands.
Page 8
Boezeman and Coninck Sustainable Earth (2018) 1:6
Received: 10 May 2018 Accepted: 20 November 2018
References
1.  Turnhout E, Tuinstra W, Halffman W. Environmental expertise: connecting
science, policy and society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2019.
2.  Sarewitz D, Pielke RA. The neglected heart of science policy: reconciling
supply of and demand for science. Environ Sci Pol. 2007;10:5–16.
3.  Cornell S, Berkhout F, Tuinstra W, Tàbara JD, Jäger J, Chabay I, et al.
Opening up knowledge systems for better responses to global
environmental change. Environ Sci Pol. 2013;28:60–70. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2012.11.008"] https://doi.org/10.
 1016/j.envsci.2012.11.008.
4.  Meadow AM, Ferguson DB, Guido Z, Horangic A, Owen G, Wall T. Moving
toward the deliberate coproduction of climate science knowledge. Weather
Clim Soc. 2015;7:179–91.
5.  Boon W, Edler J. Demand, challenges, and innovation. Making sense of new
trends in innovation policy. Sci Public Policy. 2018;45:435–47 [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scy014"] https://doi.org/
 10.1093/scipol/scy014.
6.  Rittel HJ, Webber M. Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Sci.
1973;4:155–69. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1007/bf01405730"] https://doi.org/10.1007/bf01405730.
7.  Jasanoff S, Wynne B. Science and decision making. In: Rayner S, Malone E,
editors. Human choice and climate change, vol. 1: the societal framework.
Columbus: Battelle press; 1998. p. 1–87.
8.  Daviter F. The political use of knowledge in the policy process. Policy Sci.
2015;48:491–505. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1007/s11077-015-9232-y"] https://doi.org/10.1007/s11077-015-9232-y.
9.  Cash DW, Clark WC, Alcock F, Dickson NM, Eckley N, Guston DH, et al.
Knowledge systems for sustainable development. PNAS. 2003;100:8086–91.
10. Boezeman D, De Coninck HC. Organising effective exchange in the science-
policy interface: Lessons from the Horizon 2020 CARISMA project.
Deliverable 8.5. Nijmegen: Radboud University; 2018. [URL: "http://carisma-project.eu/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=KhqvIBnIvTM%3D&tabid=95&portalid=0&mid=580"] http://carisma-project.
 eu/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=KhqvIBnIvTM%3D&tabid=95&portalid=0&mid=
 580.
11. Boezeman D. Transforming adaptation. Authoritative knowledge for climate
change governance. Nijmegen: Radboud University; 2015. [URL: "http://hdl.handle.net/2066/141636"] http://hdl.handle.
 net/2066/141636
12. Hagens J, Koretsky Z. CARISMA Advisory Boards consultations report.
Nijmegen: Radboud University; 2016.
13. Van der Gaast W, Stavakras V. D2.4 report on implementation of stakeholder
engagement plan and communication plan. Groningen: JIN; 2016.
14. Funtowicz SO, Ravetz JR. Science for the post-normal age. Futures. 1993;25:
739–55. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-3287(93)90022-l"] https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-3287(93)90022-l.
15. Radaelli CM. The role of knowledge in the policy process. J Eur Public
Policy. 1995;2:159–83. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1080/13501769508406981"] https://doi.org/10.1080/13501769508406981.
16. Pielke R. The honest broker: making sense of science in policy and politics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2007.
17. Turnhout E, Stuiver M, Klostermann J, Harms B, Leeuwis C. New roles of
science in society: different repertoires of knowledge brokering. Sci Public
Policy. 2013;40:354–65. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scs114"] https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scs114.
18. Weiss CH. Have we learned anything new about the use of evaluation? Am
J Eval. 1998;19:21–33. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1177/109821409801900103"] https://doi.org/10.1177/109821409801900103.
19. Stirling A. “Opening up” and “closing down”: power, participation, and
pluralism in the social appraisal of technology. Sci Technol Human Values.
2008;33:262–94. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243907311265"] https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243907311265.
20. Termeer C, van Buuren A, Knieling J, Gottschick M. Reconciling collaborative
action research with existing institutions: insights from Dutch and German
climate knowledge programmes. J water Clim Chang. 2015;6:89–103.
21. Kingdon JW. Agendas, alternatives, and public policies. 2nd ed. Boston:
Little, Brown; 1995. 
Page 8 of 8
