Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
Title: The practice of climate change policy evaluations in the European Union and its member states: results from a meta-analysis
Keywords: Climate policy,Policy evaluation,Meta-analysis,European Union,EU member states
ModDate: 2019/12/12 19:26:38+01'00'
Subject: Sustain Earth, doi:10.1186/s42055-019-0015-8
Author: Noriko Fujiwara
CreationDate: 2019/12/10 11:32:39+08'00'
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Climate policy,Policy evaluation,Meta-analysis,European Union,EU member states
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s42055-019-0015-8
xmp:dc:publisher: Sustainable Earth
xmp:dc:description: Sustain Earth, doi:10.1186/s42055-019-0015-8
xmp:dc:subject: Climate policy; Policy evaluation; Meta-analysis; European Union; EU member states
xmp:dc:title: The practice of climate change policy evaluations in the European Union and its member states: results from a meta-analysis
xmp:dc:creator: Noriko Fujiwara; Harro van Asselt; Stefan Böβner; Sebastian Voigt; Niki-Artemis Spyridaki; Alexandros Flamos; Emilie Alberola; Keith Williges; Andreas Türk; Michael ten Donkelaar
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2019-12-12T19:26:38+01:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2019-12-12T19:26:38+01:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2019-12-10T11:32:39+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:60e624a6-f56c-4db9-b089-b944799d7a58
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:9e331fcc-7855-41e8-9210-85ede20e3f48
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:60e624a6-f56c-4db9-b089-b944799d7a58
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2019-12-10T11:36:22+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInfoBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Results
  Conclusions
Background
Methods
Results
  General information
  Timing of publications
  Affiliation of the authors
  Commissioning bodies
  Sectors
  Reflexivity
  Evaluation methods
  Evaluation criteria
  Presence of political recommendations
Discussion
Conclusions
show [App1]
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Authors’ contributions
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Author details
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9
https://doi.org/10.1186/s42055-019-0015-8 
Sustainable Earth
RESEARCH  Open Access
The practice of climate change policy
evaluations in the European Union and
its member states: results from a meta-
analysis
Noriko Fujiwara1*, Harro van Asselt2, Stefan Böβner3, Sebastian Voigt4, Niki-Artemis Spyridaki5, Alexandros Flamos5,
Emilie Alberola6, Keith Williges7, Andreas Türk7 and Michael ten Donkelaar8
Abstract
Background: This article presents the main findings from a meta-analysis of how climate change mitigation policy
evaluations have been undertaken in the European Union (EU) and six of its Member States: Austria, Czech
Republic, France, Germany, Greece and the United Kingdom. It aims to provide insights into how policy evaluations
are carried out and how those practices might be improved. As a first step, this article reviews the literature on the
theory and practice of policy evaluations to guide our methodology and further analysis.
Results: Our sample of 236 policy evaluations in the EU and six Member States covers the period 2010–2016. Compared
with the results of a similar meta-analysis carried out covering the period 1998–2007, formal evaluations commissioned
by government bodies have been on the rise in 2010–2016. Most evaluations focus on effectiveness and goal
achievement and usually forgo a deeper level of reflexivity and/or public participation in the evaluation process. The
analysis also reveals the dominance of the energy sector in the sampled evaluations. The article finds that the low
number of any policy evaluations in the agriculture, waste or land-use sectors is an area for further investigation.
Conclusions: The exercise of identifying, coding and categorising these evaluations for 7 years helps to provide insights
into the potential use of ex-post evaluations in support of future EU legislative proposals and accompanying impact
assessments. Having a good understanding on how a certain policy performed particularly according to evaluation
criteria might form the basis for more ambitious climate change mitigation policies in the future. Our analysis further
shows that it is crucial and urgent to allocate sufficient resources to the coverage of relatively under-represented sectors,
such as land use, land-use change and forestry, and waste.
Keywords: Climate policy, Policy evaluation, Meta-analysis, European Union, EU member states
Background
The evaluation of climate change mitigation policy is
crucial for understanding how well policies and mea-
sures work. Policy evaluation offers analysts insights
in the functioning of policies and provides policy-
makers with much-needed information on how to
improve them. In addition, policy evaluation can en-
hance the transparency of policy implementation,
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:noriko.fujiwara@ceps.eu"] noriko.fujiwara@ceps.eu
1Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS), Place du Congrès 1, 1000
Brussels, Belgium
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
which is essential to gain citizens’  support for those
policies [1] and useful for private companies and in-
vestors to get a better understanding of the progress
of those policies to support their decisions in favour
of low-carbon investments.
The importance and necessity of climate policy evalu-
ation were underscored by the Paris Agreement adopted
in December 2015. The Paris Agreement puts in place a
process in which countries pledge, in five-year cycles, non-
legally-binding Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDCs).  The main accountability mechanism to ensure
countries live up to their promises consists of various
© The Author(s). 2019 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 2 of 16
review processes, notably a review of implementation by
individual parties (i.e. through the “enhanced transparency
framework” of Article 131), and a review of global efforts
towards long-term goals of the Agreement (i.e. the “global
stocktake” of Article 14).
Since the early 1990s, and in line with the requirements
under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC), the European Union (EU) has
gained significant experience in monitoring and reporting
greenhouse gas emissions, as well as the policies put in
place to reduce emissions. Over time, the Union has
strengthened its internal transparency mechanisms by
requesting Member States to report on the impacts of
these policies, adding an element of policy evaluation to
the regulatory framework. Member States now have to re-
port their progress on climate change policies under the
EU’s Monitoring Mechanism Regulation [2],  while other
policy areas such as renewable energy and energy efficiency
also require Member States to submit national action plans
and reports [1–3]. These requirements are streamlined into
Integrated National Energy and Climate Plans under the
new Energy Union Governance Regulation [4].
Although they are distinct practices, monitoring
and reporting are closely intertwined with the evalu-
ation of climate policies. Such climate policy evalua-
tions can offer insights into a variety of aspects,
including the amount of greenhouse gas emission re-
ductions, the cost-effectiveness of policies, their so-
cial acceptance, or the coherence with other policies [5].
Climate policy measures – and thus also their evaluations
– commonly address renewable energy deployment,
switching to low-carbon fuels or electric vehicles and en-
ergy efficiency in buildings [34]. Systematic analysis of the
information made available by these evaluations only re-
cently began to draw attention and is usually fragmented
across policy themes. A case in point is energy efficiency,
where there has been a long tradition on evidence-based
policy evaluations, with for instance the recent EU-funded
EPATEE (Evaluation into Practice to Achieve Targets for
Energy Efficiency) project providing a large repository of
those across EU countries [35].  Nevertheless meta-
analyses of evaluations targeting measures across policy
themes are still largely lacking. A notable exception is
Huitema et al. [6],  which reports on a meta-analysis of
259 evaluations, covering the period from 1998 to 2007
for the EU and several EU Member States.2 This article
offers a more recent application of this type of analysis,
1Parties to the Paris Agreement are to report on their emissions trends
(through annual greenhouse gas inventories) and through biennial
reports that need to indicate how much progress has been made in
implementing and achieving their nationally determined contributions
under the Agreement (see [31]).
2The Member States examined by Huitema et al. [6] are United
Kingdom, Germany, Italy, Finland, Portugal, and Poland. 
focusing on ex-post climate policy evaluations, to reflect
more recent developments and gain updated insights into
climate policy evaluation in the EU.
Through a systematic analysis of policy evaluations, the
article aims to enhance the understanding of existing climate
policy evaluation practices in the EU and Member States,
juxtaposing the latter with broader policy developments at
the EU and international level. The article first offers some
background on the theory of policy evaluation and insights
into EU evaluation practices. It then explains the method-
ology of our analysis. It summarises and discusses the results
of the meta-analysis, and concludes with recommendations
for EU policymakers and climate policy evaluators.
Policy evaluation can serve various functions. Aside from
its key function of determining whether a policy can be
considered effective [7], policy evaluation can help policy-
makers learn from their experiences and, where needed,
correct and amend existing policies. Policy evaluation can
further strengthen public accountability by demonstrating
whether policies live up to policymakers’  promises [8, 9].
Furthermore, policy evaluation can be used as a
management tool to review the performance of
government departments [8].
Common to all those functions is some sort of value
judgement based on certain criteria [10].  These value
judgements add a layer of complexity, as they raise the
question which criteria should be used to evaluate policies.
Should an evaluation focus on goal attainment or should
criteria such as “fairness” or “cost-effectiveness” be taken
into consideration as well? And who decides against which
of those values a policy is to be judged? There are no de-
finitive answers to these questions, as they are highly
context-specific: in a jurisdiction facing significant budget-
ary constraints, it may be appropriate to focus on the
criterion of cost-effectiveness, while for another jurisdic-
tion it may be more pertinent to focus on criteria such as
the fairness and distributional impacts of a policy. While
the criteria to be applied in policy evaluations are thus up
for discussion, the policy evaluation literature gives some
suggestions regarding good practices in policy evaluation.
Policy evaluation should have a highly systematic approach
that uses clear evaluation criteria [9].  Moreover, policy
evaluation should go beyond simply assessing goal attain-
ment and also ask whether specific policies have been ad-
equate to their socio-cultural context [12, 13] to achieve
their goal (e.g. whether policies are in line with existing
norms and values; see [11]).  In the same vein, Huitema
et al. [6] argue that policy evaluations should also contain a
certain degree of reflexivity (e.g. by questioning the objec-
tives underpinning policies), that they should cater to the
complexity of “wicked” problems such as climate change
(e.g. allowing for more than one recommendation) and be
participatory in nature (e.g. providing the opportunity for
several stakeholder groups to voice their opinions on a
Page 3
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 3 of 16
given policy).  In addition, Schoenefeld and Jordan [14]
argue that, depending on whether policy evaluations are
carried out or otherwise driven by government agents
themselves or more by civil society stakeholders such as
universities, NGOs and consultancies, results and outcome
of the evaluation might vary, thus pointing to the import-
ance of taking the evaluating entity into consideration [14].
Policy evaluation has become gradually more important
in the EU. Since 2002, the European Commission has been
committed to the EU agenda of “Better Regulation”, which
highlights, among others, the ex-ante impact assessments
of policy initiatives, the monitoring and ex-post evaluation
of existing policies as well as the importance of stakeholder
consultation in these processes.3 More recently, in 2012,
the European Parliament introduced ex-ante impact assess-
ments by establishing a dedicated service within its admin-
istration. Since 2013, ex-post evaluations have been added
to complete an entire legislative cycle from agenda setting
to scrutiny of legislative proposals [15]. The growing rec-
ognition within the EU of the value of the evaluation
process has resulted in an increasing demand for the
evaluation of environmental policies and programmes [9],
including evaluations in the area of climate policy.
As is the case for policy evaluation in general [16], it is
challenging to evaluate climate policies, because it can be
hard to identify clear policy outcomes, and policies often
interact with each other [9, 17, 18]. This has also recently
been recognised with respect to specific climate policy
themes (e.g. energy efficiency), where a lack of quantitative
data was highlighted as an impediment to evidence-based
analysis required to distinguish effective from ineffective
policy practices [36]. Within the EU, these barriers to an
effective evaluation process are compounded by the
complexity of the governance system [9].  Moreover,
there are important political barriers for further
strengthening evaluation and monitoring practices in
EU Member States. For instance, they require financial
resources that governments may be unwilling to allo-
cate, and Member States may be unwilling to cede
more powers to EU institutions for this function [19].
One of the most relevant pieces of EU legislation for
climate change mitigation policy evaluations is the Moni-
toring Mechanism Regulation (MMR) [2].4 The MMR re-
quires Member States to report “quantitative estimates of
the effect of policies and measures on emissions by sources
3[URL: "https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-making-process/better-regulation-why-and-how_en"] https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-making-process/better-regulation-
 why-and-how_en last accessed on 28 March 2019; see also [21, 32]: 31.
4Regulation 525/2013/EU [2] is an update of the EU’s Monitoring
Mechanism Decision (Decision 280/2004/EC [33];). The MMR is not
the only EU legislation that calls for the evaluation of the effects of
policies and measures. As Hildén et al. [19] note, other Directives –
e.g. Article 22.1 of the Renewable Energy Directive (2009/28/EC) and
Article 24.1 of the Energy Efficiency Directive (2012/27/EU) – likewise
call for Member States to report on progress made in the
implementation. 
and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases” (Article
3.2(a)(v), [2]) and to report the following elements in their
information on policies and measures (Article 13.1(c) (iii)-
(vii),  [2]):  the status of implementation of the policy or
measure or group of measures; indicators to monitor and
evaluate progress over time; quantitative estimates (both
ex-post and ex-ante assessments) of the effects of policies
and measures on emissions by sources and removals by
sinks of greenhouse gases; estimates of the projected costs
and benefits of policies and measures, as well as estimates
of the realised costs and benefits of policies and measures;
and all references to the assessments and the underpinning
technical reports. These provisions are encouraging in that
they call on Member States to provide both ex-ante and ex-
post information on the effects of mitigation policies, and
also encourage Member States to offer estimates of ex-ante
and ex-post costs and benefits. Nevertheless, they also leave
much discretion to the Member States, as indicated by the
various mentions of the words “where appropriate” and
“where available” (Article 13.1(c) (v)-(vii), [2]), as well as by
the fact that Member States can opt to assess the effects of
a group of measures. Initial reviews of reporting practices
suggest that Member States thus far have hardly included
ex-post assessments of the effects of policies and measures
in their reports [1, 19].
Indeed, the necessary capacity to carry out ex-post
evaluations is not equally developed throughout the EU.
A 2009 study carried out in preparation for the MMR
found that the EU15 Member States tended to have
more experience in ex-post evaluations and more often
have formalised monitoring and evaluation systems in
place than the newer Member States ([20]:  14).  These
factors might have an impact on the capacity of newer
Member States’ to carry out ex-post evaluations.
All this is not to say that ex-post evaluations are not
available for the EU and its Member States. Indeed, the
European Environment Agency (EEA) seeks to go be-
yond formal evaluation procedures such as those carried
out by or on behalf of the European Commission in the
context of the Better Regulation agenda, adding value by
evaluating policies within a more environment-specific
context as well as those policies influencing environmen-
tal policies5 according to its autonomous mandate. It has
also developed a conceptual framework for policy
evaluation that builds on key policy evaluation cri-
teria, with the aspiration to strengthen the tradition
of carrying out policy evaluations within the EU and
5The EEA seeks to hold a dialogue about policies on changes in
ecosystems, the production and consumption system, or the food,
energy and mobility systems and engage in such a dialogue with the
EEA member countries and the European Environment and
Information Network (Eionet), European institutions, the environment
evaluators community and interested evaluation professionals ([21]: 4).
Page 4
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 4 of 16
facilitate the dialogue between professional evaluators
and evaluation users [21].
Methods
As a starting point, we made several important choices
concerning the scope of our meta-analysis of climate
policy evaluations.
The first choice was which geographical jurisdictions
to include. Examining 28 Member States would have
been challenging, considering time and resource con-
straints as well as language barriers. Drawing on the
local expertise whilst securing diversity in the coun-
tries studied, we decided to include the three largest
EU Member States (Germany, France, and the UK) as
well as smaller Member States from Central and
South-Eastern Europe (Austria, Czech Republic, and
Greece),  with varying emissions profiles.6 In addition,
since important climate policy evaluations had been
carried out at the EU level in [6],  the EU was
included as a separate jurisdiction.
The second scope-related choice concerned the time
period of the analysis. The analysis by Huitema et al. [6]
covered evaluations from January 1998 to March 2007.
Reflecting climate policy developments in the period after
the UNFCCC climate conference in Copenhagen and after
the enactment of the EU’s 2020 climate and energy pack-
age, both of which took place in 2009, we decided to cover
the period from January 2010 to December 2016.
The third choice concerned the eligibility of evalua-
tions for the analysis.  The number of climate policy
evaluations is potentially large, and we sought to limit
the number of evaluations by:
– Only examining ex-post evaluations, including
studies that have both ex-ante and ex-post elements,
and excluding purely ex-ante evaluations.
– Focusing only on climate change mitigation, not
adaptation policies.
– Only examining evaluations of policies reported as
climate policies by cross-checking with reports
submitted to the UNFCCC (e.g. the latest National
Communications submitted by Parties to the
UNFCCC). Evaluations of policies were considered
eligible when they included a specific reference to
climate change mitigation, even if the latter was not
primary or specific objective of the policy.
– Excluding purely academic articles.
– Excluding non-systematic analyses such as position pa-
pers by NGOs, industry groups, and trade associations
6The Member State shares of total greenhouse gas emissions in the
EU28 in 1990–2016 were the following: Germany 21.1%, UK 11.6%,
France 10.7%, Czech Republic 3.0%, Greece 2.1%, and Austria 1.8%;
 http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/
 Greenhouse_gas_emission_statistics last accessed on 28 March 2019. 
whose primary purpose is not considered to be evalu-
ation as such but advocacy for policy change.
– Focusing on the EU-level and national policies,
excluding purely sub-national policies.
– Looking only at documents that were made available
to the public.
Of course, these choices can influence the results of
collecting and aggregating evaluations. For instance, ex-
cluding academic articles avoids double counting be-
tween different versions of the same paper at different
stages (e.g. first published as a working paper or report,
followed by an academic article with essentially the same
contents). It also allowed us to focus on the content of
Member States’  reports and official policy evaluations
and whether and to what extent these represented rigor-
ous evaluation practices. At the same time, this decision
risks lowering the total number of evaluations covered
and may also influence the number of evaluations we
classified as “independent”.
In the next step, following the eligibility criteria
outlined above, we gathered relevant evaluations by
researching relevant sources such as national govern-
ments websites, university websites, well-established
national consultancies and research institutes and
repositories including EU and UNFCCC databases.
In the third step, we coded key information from the
evaluations with a view to creating a comprehensive set
of information (see Appendix 1 in [22]).  For this pur-
pose, a common template was developed drawing on the
template used by Huitema et al. [6].
The information collected for each of the evaluations
was aggregated, focusing on the following features and
design choices (following [6]): (1) the year of publication;
(2) the affiliation of authors; (3) commissioning bodies
of evaluations; (4) sectoral coverage; (5) the nature of
the evaluation (reflexivity); (6) evaluation methods used;
(7) evaluation criteria used; and (8) whether political re-
commendations were made (see Appendix). The aggre-
gation process also helped to verify the information
collected, spot gaps and inconsistencies, and, in some
cases, led to the exclusion of evaluations that, on closer
inspection, did not meet the eligibility criteria.
While focusing on these features and design choices
allowed a systematic analysis of climate policy evaluation
practices in the EU and some of its Member States, several
caveats are in place. First, the number of evaluations
found is likely to be non-exhaustive, for instance because
evaluations are not always publicly available. Second, the
act of coding evaluations means that a degree of subjectiv-
ity is inevitable. For example, evaluations do not always
clearly spell out which criteria or methods are used, and
judging whether an evaluation is reflexive in nature is not
always straightforward. We sought to address this concern
Page 5
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 5 of 16
by offering detailed guidance to the coders working in a
decentralised manner (see Appendix 1 in [22]). Some dis-
cretion was left to the individual coders on practical
choices (see also [6]). Nevertheless, systematically applying
the coding template allowed us to draw some conclusions
concerning EU policy evaluation practices. The following
section reports and analyses results of coded evaluations
in a way comparable to Huitema et al. [6].
Results
General information
In total, our sample consisted of 236 evaluations,
distributed amongst Member States as displayed in
Table 1. The variation in the number of evaluations
implies a discrepancy in evaluation practices across
Member States for reasons other than limited capacity
as discussed earlier. Lists of sampled evaluations can be
found in Appendix 2 of [22].
In comparison, the sample size of evaluations covered
by Huitema et al. [6] – which also included adaptation
policies and academic articles – was 259, ranging from the
EU (105 evaluations) and the UK (78 evaluations) to
Portugal (10 evaluations) and Poland (6 evaluations). The
diversity of the new sample for 2010–2016 is similar to
those of the old sample for 1998–2007, although the aver-
age number of evaluations (compared to the number of
years covered) is comparatively higher (33.7 evaluations
per year compared to 25.9 evaluations per year),  even
though the sample in Huitema et al. [6] included studies
covering adaptation, and also included journal articles.
Timing of publications
The number of evaluations continued to increase towards
2015, except for 2013, and then declined by more than half
(Fig. 1). It is unclear whether the year 2016 is exceptional
or signals a changing trend. It is possible that a number of
evaluations were completed in 2016 but not yet published.
The number of evaluations could be linked to specific
policy developments and requirements at international,
EU and national levels. Nearly half (47%) of the total eval-
uations were published in the years 2014 and 2015. These
years can be regarded as important milestones to evaluate
existing policies in preparation for two major policy
events. One is the submission of intended nationally de-
termined contributions (INDCs) to the UNFCCC, which
were due in the first quarter of 2015. The other is the
launch of the Energy Union in Europe in 2015. The evalu-
ations in the third highest year, 2012, include the first
Table 1 Evaluations per jurisdiction
Countries EU Germany United Greece Austria France Czech
Kingdom  Republic
Total 70
number of
evaluations 
59  64  20  8  10  5  236 
carbon market report at the end of the second phase of
the EU ETS, and sectoral analyses of non-ETS sectors.
The new sample for 2010–2016 remained mostly in the
range of around 30–60 evaluations per year. This falls be-
tween the low level of evaluation activities (0–30 evalua-
tions per year) in 1998–2004 and the high level of activities
(80–90 evaluations per year) in 2005–2006 (Figure 1 in [6]).
Affiliation of the authors
Figure 2 shows the affiliation of authors, highlighting
that universities or research institutes, followed by govern-
ment bodies,  were responsible for the clear majority of
evaluations.7 Government bodies rather than universities
or research institutes only contributed most to evaluations
as authors in the EU and the Czech Republic.
The previous study by Huitema et al. [6] also ranked
universities or research institutes (about 135 evaluations)
on top, but followed by commercial consultancies
(50–60 evaluations) and international organisations
(20–30 evaluations) (Figure 2 in [6]). A fewer number
of government bodies authored policy evaluations.
Commissioning bodies
Figure 3 shows that most evaluations were commissioned
by government bodies.8 The second highest number of
evaluations does not fall under any of the specified cat-
egories, i.e. others. This category may include any evalua-
tions for which the commissioning bodies could not be
identified. It is possible that NGOs were underrepresented
in the sample due to the eligibility criteria. For example,
certain ex-post evaluations carried out for their internal
purposes may well have been excluded from the sample.
Huitema et al. [6] do not provide details about the
breakdown of commissioning bodies but differentiate
whether the relevant evaluation was commissioned or not.
Thus, the new sample for 2010–2016 cannot be adequately
compared with the study with respect to this question.
Sectors
Information collected with regard to the sectoral cover-
age of evaluations was classified under the following
sector categories, based on categories established by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC):
energy (including buildings), industry/industrial processes,
waste, land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF),
agriculture, transport and cross-sectoral.
Figure 4 reveals that evaluations in the energy sector
are dominant in our sample,9 with 171 evaluation
7Evaluations may be counted under more than one category.
8Evaluations may be counted under more than one category.
9Evaluations could be – and have been – counted under more than
one category, which is the reason for the divergence of the total
number of evaluations in our sample (236) and the total number of
evaluations in Figure 4 (367).
Page 6
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 6 of 16
Fig. 1 Evaluations per year
entries covering the sector where multiple answers
were possible. While this large share might be due
to the fact that we included the buildings sector in
the energy sector (as does the UNFCCC),  this find-
ing is in line with a study done by the EEA, which
also showed that most energy and climate policies of
Member States focused on the energy sector [23].
This was followed by cross-sectoral evaluations (61 en-
tries),  industry/industrial processes (51) and transport
(48).  This pattern is common to most of the jurisdic-
tions covered, except the EU, which had a relatively
higher share of cross-sectoral approaches than
Member States. Moreover, some sectors, such as the
agricultural, waste and LULUCF sectors, are clearly 
under-represented. LULUCF evaluations have been
particularly scarce, possibly because the sector was
not accounted for in the EU-wide emission reduction
target up to 2020.
Looking at specific jurisdictions, the share of the energy
sector is particularly high in the UK and Germany
(Fig. 5).10 it is noteworthy that in our sample, evaluations
carried out on the EU level seem to roughly reflect the
cross-sectoral distribution of actual emissions,11 while the
Greek evaluations focus primarily on the energy sector.
The sectoral spread in the sampled evaluations can be
compared with the sectoral shares of actual greenhouse gas
emissions in the EU28 in 2015, i.e. energy (55%), transport
(23%), industry (8%), agriculture (10%), and waste (3%) [37].
Fig. 2 Affiliation of the authors
Page 7
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 7 of 16
Fig. 3 Commissioning bodies
The aggregated data suggests that both the energy and in-
dustry sectors are represented to a higher extent than their
actual shares of emissions, despite the challenges of delin-
eating specific sectors,12 and the multiple counting. By con-
trast, transport, agriculture and the LULUCF sectors are
under-represented given their actual shares of emissions.
The strong focus on the energy sector in climate change
mitigation policies corresponds to observations made by
Bößner et al. [24] regarding the information available in
international climate change mitigation policy databases. Of
all the international databases analysed, the large majority
contained information about energy policies, but only a
fraction conveyed any information on mitigation policies in
the agricultural or waste sector.
Huitema et al. [6] do not provide for a sectoral breakdown
per country, meaning that a direct comparison is not possible.
Reflexivity
Policy evaluations can be conducted in a reflexive or
non-reflexive manner. While the latter entails answering
the question whether objectives of a given policy were
reached according to certain criteria, a reflexive policy
evaluation questions the objective and the chosen means
to reach this objective critically and tries to address
questions like whether the policy itself was/is justified.
10Evaluations may be counted under more than one category. Also,
UK waste and agricultural policies have been addressed by a few cross-
sectoral studies and were classified as such.
11Evaluations in France and Austria also seem quite evenly distributed,
but the sample size was quite small.
12However, grouping emissions into different sectors is not
standardised; the European Commission places all “combustion from
fuels” under the energy category including “combustion from
construction and manufacturing” which might be placed under the
“industrial processes” category by other institutions. 
In the sample, the majority of the evaluations (204 evalu-
ations, 86%) are found to be non-reflexive.
The high share of non-reflexive evaluations is compar-
able to the share (82%) in the 1998–2007 sample [6].
However, a closer look at each country shows mixed
results across jurisdictions. On the one hand, the EU,
Germany, the UK and Austria have the highest shares of
non-reflexive evaluations (70 evaluations for EU and 59
evaluations for Germany), 83% (53 out of 64 evaluations
for UK) and 75% (6 out of 8 evaluations for Austria). On
the other hand, Greece has an even split (10 evaluations
each) while France and the Czech Republic have reflexive
evaluations at 60% (6 out of 10 evaluations for France; 3
out of 5 evaluations for the Czech Republic).
Evaluation methods
A closer look at the methods used to evaluate policies
shows that most of evaluations used “documentary ana-
lysis” (153 entries). In a decreasing order, other methods
used were “modelling, regression analysis or time series
analysis” (88), “public opinion polls, user surveys, stake-
holder analysis, feasibility assessments or expert inter-
views” (85) and “cost benefit analysis, cost-effectiveness,
multi-criteria analysis, feasibility analysis or risk analysis”
(44) (Fig. 6).13 In terms of stakeholder involvement, it can
be assumed that most of the methods applied are neither
participatory nor interactive, except for the category of
“public opinion polls, user surveys, stakeholder analysis,
feasibility assessments or expert interviews”.
The above three types of methods also scored high in
[6], which placed 181 evaluations out of the total 259 in
13Evaluations may be counted under more than one category.
Page 8
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 8 of 16
Fig. 4 Sectors covered, all jurisdictions
the category “documentary analysis”, and 93 evaluations
in the “modelling” category.
Looking at the largest jurisdictions in terms of popula-
tion, it is interesting to note that Germany relies mostly on
“modelling, regression or time-series analysis” (59%), while
the UK uses proportionally more “public opinion polls,
user surveys, stakeholder analysis, feasibility assessments or
expert interviews” (52%) than other countries (Fig. 7).
Evaluation criteria
Following Huitema et al. [6], we identified the evaluation
criteria for each study. Table 2 illustrates some examples of 
questions associated with each of the evaluation criteria we
distinguished.
The overwhelming majority of evaluations assessed
policies against their “effectiveness and goal attainment”
(194),  followed by “cost-effectiveness” (74),  “efficiency”
(50),  “legality or legal acceptability” (47),  “coordination
with other policies” (40), “fairness” (33) and “legitimacy”
(23).  This shows that evaluations opt for assessing
policies in a technical and/or economic manner, while
more qualitative criteria such as fairness or legitimacy
were addressed in a limited number of jurisdictions only.
As above, this question allowed for multiple answers
(Fig. 8).14
Fig. 5 Sectors covered by jurisdiction
Page 9
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 9 of 16
The above results are not that different from the
sample in [6], which also found that the majority of the
evaluations focused on evaluating the effectiveness and
goal attainment of policies.
Broken down for each jurisdiction, it is noteworthy that all
the French evaluations and almost all of the EU evaluations
(68 entries) address “effectiveness and goal attainment”. The
EU-level evaluations show a higher-than-average share of
“cost-effectiveness” (35) and “legality or legal acceptability”
(30). Moreover, while most of the UK evaluations focus
on “effectiveness”,  “cost-effectiveness” and “efficiency”,
the country also has a higher-than-average share of
evaluations addressing “policy coordination”,  “fairness”
and “legitimacy” (14, 17 and 10 respectively) (Fig. 9).
Presence of political recommendations
Finally, close to half (44%) of the evaluations made political
recommendations. A closer look, however, shows mixed
results across jurisdictions. Generally, a high share of
evaluations in the Member States made political recommen-
dations, whereas the share of political recommendations in
the EU was rather low (5 out of 70 evaluations, i.e. 7%).
Discussion
Several inferences can be drawn on the basis of the meta-
analysis results presented in the previous section. First, the
number of evaluations fluctuates year-by-year, but seems to
be linked to specific climate policy developments and events
at the national, European, and international levels. For ex-
ample, evaluations increased significantly before countries
first published their INDCs, and when the European Com-
mission launched its Energy Union initiative. This implies
that international climate policy events – including not only
the regular and review reporting already part of the
UNFCCC regime, but also the new global stocktake due to
start in 2023 and its predecessor, the Talanoa Dialogue
which was launched in 2018 – may influence climate policy
evaluation activities by setting milestones. Moreover, the
five-yearly preparation of NDCs by all parties to the Paris
Agreement is likely to spur climate policy evaluations, as
evaluations can help the EU as a whole and Member States
determine what level of ambition is adequate for their future
policies.
Second, the largest group carrying out the sampled eval-
uations were universities and research institutions. How-
ever, a relatively large number of evaluations were carried
out by government bodies, showing a significant increase
from the sample of Huitema et al. [6]. These findings are
interesting in light of the distinction in policy evaluation
theory made between “formal” and “informal” evaluations
14Evaluations may be counted under more than one category, thus
allowing the sum of each category to exceed the number of 236
evaluations. 
[14]. The key distinction here is that formal evaluations
are carried out or driven (e.g. commissioned) by govern-
ments, or those responsible for the policy, whereas infor-
mal evaluations are driven by other societal actors. Our
analysis also found that government bodies are respon-
sible for commissioning the large majority of evaluations
in the sample. This suggests that while a large part of
evaluations continues to be of an informal nature, formal
evaluations may be on the rise.
Third, the dominance of the energy sector could be
explained by the fact that the sector is responsible for
the largest share of emissions in Europe, and has the lar-
gest mitigation potential.15 Moreover, emissions from
the sector can be measured, monitored, quantified and
verified more easily than other sectors.16 Another pos-
sible reason is that delivering emission reductions in the
energy sector is considered more cost-effective than in
other sectors, such as transport (e.g. “to promote
reductions of greenhouse gas emissions in a cost-effective
and economically efficient manner”, [25]; see also [26]).
Lastly, the energy sector has additional mitigation poten-
tial through energy savings by end-users ([27, 28]) in
addition to those by producers and distributors.
As far as the over-representation of the industry sector in
the evaluations in relation to their actual shares of emis-
sions is concerned, one explanation might be the sensitivity
of the sector for the overall economy, particularly in Mem-
ber States such as Germany in which industry is an import-
ant economic sector and where many jobs depend on the
performance of and policies directed at this sector. More-
over, there are remaining concerns about the possible
impact of EU climate policies and instruments such as the
EU ETS on competitiveness and carbon leakage [29].
However, the low number of any policy evaluations in
the agriculture, waste or LULUCF sectors is an area that re-
quires further investigation. Emissions from these sectors
are still covered less by EU mitigation policies because until
recently the EU emission reduction targets did not take into
consideration the LULUCF sector, which means the sector
was outside the scope of the major policy initiatives for the
period until 2020 [38]. Or the nature of the sectors may
mean that mitigation policies and policy evaluations are
subsumed under larger policy initiatives (e.g. on sustainable
agriculture or sustainable forest management) where cli-
mate change mitigation is but one of several policy goals. In
any case, in the EU where, for example, the agricultural sec-
tor represents about 10% of greenhouse gas emissions [39],
it is important to understand how well policies covering dif-
ferent aspects of these emissions have worked individually
15The energy sector accounted for 55% of the total greenhouse gas
emissions in EU28 in 2015.
16The energy sector has been covered by the EU emissions trading
system (ETS) since 2005. See [25, 26].
Page 10
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 10 of 16
Fig. 6 Evaluation methods, all jurisdictions
and how different policies have influenced each other,
e.g. how agriculture, rural development, energy, and
climate policies affect each other on bioenergy or biofuel
production.
Fourth, the sample revealed that the vast majority (more
than two-thirds) of the evaluations are not reflexive or par-
ticipatory, confirming the findings in [6]. Besides the small
number of reflexive evaluations (i.e. those evaluations which
examine the policy and its objectives more critically), most
evaluations assessed policies against the criteria such as “ef-
fectiveness and goal attainment” and/or “cost-effectiveness”.
Moreover, with the exception of the UK and Greece, evalu-
ations hardly addressed questions related to the fairness or
legitimacy of policies. Yet knowing how a certain policy
actually performed against these criteria – particularly legit-
imacy –will be important for understanding the state (ac-
ceptance and distribution) of public support for existing
policies. While methods such as public opinion polls and
stakeholder analyses have been well integrated in the EU
evaluation practices and carried out relatively often, simple 
documentary analysis as well as modelling efforts still re-
main the methodology of choice for most (45%) evaluations
assessed. This suggests that a large part of evaluations is
not participatory in nature.
However, using evaluation criteria other than effective-
ness/goal attainment or cost- effectiveness and evaluation
methods involving stakeholder participation are fraught
with difficulties. For instance, assessing the fairness re-
quires, first of all, the establishment of a benchmark of
what can be considered “fair”, how one can measure it,
and – if the evaluation is to allow for comparisons – such
benchmarks would need to be consistently applied. By
contrast, the benchmarks for evaluations of effectiveness
(e.g. tonnes of CO2 
emissions reduced) or cost-
effectiveness (e.g. costs/tonne of CO2 
emissions reduced)
can – though need not17 – be relatively straightforward.
In other words, the application of some criteria may in-
volve important (subjective) choices on the part of the
evaluator,18 which may make it more difficult to allow for
comparative analyses. The use of participatory methods
Page 11
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 11 of 16
Fig. 7 Evaluation methods per jurisdiction
Table 2 List of criteria distinguished
Criterion  Examples of associated questions
Goal attainment/
Effectiveness 
Have specified goals been attained?
Can this be attributed to the policy?
E.g. Has the policy reduced absolute
greenhouse gas emissions by the targeted level?
Cost-effectiveness How much of a given benefit is delivered
per unit of expenditure?
E.g. How many tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO2
)
emissions have been reduced
for each Euro?
Efficiency  Have the optimal goals been formulated?
E.g. Is the price of carbon right?
Fairness  How are the costs and benefits of a policy
distributed among certain sectors of society?
E.g. Does the EU emissions trading system (ETS)
lead to windfall profits for power producers?
Legitimacy Does the public accept the policies? Does the
policy meet criteria of democratic
accountability, such as transparency?
E.g. How much public support is there for
policies to promote wind power?
Coordination Is the policy well-coordinated with other policies?
E.g. How does the use of renewable energy
certificates interact with the EU ETS?
Legal admissibility Is the policy compatible with legal rules and
principles?
E.g. Is the Member State’s energy efficiency policy in
line with the Energy Efficiency
Directive or the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union?
Source: based on Fischer [11] and Huitema et al. [6] 
also faces particular challenges, including the costs of
stakeholder engagement, and the needs for avoiding bias
and ensuring representativeness (i.e. who participates).
Lastly, close to half of the evaluations presented political
recommendations. There is a significant variance in the
share of such recommendations between Member States
on the one hand, and the EU on the other. The presence
of political recommendations may depend on the role of
evaluations envisaged in the relevant jurisdiction, specific-
ally how far policy evaluations should go beyond the tech-
nical level, and how such evaluations should contribute to
the legislative processes (e.g. providing evidence to policy-
makers in a closed process or directly submitting them to
an open legislative process).
These findings have to be interpreted with care, due to
limitations related to the eligibility criteria, such as the ex-
clusion of academic publications, documents that are not
publicly available and subnational policy evaluations.
However, this new meta-analysis, combined with the pre-
vious one [6], enables researchers to track the long-term
17Although policy goals may seem undisputed, the policy goal as
formulated may mask underlying contestations between different
societal actors about what a specific policy should achieve.
18While this finding may apply to all criteria to some extent, it applies
more strongly to those criteria where metrics for evaluations (e.g.
amount of CO2 
emissions reduced; costs per unit of CO2 
emission
reduction) are absent.
Page 12
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9
Fig. 8 Evaluation criteria, all jurisdictions 
Page 12 of 16
Fig. 9 Evaluation criteria by jurisdiction
Page 13
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 13 of 16
trend in almost 20 years and understand the diversity of
policy development across jurisdictions and sectors.
This study shows that while evaluation of mitigation
policies is quite advanced in some jurisdictions, there
is still some room for improvement, not only in
terms of the quantity of the evaluations but also in
terms of their quality.
Conclusions
What insights does this meta-analysis provide for policy-
makers and the broader climate policy evaluation commu-
nity? First, the meta-analyses discussed in this article and
in [6] show that that there is no dearth of climate policy
evaluations in Europe. The large and increasing number
of evaluations might harbour some redundancies and
overlaps, but it seems important to use this wealth of ex-
post evaluations to support future EU legislative proposals
and accompanying impact assessments.
To this end, existing and future policy evaluations could
be saved in an EU-wide single, central and publicly access-
ible repository, which could be established and built on
the existing infrastructure with support of the European
Commission, including the Joint Research Centre, and the
EEA. Such a repository would help render EU climate pol-
icies more robust in two ways. On the one hand, it could
help researchers in carrying out similar assessments, avoid
duplication of efforts, and allow for the sharing of lessons
learnt in a more efficient manner. On the other hand, it
could offer interested stakeholders – including policy-
makers, but also the general public – an initial indication
of the performance of climate policy in the EU and its
Member States, foster the exchange of evaluation prac-
tices, and suggest where further capacity building for
climate policy evaluation may be needed.
Furthermore, the repository could offer a solid basis for
studying – and improving – the quality of climate policy
evaluations, and for examining whether evaluations are in
line or at odds with each other. For instance, while evalua-
tions may employ similar criteria (e.g. “goal attainment” or
“cost-effectiveness”), they may be inconsistent in how those
criteria are applied. A repository could thus help the climate
policy evaluation community to assess existing evaluation
practices, and where possible and appropriate, align them.
Although the sample of evaluations covered in both meta-
analyses could offer a starting point for such a repository, add-
itional efforts and resources would be needed to collect evalu-
ations in other Member States, and to do so on an ongoing
basis. The inclusion of ex-ante evaluations in such a repository
could further be considered, so as to allow for a comparison
of whether and to what extent the expectations set out in
ex-ante evaluations (including impact assessments by the
EU) are consistent with the findings of ex-post evaluations.
Second, addressing evaluation criteria such as fairness and
legitimacy as well as reflexivity in more jurisdictions would 
enhance policymakers’  understanding of climate change
mitigation policies across the EU. In our findings, fairness
and legitimacy account for a smaller proportion of total eval-
uations than other criteria. Looking at specific jurisdictions,
only the UK and Greece widely applies both criteria in ex-
post evaluations. Their near absence in evaluations in other
jurisdictions except fairness applied in Germany might be
related to the lack of reflexivity in the sampled policy eva-
luations. If an evaluation does not critically question the
policy objective or specific measures themselves or examine
the grounds of their justification, criteria such as fairness
and legitimacy will arguably be of less relevance.
However, to increase climate policy ambition, it will be
important for policy evaluations to reflect on the adequacy
of goals set in climate policies and on whether support of
the policy (because it is seen as legitimate) is shared by a
wide spectrum of stakeholders. In this respect, the new EU
Governance Regulation [4] provides a framework for Mem-
ber States to improve transparency and potentially address
fairness or legitimacy in long-term policymaking and plan-
ning processes. A review of stakeholder positions on the
European Commission’s proposal for the Governance
Regulation showed strong acceptance of the process [30].
At the same time, broadening the field of evaluators, as well
as more inclusive and participatory approaches to policy
evaluations could enhance their usefulness by giving space
to a variety of actors (civil society organisations, businesses,
citizens, etc.) to voice their views and share their experi-
ences when analysing policies. Moreover, broadening the
types of organisations carrying out or involved in climate
policy evaluation could help policymakers reflect on their
initial assessments, crystallise the points of contention or
disagreements over policy designs, and correct any error or
mistake made in previous decisions. The Governance Regu-
lation [4] expects Member States to provide the public with
early and effective opportunities to participate in and be
consulted on the preparation of the national plans and to
involve social partners in the preparation. Finally, it would
be of interest to explore the debate on evaluation models
and methods used in climate policy evaluations in relation
to evaluators, political actors and relevant authorities.
Doing so would acknowledge how evaluations would reflect
political and social norms adhered to by different actors,
which may affect the choice of models and methods.
Third, the EU, Member State governments and other ac-
tors commissioning evaluations should allocate sufficient
resources to the coverage of relatively under-represented
sectors, notably LULUCF and waste. Likewise, where pos-
sible, climate policy evaluators should pay more attention
to including these sectors in their evaluations. This article
affirms that there is an incongruence in the sectors targeted
by the policy evaluations and the emissions shares which
these sectors are responsible for. With the Paris Agree-
ment’s goal of net decarbonisation underscoring the role of
Page 14
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 14 of 16
negative emissions in achieving global temperature goals,
mitigation in the land-use sector will likely only become
more important. Thus, there is an urgent need for dedi-
cating more resources to ex-post policy evaluations in the
LULUCF, agriculture and waste sectors. Commissioning
studies on the performance of policies in these areas – both
at the EU-wide level, and for some Member States where
these sectors are responsible for a relatively large share of
emissions – can help address this gap. Such studies could
help inform the EU as it explores the options to raise the
level of ambition for the period beyond 2020 up to
2030 in its NDC to the Paris Agreement. Moreover,
they may improve the evidence of what climate change
mitigation policies have achieved in the EU and its
Member States.
Despite some limitations and outstanding questions in
need of further clarity, this meta-analysis has highlighted
trends, patterns and focal areas of European evaluation
practices in the area of climate change mitigation po-
licies. Based on these outcomes, the article has pointed
out where the evaluation practices could be further
improved and contribute to wider discussions on policy
evaluations and data analysis at the European and inter-
national levels.
Appendix
Table 3 Sustainable Earth Paper
EU total GER AUT UK GRE FRA CZ
General Statistics
Total No. of reports  70  59 8  64 20 10 5
Origin
Year of publication
2010  4  3  0  1  1  0  0
2011  4  7  0  8  0  0  0
2012  10  15 0  11 1  0  1
2013  8  4  1  9  4  4  1
2014  14  17 4  9  7  1  1
2015  21  12 1  17 4  2  1
2016  9  1  2  9  3  3  1
Affiliation of authors
Government body  47  14 3  14 5  2  2
Official, but independent 0  7  0  11 0  3  1
advisory/scrutiny body
Parliamentary Committee 1  0  0  8  0  0  0
Commercial Consultancy 17  2  2  13 0  4  1
University/research institute 31  37 4  24 15 0  1
NGO  0  3  1  1  0  1  0
International organisation 0  0  2  1  0  1  1
Industry group/trade
association 
0  0  1  00 0  0
Other  1  0  0  00 0  0 
Table 3 Sustainable Earth Paper (Continued)
EU total GER AUT UK GRE FRA CZ
Commissioned by
Government body  66  26 5  29 7  7  4
Official, but independent 3  6  0  1  0  1  0
scrutiny/advisory body
Parliamentary Committee 0  0  0  11 0  0  0
vInternational organisation 1  0  2  0  6  2  1
Industry groups/trade
association 
0  0  0  20 0  0
NGO  0  2  0  0  0  1  0
Other  1  26 1  22 0  0  0
Sectors
Sectors
Cross-sectoral  30  8  5  10 0  5  3
Energy  29  53 6  49 20 9  5
Industry/Industrial Processes 20  14 6  0  1  6  4
Transport  16  12 6  5  2  6  1
Agriculture  1  2  5  01 5  1
LULUCF/Forestry  0  0  5  00 4  0
Waste  1  0  4  01 5  1
Methods
Type of Evaluation
Reflexive  0  0  2  11 10 6  3
Non-reflexive  70  59 6  53 10 4  2
Evaluation method
Cost-benefit analysis, cost-
effectiveness analysis,
extended cost-benefit
analysis, multi-criteria analysis,
(financial) feasibility analysis,
risk analysis 
7  11 1  17 5  0  3
Modelling, regression analysis, 41  35 0  3  7  2  0
time series analysis
Public opinion polls, user  17  17 0  33 9  7  2
surveys, stakeholder analysis,
(political feasibility assessment,
expert interviews
Social experimentation 0  0  0  10 0  0
Documentary analysis 55  9  7  50 19 9  4
Not specified/unclear  2  4  0  00 0  0
Evaluation criteria
Effectiveness and goal attainment 68  38 8  51 14 10 5
Efficiency  20  7  0  20 3  0  0
Cost-effectiveness 35  13 0  16 8  0  2
Legality/legal acceptability 30  0  2  6  8  0  2
Co-ordination with other
policies 
10  7  5  14 3  0  1
Legitimacy  1  1  2  10 8  0  1
Fairness  1  9  0  17 6  0  0
Other  9  14 0  9  1  0  0
Political Recommendations made?
Yes  5  34 5  36 14 7  3
No  65  25 3  28 6  3  2
Page 15
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9  Page 15 of 16
Abbreviations
CO2
: Carbon dioxide; EEA: European Environment Agency; ETS: Emissions
trading system; EU: European Union; INDCs: Intended Nationally Determined
Contributions; LULUCF: Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry;
MMR: Monitoring Mechanism Regulation; NDC: Nationally Determined
Contribution; UNFCCC: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Douglas Fraser for supporting the UK data collection and
for helping prepare the coding template.
Authors’ contributions
NF, HvA, and SB designed the research with inputs from SV, NAS, AF, EA, KW,
AT, and MtD. All authors performed the research. NF, HvA, and SB wrote the
paper with inputs from SV, NAS, AF, EA, KW, AT, and MtD. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript. SB visualised the data. The first three
authors drafted at least one section or more. SV, NAS and AF largely
accepted the draft, adding inputs. EA, KW, AT and MtD approved with
comments or questions. NF, HvA, SB, and NAS revised the manuscript
following peer review.
Funding
The article is based on the research undertaken under the CARISMA
(Coordination and Assessment of Research and Innovation in Support of
climate Mitigation Actions) project which received funding from the
European Horizon 2020 Programme of the EU under the Grant Agreement
No. 642242. At the time of project implementation, Böβner and van Asselt
were affiliated with the Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI), Alberola with
the Institute for Climate Economics (i4CE), and ten Donkelaar with ENVIROS.
Availability of data and materials
Supplementary data associated with this article are submitted as attachment.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
1Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS), Place du Congrès 1, 1000
Brussels, Belgium. 2University of Eastern Finland Law School, Yliopistokatu 2,
FI-80101 Joensuu, Finland. 3Stockholm Environment Institute, Linnégatan
87D, 10451 Stockholm, Sweden. 4Centre for European Economic Research
(ZEW), L 7, 1, 68161 Mannheim, Germany. 5University of Piraeus Research
Centre (UPRC), 80, M. Karaoli & A. Dimitriou St, 18534 Piraeus, Greece.
6ECOACT FRANCE, 35 rue de Miromesnil, 75008 Paris, France. 7University of
Graz, Universitätsplatz 3, 8010 Graz, Austria. 8RICARDO, Prague Technical
Centre, Palác Karlín, Thámova 11–13186 00, Praha 8, Czech Republic.
Received: 25 July 2018 Accepted: 15 October 2019
References
1.  Schoenefeld JJ, Hildén M, Jordan AJ. The challenges of monitoring national
climate policy: learning lessons from the EU. Clim Pol. 2018;18(1):118–28.
2.  European Union (2013). Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European
Parliament and of The Council of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism for
monitoring and reporting greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting
other information at national and Union level relevant to climate change
and repealing Decision No 280/2004/EC. [2013] OJ L165/13.
3.  Umpfenbach K. Streamlining planning and reporting requirements in the
EU energy union framework. Report for the European Climate Foundation.
Berlin: Ecologic Institute; 2015.
4.  European Commission (2016). Proposal for a regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the Governance of the Energy Union,
amending Directive 94/22/EC, Directive 98/70/EC, Directive 2009/31/EC, 
Regulation (EC) No 663/2009, Regulation (EC) No 715/2009, Directive 2009/
73/EC, Council Directive 2009/119/EC, Directive 2010/31/EU, Directive 2012/
27/EU, Directive 2013/30/EU and Council Directive (EU) 2015/652 and
repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013. 23.2.2017 COM (2016) 759 final/2.
5.  Spyridaki N-A, Ioannou A, Flamos A, Oikonomou V. An ex-post assessment of
the regulation on the energy performance of buildings in Greece & the
Netherlands - a cross country comparison. Energy Efficiency. 2015;9(2):261–79.
6.  Huitema D, Jordan A, Massey E, Rayner T, van Asselt H, Haug C, Hildingsson
R, Monni S, Stripple J. The evaluation of climate policy: theory and
emerging practice in Europe. Policy Sci. 2011;44:179–98.
7.  Rossi P, Lipsey MW, Freeman HE. Evaluation: A systematic approach. 7th ed.
Thousand Oaks: Sage; 2004.
8.  Crabbe A, Leroy P. The handbook of environmental policy evaluation.
London: Earthscan; 2008.
9.  Mickwitz P. Policy evaluation. In: Jordan A, Adelle C, editors. Environmental
Policy in the EU: Actors, Institutions and Processes. London; New York:
Routledge; 2013. p. 267–86.
10. Fournier DM. Evaluation. In: Mathison S, editor. Encyclopaedia of evaluation.
Thousand Oaks: Sage; 2005. p. 39–40.
11. Fischer F. Evaluating public policy. Chicago: Nelson-Hall Publishers; 1995.
12. Spyridaki NA, Flamos A. A paper trail of evaluation approaches to energy
and climate policy interactions. Renew Sust Energ Rev. 2014;40:1090–107.
13. Spyridaki N-A, Banaka S, Flamos A. Evaluating public policy instruments in
the Greek building sector. Energy Policy. 2016;88:528–43.
14. Schoenefeld J, Jordan A. Governing policy evaluation? Towards a new
typology. Evaluation. 2017;23(3):274–93.
15. Anglmayer I. Evaluation and ex-post impact assessment at EU level. Briefing,
European Parliamentary Research Service, September; 2016.
16. Nilsson M, Jordan A, Turnpenny J, Hertin J, Nykvist B, Russel D. The use and
non-use of policy appraisal tools in public policy making: an analysis of three
European countries and the European Union. Policy Sci. 2008;41:335–55.
17. Mickwitz P, Birnbaum M. Key insights for the design of environmental
evaluations. In: Binbaum M, Mickwitz P, editors. Environmental program and
policy evaluation. New Directions for Evaluation; 2009. p. 105–12.
18. Haug C, Rayner T, Jordan A, Hildingsson R, Stripple J, Monni S, Huitema D, Massey
E, van Asselt H, Berkhout F. Navigating the dilemmas of climate policy in Europe:
evidence from policy evaluation studies. Clim Chang. 2010;101(3–4):427–45.
19. Hildén M, Jordan A, Rayner T. Climate policy innovation: developing an
evaluation perspective. Environ Politics. 2014;23(5):884–905.
20. AEA, ECOFYS, Fraunhofer and ICCS. Quantification of the Effects on
Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Policies and Measures: Final Report. ENV.C.1/
SER/2007/0019. Brussels: European Commission; 2009.
21. EEA (European Environment Agency). Environment and climate policy
evaluation. Copenhagen: EEA; 2016.
22. Fujiwara, N., Bößner, S., van Asselt, H., Fraser, D., Voigt, S., Spyridaki, N.-A., ten
Donkelaar, M., Alberola, E., Türk, A., and K. Williges (2017). D5.2: Meta-analysis of
climate change policy evaluations in the EU and Member States. CARISMA
Deliverable. [URL: "http://www.carisma-project.eu/Portals/0/D5.2%20Meta_analysis%20of%20climate%20change%20policy%20evaluations%20in%20the%20EU%20and%20Member%20States.pdf"] http://www.carisma-project.eu/Portals/0/D5.2%20Meta_analysis%2
 0of%20climate%20change%20policy%20evaluations%20in%20the%20EU%2
 0and%20Member%20States.pdf last Assessed on 13 July 2018.
23. Dejean F. Reporting on National Climate Action in the EU. Presentation at
COP23 in Bonn, 08.11. 2017; 2017.
24. Bößner, S., van Asselt, H., Clochard, G.-J., Alberola, E., Türk, A., Spyridaki, N.-A.,
Fujiwara, N., van der Gaast, W. (2017). D5.1: report on climate change
mitigation policy mapping and interaction. CARISMA deliverable. [URL: "http://www.carisma-project.eu/Portals/0/Documents/5.1%20Report%20on%20climate%20change%20mitigation_%20policy%20mapping%20and%20interaction.pdf"] http://
 www.carisma-project.eu/Portals/0/Documents/5.1%20Report%20on%2
 0climate%20change%20mitigation_%20policy%20mapping%20and%2
 0interaction.pdf last Accessed on 13 July 2018.
25. European Union (2003). Directive 2003/87 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for greenhouse
gas emission allowance trading within the Community and amending
Council Directive 96/61/EC, [2003] OJ L275/32.
26. European Union (2009a). Directive 2009/29/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 23 April 2009 amending Directive 2003/87/EC so as
to improve and extend the greenhouse gas emission allowance trading
scheme of the Community, [2009] OJ L140/63.
27. European Union (2009b). Decision No. 406/2009 adopted jointly by the
European Parliament and of the Council on the effort of Member States to
reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to meet the Community’s
greenhouse gas emission reduction commitments up to 2020, [2009] OJ
L140/136.
Page 16
Fujiwara et al. Sustainable Earth (2019) 2:9
28. European Union (2012). Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on energy efficiency, amending
Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC
and 2006/32/EC, [2012] OJ L315/1.
29. Martin R, Muuls M, de Preux LB, Wagner UJ. On the empirical content of
carbon leakage criteria in the EU emissions trading scheme. Ecol Econ.
2014;105:78–88.
30. Ringel M, Knodt M. The governance of the European energy union:
efficiency, effectiveness and acceptance of the winter package 2016. Energy
Policy. 2018;112:209–20.
31. Van Asselt H, Weikmans R, Roberts JT. Pocket Guide to Transparency under
the UNFCCC. Oxford: European capacity-building initiative; 2017. [URL: "http://www.eurocapacity.org/downloads/Pocket_Guide_to_Transparency_UNFCCC.pdf"] http://
 www.eurocapacity.org/downloads/Pocket_Guide_to_Transparency_
 UNFCCC.pdf last accessed on 13 July 2018
32. Ashford N, Renda A. Aligning policies for low-carbon systemic innovation in
Europe. Brussels: CEPS and i24c; 2016.
33. European Union (2004). Decision No 280/2004/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 concerning a
mechanism for monitoring Community greenhouse gas emissions and for
implementing the Kyoto Protocol, [2004] OJ L49/1.
34. EEA. National policies and measures on climate change mitigation in
Europe in 2017, EEA report no 9/2018. Copenhagen: European
Environment Agency; 2018.
35. Breitschopf, B., Schlomann, B., Voswinkel, F., and Broc, J-S. (2018). Identifying
current knowledge, suggestions and conclusions from existing literature.
H2020 EPATEE project report. Availabele at: [URL: "https://epatee.eu/reports"] https://epatee.eu/reports
36. Broc, J-S., Oikonomou, V., and Dragovic, M. (2018). Evaluation into practice:
lessons learnt from 23 evaluations of energy efficiency policies. Volume I:
Main findings. H2020 EPATEE project. Available at: [URL: "https://epatee.eu/reports"] https://epatee.eu/reports
37. [URL: "http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Greenhouse_gas_emission_statistics_-_emission_inventories#Trends_in_greenhouse_gas_emissions"] http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=
 Greenhouse_gas_emission_statistics_-_emission_inventories#Trends_in_
 greenhouse_gas_emissions last Accessed on 13 July 2018.
38. [URL: "https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/forests_en"] https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/forests_en last Accessed on 13 July 2018.
39. [URL: "http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Agri-environmental_indicator_-_greenhouse_gas_emissions"] http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Agri-
 environmental_indicator_-_greenhouse_gas_emissions last Accessed on 13
July 2018.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations. 
Page 16 of 16
