Keywords: EU climate policy,National Energy and climate plans,Computable general equilibrium,Carbon payback time,Social acceptance
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
ModDate: 2022/03/07 09:42:09+01'00'
CreationDate: 2022/03/03 06:25:34+08'00'
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
Subject: Sustain Earth, doi:10.1186/s42055-022-00046-z
Author: Keith Williges
Title: The potential for successful climate policy in National Energy and climate plans: highlighting key gaps and ways forward
xmp:pdf:Keywords: EU climate policy,National Energy and climate plans,Computable general equilibrium,Carbon payback time,Social acceptance
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s42055-022-00046-z
xmp:dc:publisher: Sustainable Earth
xmp:dc:description: Sustain Earth, doi:10.1186/s42055-022-00046-z
xmp:dc:subject: EU climate policy; National Energy and climate plans; Computable general equilibrium; Carbon payback time; Social acceptance
xmp:dc:title: The potential for successful climate policy in National Energy and climate plans: highlighting key gaps and ways forward
xmp:dc:creator: Keith Williges; Wytze Gaast; Krisztina Bruyn-Szendrei; Andreas Tuerk; Gabriel Bachner
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2022-03-07T09:42:09+01:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2022-03-07T09:42:09+01:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2022-03-03T06:25:34+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:95991ca8-0383-42eb-bc90-6e48d3d2ab25
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:008a8e81-93f2-4053-b8b5-736304164b8b
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:95991ca8-0383-42eb-bc90-6e48d3d2ab25
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2022-03-03T06:28:58+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Keith Williges
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5139-2740
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Results
  Conclusions
Introduction
Background
  The winter package and NECPs
  Three facets of successful policies
    Economic efficiency
    Environmental effectiveness
    Feasibility
Selection of case studies and overview of their NECPs
  Greece
  Austria
  The Netherlands
  Open issues from NECPs
    Lack of consideration of integration costs
    No consideration of life-cycle emissions
    Varying degree of feasibility assessment
Addressing gaps in the NECPs - methodological approach
  Economic efficiency
  Environmental effectiveness
  Feasibility
Results
  Efficiency: including integration costs in economic analysis
    Greece
    Austria
    Netherlands
  Estimating the potential for missed GHG reductions via carbon payback times
    Greece
    Austria
    The Netherlands
  Potential feasibility barriers
    Greece
    Austria
    The Netherlands
Discussion
  Economic aspects
  Environmental effectiveness
  Social acceptance
Conclusions
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Authors’ contributions
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Author details
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1
https://doi.org/10.1186/s42055-022-00046-z 
Sustainable Earth
RESEARCH  Open Access
The potential for successful climate policy
in National Energy and climate plans:
highlighting key gaps and ways forward
Keith Williges1* [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5139-2740"] , Wytze Van der Gaast2†, Krisztina de Bruyn-Szendrei2†, Andreas Tuerk1,3 and Gabriel Bachner1
Abstract
Background: The EU “Winter Package” sets out specific energy and climate goals and urged formation of National
Energy and Climate Plans (NECPs) by Member States for 2020 to 2030. Integrating scaled-up mitigation
technologies within existing economic and social structures face numerous difficulties and require careful planning.
While some options may be less suitable than others within a given country context, solutions exist to mitigate
negative impacts and build local acceptance. We assess the resulting plans in the context of: (i) economic effects,
the trade-offs arising from scaled-up technologies in terms of energy system- and macroeconomic effects; (ii)
climate effectiveness, via assessment of carbon payback times of technologies, and (iii) social aspects, with a focus
on identifying approaches for wider social adoption and acceptance of mitigation options. Assessment takes the
form of case studies for Greece, Austria, and the Netherlands, three EU member states with very different
preconditions.
Results: In terms of economic efficiency, NECPs lack consideration of the unique properties inherent in large-scale
renewable energy deployment, and we suggest a possible way forward for future macroeconomic assessment via
incorporating integration costs. For economic efficiency, we find that countries may be overestimating their
contributions to GHG reduction targets via failure to incorporate life-cycle based analysis. Addressing feasibility, we
find that countries address acceptance to different extents, with Greece and Austria holding stakeholder workshops
and allowing for public comment on draft NECPs, while the Netherlands undertook a more extensive effort to
ensure local public acceptance and involvement in planning.
Conclusions: The results illustrate that even though NECPs may be finalized, their success is far from ensured, and
neglecting to consider key aspects of efficiency, effectiveness and feasibility may result in underestimation of
impacts, failure to have as large an impact on GHG reduction as expected, or increasing public resistance to climate
policies. We present approaches to deal with gaps in economic and environmental assessment, and highlight
methods for improving public acceptance via examples from the case studies and related literature.
Keywords: EU climate policy, National Energy and climate plans, Computable general equilibrium, Carbon payback
time, Social acceptance
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:keith.williges@uni-graz.at"] keith.williges@uni-graz.at
†Wytze Van der Gaast and Krisztina de Bruyn-Szendrei contributed equally to
this work.
1Wegener Center for Climate and Global Change, University of Graz,
Brandhofgasse 5, A-8010 Graz, Austria
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2022 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Page 2
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 2 of 17
Introduction
Within the EU, the “Winter Package” introduced by the
European Commission (EC) in November 2016 focused
on clean energy, with steps towards increased energy ef-
ficiency, growth of renewable energy, and the
reorganization of electricity markets in Europe to reduce
energy poverty. It called upon Member States to formu-
late National Energy and Climate Plans (NECPs) [1], in
line with the EU’s Energy Union Strategy for 2030 [2],
and national long-term low emission strategies for 2050.
The package aimed at being a substantial step towards
reducing the EU’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by
40% before 2030 – in line with EU pledges at COP-21
(held in Paris, December 2015) – and by 80 to 95% by
2050. While the energy and climate goals of the EU re-
quire scaling up of climate change mitigation technolo-
gies to high levels, integrating such options in existing
economic and social structures requires careful planning
and acknowledgement that measures need to fit country
contexts, but also that solutions exist to mitigate poten-
tial negative side effects and build local support among
citizens.
The NECP design process has recently (as of Decem-
ber 31st 2019) been completed, after an iterative period
of drafting and both public and EC review, and countries
are now faced with implementing their pledged policy
pathways to 2030. But how feasible are these plans, espe-
cially considering that some countries have most likely
failed to meet climate goals for 2020? We attempt to an-
swer this question using a holistic approach, synthesizing
research focusing on three main facets of successful cli-
mate policy as defined in the literature: (i) economic effi-
ciency, (ii) environmental effectiveness and (iii)
feasibility [3]. To narrow our discussion, we focus on as-
pects of the NECPs related to the dimension of
decarbonization, specifically the buildup of renewable
energy capacity. Combining recent general equilibrium
analysis of renewable electricity generation, life-cycle
analysis of the time delay between implementation of re-
newable capacity and achieving carbon-neutral gener-
ation, and literature review relating to public acceptance
of GHG reduction efforts, we assess the potential for
success of countries’  NECPs based on representative
cases for Europe and suggest recommendations for pol-
icymakers as they begin the task of implementing their
climate plans.
We address economic efficiency (i) in terms of cost-
effectiveness (if a policy can achieve its objectives at
minimal cost) and distribution (how the costs and bene-
fits of a policy are borne across society) and (ii) in
macroeconomic terms via use of computable general
equilibrium (CGE) modeling of large-scale buildup of re-
newable capacity, contrasting results with estimates of
impacts from country NECPs. We focus on estimated 
changes in projected growth, wages, and welfare (the
consumption possibilities of households) when consider-
ing the system-level costs (e.g. additional burden intro-
duced by large portions of electricity generation from
renewables due to their variable and intermittent
nature).
Environmental effectiveness, the extent to which a pol-
icy meets intended environmental objectives [3] is dis-
cussed in terms of Carbon Payback Times (CPT),  a
measure which approximates how soon a technology’s
life-cycle emissions are offset by GHG emissions reduc-
tion [4]. As countries plan extensive buildup of renew-
able energy source (RES) capacity over the next 10 years,
we attempt to identify the extent to which this new gen-
eration will be carbon-neutral, or if there may be overes-
timates of the GHG impacts in the NECPs.
Finally, we address feasibility in terms of political feasi-
bility as defined in IPCC as the “likelihood of a policy
gaining acceptance and being adopted and implemented”
[3] via an overview of literature focusing on acceptance
of RES buildup in our three cases.
We focus our analysis on three case study countries, (i)
Greece, (ii) Austria and (iii) the Netherlands, representing
different starting points regarding EU energy policy (dis-
cussed in further detail in the section “Selection of case
studies and overview of their NECPs”) in terms of varying
economic considerations (such as the costs of financing
new renewables generation), current shares of renewables
in the energy consumption mix, and climatic conditions.
It is important to underline that despite the broad
categorization of the countries and their characteristics;
the case studies will not result in blueprints for policy
making on how to scale up technology options. Rather,
the case studies demonstrate the impact of different coun-
try contexts and NECP ‘starting points’  on decision-
making about mitigation technologies.
In the rest of this work, we first provide a background
into the goals of the EU Winter Package, followed by an
overview of our framework (in terms of the three facets
of effective climate policy) and methodological approach,
including the justification of our three country case
studies. We then present results from case studies of
Greece, Austria and the Netherlands, summarizing their
NECP pledges and comparing their projections for the
future with our three criteria, and finish with a discus-
sion and recommendations for policymaking, and con-
cluding remarks.
Background
The winter package and NECPs
NECPs were tasked with covering the key dimensions of
the EU’s Energy Union Strategy: decarbonization, energy
efficiency, energy security, the internal energy market
and innovation and competitiveness [1],  while being in
Page 3
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 3 of 17
line with Member States’  strategies towards low-
emission economies by 2050. Important in the Winter
Package was the envisaged role of stakeholders as actors
in energy efficiency and renewable energy value chains
and consumers of energy. The Package additionally rec-
ommended that (negative) societal impacts of the clean
energy transition be minimized.
Determining the scale of deployment and diffusion of
technology options for reaching the country’s and the
EU’s energy and climate targets is an overarching chal-
lenge for policy makers. Partly, the scale depends on the
technology’s ‘technical potential’ for which, for instance,
the availability of renewable energy resources such as
biomass, wind, hydro and solar energy in the country is
an important factor. To realize the strongest climate ef-
fectiveness, renewable energy technologies need to be
deployed in areas or regions where most of the resources
are, such as high wind speeds or high solar radiation,
which are however often far away from actual demand
centers.
Next to climate effectiveness, the scales for individual
technologies within Member State may furthermore de-
pend on economic and social drawbacks or benefits of a
given technology. Some of these drawbacks can be mea-
sured by impacts on economic indicators such as gross
domestic product (GDP), electricity prices, employment,
wages and capital prices, etc. Deployment and diffusion
of technologies for mitigation are expected to result in a
range of positive impacts, such as newly created jobs [5]
and increased added value in renewable technology in-
stallation. However, there may also be negative impacts,
such as: 
necessary when thinking about long-term low-carbon
transition.
With respect to climate effectiveness, it is important to
consider that technologies for mitigation not only con-
tribute to GHG emission reductions, thus reaching cli-
mate targets, but their production, construction,
operation, and eventual dismantling also cause GHG
emissions. Hence, the net mitigation impact of a tech-
nology is the difference between the emission reduction
effect of replacing fossil fuel-based technologies and the
life-cycle emissions.
This net impact is important to consider as several
mitigation technologies are produced in Europe, while
other life-cycle phases may not take place in Europe (or
may take place in other Member States).  This means
that from a European perspective, not only are the emis-
sion reduction gains of mitigation technologies
accounted for in climate inventories of Member States,
but also in some cases the life-cycle emissions (albeit
possibly in different Member States and different eco-
nomic sectors).
From a production based emission accounting per-
spective, for overall EU climate change mitigation effect-
iveness, it thus makes sense that states include
technologies in their NECPs with the shortest carbon
payback time (CPT), a measure of how soon a technol-
ogy’s life-cycle emissions are offset by its contribution to
GHG emission reduction [4].  While lifecycle emissions
are not currently included in GHG accounting systems,
they may be included at a later stage, and their early
consideration can thus be beneficial.
 Job losses and/or lower wages in sectors not
benefiting from the deployment and diffusion of
renewables [6];
 Higher energy costs for consumers due to increased
electricity demand (e.g. due to electrification of
industrial and transport sectors, along with
continued economic growth and increasing
standards of living [7]) in combination with required
system-level improvements [8] (in this work, repre-
sented as “integration costs”); and
 Higher capital costs, as renewable energy
technologies are more capital-intensive than conven-
tional energy technologies [9], meaning that an in-
crease in clean technologies requires large amounts
of investments and thus capital [10].
This begs the question of how to scale up technolo-
gies for mitigation in the NECPs to a level that is
politically affordable for policy makers from the per-
spective of socio-economic impacts, as they may be
more concerned with shorter time frames than are 
Three facets of successful policies
Economic efficiency
Criteria falling under the category of economic efficiency
address the goal of having a policy achieve its objective
with the least cost to society; for mitigation efforts, this
is equated to achieving a goal at a minimum aggregate
cost of abatement. Environmental taxes, for example, are
believed to be very efficient instruments as they equalize
marginal abatement costs across all economic actors,
with actors which can reduce emission at lower costs re-
ducing more than actors which face high emission re-
duction costs [11].  Various frameworks define the
criteria differently, ranging from simply cost effective-
ness [12] to further differentiation into static and dy-
namic efficiency [13–16].  Static efficiency represents a
policy functioning at least cost, given currently available
abatement options, while dynamic efficiency allows for
minimizing the cost of achieving targets over a given
time period, thus assuming efforts to find cheaper abate-
ment options and incorporating technological progress
[17].
Page 4
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 4 of 17
Environmental effectiveness
Effectiveness puts the actual effect of a policy at center. It
measures the results of a policy intervention, either as an
output of a policy (implementation of laws or regulations),
an outcome (such as a share of renewables or the number
of electric cars), or the impact of a policy, e.g. the level of
climate impacts avoided [7]. It measures whether a policy
or package is actually achieving the objectives it has set
out to do; e.g. meeting a certain target of emission reduc-
tions. Taking again the example of an environmental tax,
it might be very efficient, however, when set too low,
may only be minimally environmentally effective.
Feasibility
For scaling up technologies for mitigation, it is import-
ant that they are compatible with existing social struc-
tures and can be readily accepted. This is an important
aspect for determining the scale at which a technology
option or the stringency of a policy can be realistically
implemented [18].  The final broad criterion for policy
success is thus feasibility, which speaks to the probability
of success or conversely its risk of failure, and addresses
risks that the policy may not be implemented as de-
signed or may not produce expected results. Specifica-
tions of feasibility range from a focus on distributional
effects and institutional feasibility [3],  coherence with
overarching policy objectives [19], to administrative sim-
plicity and political acceptability [20].  Feasibility also
speaks to normative criteria, highlighting equity and dis-
tributional effects (either relating to political acceptabil-
ity, or more generally relating to public acceptance of a
proposal).  Again, an environmental tax is very efficient
and might be very effective when set sufficiently high,
however, faces the risk of failure due to low public ac-
ceptance; e.g. due to the fear of higher prices and lower
purchasing power of households.
Selection of case studies and overview of their
NECPs
As discussed in the “Introduction”,  this work assesses
the projected deployment of mitigation technologies at
large scales (as outlined in country NECPs) in three di-
mensions; (i) economic efficiency, (ii) environmental ef-
fectiveness, and (iii) feasibility on three case study
countries. In the following section, we motivate the
choice of case study countries, give descriptions of their
characteristics and provide an overview of their NECPs
with regard to buildup of RES.
To address different country contexts, the cases repre-
sent different starting points regarding EU energy policy
and the goals of their NECPs, namely in terms of the
costs of financing (or capital),  current share of renew-
ables in the energy mix, and climatic conditions. This
broad categorization allows for a representative country 
case to highlight issues which may arise due to one or
more factors and may serve as examples for other coun-
tries with similar starting points. To span a range of po-
tential national situations in the EU, we utilize country
case examples of Greece, Austria, and the Netherlands,
which are discussed in detail below.
Greece
For several years, Greece has been in recession and
under credit crunch conditions, with high interest rates
and high costs of capital due to a high risk profile; due
to these conditions, its WACC is assumed to be high
relative to the rest of Europe, around 12% [21].  It is
characterized by a high share of fossil fuels in its electri-
city mix; 18% of primary energy supply (26% of electri-
city generation) was derived from renewables in 2018,
mainly by wind and solar PV [22].
In its final NECP [23], Greece aims to increase its re-
newables as a share of gross final energy consumption to
at least 35% by 2030, with an equivalent share in final
consumption of electricity of 61%,  mainly via the
buildup of wind (from 7.3 TWh in 2020 to 17.2 by 2030)
and solar PV (4.5 TWh in 2020 to 11.8 in 2030). Greece
also anticipates the electrification and coupling of final
consumption sectors, e.g. transportation via full electrifi-
cation of railways, housing via use of heat pumps, and
other sectors using energy storage systems, among other
strategies. Challenges include the existing institutional
framework, which lacks clear rules and criteria for plan-
ning of RES development, coordination between institu-
tions, a market model which adequately addresses the
needs and issues of RES, and a desire to develop RES
projects with local value-added.
The impact of RES and energy efficiency plans are es-
timated via use of partial equilibrium economic model-
ing (the TIMES and PRIMES models), which are limited
in their ability to assess effects of changes in e.g. the
electricity sector (in terms of prices or quantities of elec-
tricity produced) on other sectors and final demand. The
plan provides estimates of e.g. domestic added value (12
billion EUR due to new investment in RES) projected
additional employment (37 thousand full time-
equivalent jobs for ten years) and incomes (4.8 billion
EUR over the lifetime of projects) [23]. The plan notes
that the goal of RES penetration is achieved most cost-
effectively for the national economy via significant in-
creases in wind and PV due to their high capacity factors
and thus low weighted cost of electricity production in
the short run and due to being directly competitive with
conventional generation in the electricity market. How-
ever, these estimates may not be based on models which
incorporate unique aspects of RES generation and the
resulting additional costs, thus possibly leading to under-
estimation of resulting economic effects.
Page 5
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 5 of 17
The NECP of Greece has been strongly criticized by
the EC. It is vague regarding feasibility and incorpor-
ation of public and stakeholder views; in its review of
the draft document submitted in January 2019, the EC
found that while the plan mentions the need for a “just
and fair transition” via a Fair Transition Support Initia-
tive there is little elaboration of specific projects, support
and impact of such an effort. The final NECP does not
elaborate broadly on this point, and regarding stake-
holder dialogue notes a period of public consultation,
without identifying any conclusions from such and/or
how they have been incorporated into the final plan
[24].
Austria
Austria was selected to provide an example of a country
with a high renewable share of total electricity gener-
ation, which as a result has enabled the country to be on
track to meet or exceed its EU energy and climate miti-
gation targets. Hydropower has long held the lion’s share
in terms of electricity production, and in total in 2018,
the renewables share of electricity production stood at
73% [25],  with the residual produced by fossil fuel
sources, e.g., natural gas and coal. Beyond the electricity
sector, Austria has low interest rates, with a weighted
average costs of capital (WACC) estimated at 6.5% [21].
Austria’s NECP [26] defines the target pathway for
RES in total final energy consumption as rising from
34% in 2020 to between 46 to 50% by 2030, with 100%
of total electricity to be generated by domestic RES in
2030. The country anticipates wind power rising from
8.6 TWh in 2020 to 16.7 in 2030, with PV increasing
from 3.6 TWh to 11.7 by 2030. This corresponds to a
share of final energy demand for wind of 6.7% in 2020
to 10.6% in 2030, and for PV of 2.8% in 2020 to 7.5% in
2030. Hydropower, currently the dominant form of elec-
tricity generation, will remain relatively stable over the
same period, but will be reduced in share of final energy
consumption from 34 to 28% by 2030. Austria also notes
the need to address balancing, flexibility of networks,
and ensuring the security of supply due to the introduc-
tion of more RES capacity, and anticipates greater elec-
trification of the transport sector via e-mobility, and
reduction of remaining emissions via use of bioethanol
and biodiesel in transport (along with encouraging or
mandating the use of e-mobility options via phasing out
combustion engines from 2030 and beyond).
Also Austria’s NECP has been criticized by the EC
[27], as well as by Austrian scientists [28]. It is compara-
tively vague with regard to the broader economic effects
of the planned measures, with only cursory examination
of possible changes to GDP growth (from 2.0% in 2020
to 1.5% by 2030, remaining steady to 2040). Most impact
estimates focus on the changes due to existing measures 
on the energy mix and sectoral demands. Additional
analysis from the Federal Environment Agency is refer-
enced, but not elaborated upon.
In terms of feasibility and social acceptance, the plan
outlines various consultations of e.g. ministries, federal
states, social partners (e.g. agricultural, labor, trade
union confederations),  associations of industries, cities
and municipalities, and representatives of science. Most
interaction involved round-table events and online con-
sultations, with a public review period of the draft NECP
with the ability to submit concerns by members of the
general public. However, little elaboration is provided as
to the nature and manner of addressing any concerns
which arose.
The Netherlands
The Netherlands provides a contrast to the other two
cases. Similar to Austria, it is country with strong finan-
cial conditions; it is assumed to have a WACC in line
with other western European countries, around 5.3%
[21],  but it shows a much lower share of RES in total
current energy consumption. While prior to the NECP
policy process, the country had a 2020 goal of having
14% of all energy consumed produced from renewable
energy sources [29], which it was not predicted to meet,
with the latest estimates for 2020 expected RES share of
11.4% [30].
Considering its relatively low RES starting point, in its
NECP the Netherlands has outlined an ambitious plan
to boost the share of RES in total energy supply to 26%
by 2030, with its share in total electricity production in
2030 predicted to be 70%. The rise would be made up
predominately of offshore wind (49 TWh by 2030), on-
shore wind and large solar PV parks (35 TWh by 2030)
and small-scale RES e.g. rooftop solar making up 10
TWh. In concert with the other two cases, the country
highlights the need for flexibility via new market mecha-
nisms to address the intermittency and lack of dispatch-
ability issues presented by having a large portion of RES
[30].
The plan makes use of both CGE (the WorldScan
model) and macro-econometric (SAFFIER model from
the Dutch Ministry) modeling to estimate effects on the
broader economy, finding that new policies are likely to
result in GDP falling 0.5% below baseline scenarios by
2030. Incomes are expected to increase with the intro-
duction of proposed policies, with positive income ef-
fects foreseen at 0.3% in 2030, but not equally
distributed over income classes, with lower incomes see-
ing rises of 0.7%, and higher incomes only 0.2% [30].
In contrast to the other cases, the Netherlands out-
lined an extensive approach to dealing with social ac-
ceptance, which was noted already in a review of the
draft version by the EC [31]. In line with the other cases,
Page 6
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 6 of 17
the plan was open to public consultation for a period of
6 weeks, with additional stakeholder consultation and
discussions. Additionally, the Netherlands took a
municipal-focused approach to renewable electricity
generation, emphasizing the need for a participatory ap-
proach for energy projects, providing tools and guide-
lines for such for developers, governments and
financiers. The plan sets a goal to have 50% local owner-
ship of electricity production in the local environment
(e.g. local citizens and businesses) by 2030. The Social
and Cultural Planning Office also runs a “Sustainable
Society” program, providing a socio-cultural perspective
on the transition to sustainable society, research on the
relationship between citizens and the government in the
context of transition, and impacts of transitions on qual-
ity of life.
Open issues from NECPs
Lack of consideration of integration costs
The three cases use varying approaches to assess the
economic efficiency of their climate packages. Austria’s
assessment was cursory, focused mainly on changing
shares of production in the energy mix and sectoral de-
mand, while Greece utilized partial equilibrium models
to produce forecasts of changes in sectoral use of energy
and macroeconomic estimates of changes to e.g. agricul-
tural, mining, and industrial sectors due to changing en-
ergy sources and costs. The Netherlands produced the
most comprehensive macro assessment via both CGE
and macro-econometric modeling1, and provided expli-
cit assessment of the possible macroeconomic and distri-
butional effects of the planned policy package.
However, a key component for achieving these GHG
emission reductions is via drastically upscaling the use
of RES, which differs from conventional generation due
to its intermittency and lack of dispatchability. These
differences make it difficult to compare costs of electri-
city across generation type (typically described using
levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) [33], an easy way to
assess what each unit of electricity would need to cost to
repay investments and maintain the plant). Scaling up a
technology with intermittent generation within a country
will require additional investments in, e.g.,  grid, balan-
cing and system integration activities. These system inte-
gration costs arise after production of electricity at a
1The alternative approaches, strengths and weaknesses of CGE versus
macro-econometric models are beyond the scope of this work, but ex-
tensive overviews can be found (e.g. Pollitt et al. [32]) Generally, CGE
models represent cases of optimization assuming perfect knowledge,
whereas macro-econometric models can incorporate uncertainty; CGE
models assess how optimal resource use may change, given a policy
constraint, while macro-econometric models allow for assessing im-
pacts of using more or less of available resources. 
generation site, when that power is supplied to the larger
grid. As described by Hirth et al. [8], they include:
 balancing costs, which occur due to deviation from
day-ahead planned generation schedules, requiring
overcapacities or capacity reservations of thermal
power plants.
 grid-related costs, the reduction in market value due
to the location of generation in the power grid,
which might be far away from demand centers;
essentially, the marginal costs of transmission losses
or limitations.
 profile costs which arise because the supply of
renewables does not follow load profiles from
demand (e.g. seasonality of PV). Thus, demand gaps
must be handled by dispatchable plants at some
point. However, with more RES the full load hours
of the dispatchable plants are reduced (as they only
produce when RES do not), leading to efficiency
losses and eventually to higher LCOEs for these
plants; which is the so called “utilization effect.” On
the other hand, RES may at times exceed demand,
leading to an oversupply of electricity.
Until recently, RES expansion scenarios in macroeco-
nomic modeling did not take into account these integra-
tion costs, and as such, the evaluations in the NECPs
may be underestimating the impacts of large-scale
increases.
No consideration of life-cycle emissions
None of the cases explicitly address environmental ef-
fectiveness of their plans, which is not unreasonable; as
environmental effectiveness is typically measured as e.g.
a share of renewables in the final energy mix, NECPs
which meet the EU climate goals can be considered to
fulfill the criteria. However, as discussed in the section
on “The winter package and NECPs”,  life-cycle emis-
sions have an eventual impact on the time at which a re-
newable installation affects an emission reduction. In
this sense, NECPs may be overstating the emission re-
ductions from RES installation, as substantial capacity
buildup is planned for later in the decade.
Varying degree of feasibility assessment
While each case NECP stated its process for inclusion of
stakeholders and the general public in formulation of
their plans, they did so to different degrees, with the EU
in its review noting that certain countries were lacking
in this regard, while others appeared to make a more
concerted and substantive effort. However, none of the
NECPs note the degree to which public or stakeholder
input changed the planning process, nor how plans took
various public views into account. Thus, the question of
Page 7
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 7 of 17
how well the NECPs correspond to public wishes and
opinion remains open.
Addressing gaps in the NECPs - methodological
approach
With the points from the “Open issues from NECPs”
section in mind, we attempt to provide examples of how
these issues can be addressed as Member States proceed
forward with NECP implementation. Synthesizing re-
search which addresses these knowledge gaps and poten-
tial barriers to success, we bring together emerging work
on integration costs in macroeconomic modeling and
carbon payback times. We additionally compare NECP
proposals and social acceptance strategies to literature
on feasibility for the cases, to present a holistic view of
the NECPs and highlight possible issues in the future as
implementation begins.
Economic efficiency
The case country NECPs addressed macroeconomic ef-
fects of their plans to varying degrees, but do not expli-
citly take into account the additional costs due to the
integration of large amounts of RES into the electricity
system. However, efforts to incorporate these consider-
ations into economic models have been undertaken, and
we use the results of two CGE models to identify the ex-
tent to which these integration costs may skew assess-
ments of e.g. future costs of electricity, GDP, and
welfare.
CGE models allow for a modeled microeconomic rep-
resentation of market interactions and assess the likely
change in sectoral activity and macroeconomic indica-
tors due to a simulated change such as a policy imple-
mentation, and allows for representing the interlinkages
between markets, where changes in supply and demand
in one market are linked to price changes in other mar-
kets [34]. CGE models generally consist of a representa-
tive household (or households) which provide factors of
production (labor and capital). This household receives
income from factor earnings, plus government transfers.
Income is used to maximize utility, by spending it for
consumption of goods and services which are produced
by multiple production sectors. By measuring the change
in consumed quantities, we obtain a welfare effect2. Pro-
duction sectors use the factors of production plus inter-
mediate inputs (i.e. output from other sectors) to
produce output and seek to minimize production costs.
This behavior of households and producers is assumed
to ultimately lead to a flow equilibrium in which all mar-
kets are cleared (i.e. supply = demand for all goods and
services), also called “benchmark equilibrium.”
2The so called Hicksian Equivalent Variation, or the willingness to pay
(accept) for a price rise (fall) not to occur 
Policies are modelled in CGE approaches by shocking
a benchmark equilibrium via a policy introduction,
which leads to responses of consumers and producers
via their optimizing behavior under these new condi-
tions, resulting in a new equilibrium state composed of a
changed matrix of demanded quantities and prices of
goods. Such models allow for showing how changes in
quantities or prices in one sector affects other sectors,
final demand, and macroeconomic indicators e.g. GDP
and welfare, or the consumption possibilities of house-
holds. CGE models can be comparative-static, compar-
ing reactions in an economy at one point in time, or
dynamic,  incorporating assumptions of future changes
for exogenous variables and representing possible
changes over time.
We use two CGE models, one comparative-static, and
one recursive-dynamic, both multi-regional and multi-
sectoral, to compare the potential impacts of integration
costs on macroeconomic assessments of NECP policies.
For the cases of Greece and Austria, a static model based
on the GTAP9 database (Aguiar et al. [35]) was used to
illustrate the impacts of a large-scale expansion in RES
technologies by 2030 in Europe (for a more extensive
model description, see Bachner et al. [21]).  The model
applies scenarios on wind energy buildup for European
regions and for Austria and Greece explicitly, which pro-
ject wind penetration in Austria to be a 23% share of
total electricity generation, and 40% in Greece. For a
scenario of scaled-up PV, Austria is modeled as having
38% PV penetration, and Greece 66%. While these sce-
narios cannot directly be used to assess likely impacts of
the NECP policies, due to differences in cost estimates
and RES penetrations – the Austrian NECP would result
in wind penetration of approximately 20%,  and PV of
14%,  and the Greek NECP a wind penetration of 36%
and PV of 25%, thus the scenarios from [21] would for
PV be large overestimates, less so for wind – they can
serve to demonstrate the impact of incorporating inte-
gration costs into such analysis. Comparing scenarios
with and without integration costs can provide an indi-
cation of the degree to which conventional macro ana-
lysis is under/overestimating impacts. Integration costs
are incorporated by inclusion of the utilization effect
portion of profile costs, as well as grid-related costs. The
utilization effect is modelled via requiring more capital
input for each unit of output from the residual electricity
sector (15 EUR/MWh) [36], while grid related costs are
incorporated via increased investment costs of wind and
PV (an additional 150 EUR/kW for both technologies,
based on estimates from the literature [8, 37, 38]).
For the Netherlands, we take a similar approach of
comparing scenarios with/without the effects of integra-
tion of RES, but here using a dynamic-recursive model
(as the model of Bachner does not explicitly model this
Page 8
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 8 of 17
country separately).  However, recent work from Mayer
et al. [39] builds on the model from Bachner, which is
also multi-regional and multi-sectoral, but in this case
solves in 5-year time steps to 2050. A full description of
the model can be found in Mayer et al. [40] and Bachner
et al. [41] The model compares a baseline scenario
where in 2050, 66% of electricity generation is via wind
(on-shore: ~ 51% and off-shore ~ 15%)) and 15% from
solar PV (both large-scale and rooftop), with a scenario
closer to the case’s NECP, with wind making up about
54% (on-shore: ~ 15% and off-shore ~ 39%) and solar PV
33%. This aligns partially with the 2030 projection from
the plan, which estimates approximately 36% of produc-
tion from offshore wind, 26% from onshore wind and
large-scale solar, and 7% from rooftop solar.
The comparison of an offshore-wind-intensive baseline
with a counterfactual scenario comprised of more on-
shore wind and PV (and thus more intermittency) allows
for observation of the effect of integration costs on sce-
nario outcomes.
Mayer et al. [39] estimate the additional costs of re-
newables in terms of higher connection costs (e.g. for
offshore wind, costs of both undersea cable to the shore-
line, and additional costs from improving the country’s
grid capacity to handle the large influx of power from
offshore) and investments in battery storage to address
balancing costs. Offshore wind entails additional connec-
tion costs of 930,000 EUR/MW to run cable to the
shore, and an additional 930,000 EUR/MW to improve
the existing grid; on-shore wind and PV parks are esti-
mated to result in additional connection costs of 81,000
EUR/MW, with similar additional costs to improve the
existing grid. For battery storage, capacity requirements
vary based on the share of electricity generation, and are
installed at an increasing percentage of total demand for
scenarios with over 25% of electricity from intermittent
RES. Costs are estimated to drop (due to technological
progress and learning rates) from 540 EUR/kW from the
start of the scenario to 90 EUR/kW by the end in 2050.
This dynamic depiction of an RES-intensive electricity
system compares a baseline of mainly offshore wind
(and thus, much less need for battery storage) with a sys-
tem where intermittent generation rises above 30%, thus
necessitating large investments in batteries to solve bal-
ancing issues. This comparison illustrates the impact of
more intermittent RES vs. less, but also allows for illus-
trating how those effects propagate over time. 
CPTs vary by location and technology; for example, the
lowest CPTs have been found for wind farms located
offshore and near the coast, while it takes more time for
wind power plants to recover their own life-cycle emis-
sions when built onshore [42],  due to by offshore tur-
bines being taller so that they can endure stronger wind
speeds.
As the NECPs employ significant buildup of RES over
the next decade, based on the location-specific CPTs
some of this new RES may not be actively contributing
to reducing GHG emissions from the country, as it
would still in effect be working off its own GHG debt
from transport and installation.
Based on literature estimates of location- and
technology-specific CPTs we estimate the amount of
new capacity which would not yet be net-carbon-neutral
by 2030, using projected new capacity from the case
NECPs, identifying the possible degree to which coun-
tries may be overstating their GHG emissions as a result.
Feasibility
While an exhaustive and comparative analysis of feasibil-
ity and public acceptance is beyond the scope of this
work, we use results from recent work focusing on the
case countries to determine how closely the NECPs take
into account reported public opinion, e.g. if decisions
made on the size and rate of RES scale-up in the NECPs
may encounter barriers to implementation due to differ-
ing public acceptance.
We do this via an analysis of the relevant literature, ac-
knowledging that we may not include all related litera-
ture, but have focused on recent contributions focusing
on public acceptance of RES. This overview is meant to
provide examples of areas where policymakers will un-
doubtedly need to focus in the coming implementation
period in order to meet NECP targets.
Results
In line with the open questions raised by the review of
our case NECPs, we discuss below how increasing the
share of renewables in electricity generation would affect
the larger economy, emphasizing the effect of system
costs on projected results. We then discuss the challenge
of choosing locations and types of renewable energy
sources to scale up in terms of life-cycle accounting and
carbon payback times. Finally, we discuss issues of pub-
lic acceptance or resistance to such possible policies.
Environmental effectiveness
As an indicator of the time needed for RES capacity to
become net carbon neutral for our case countries, we
use research defining a Carbon Payback Time [4] (CPT,
also referred to as greenhouse gas payback time (GPT)
in the literature) to judge environmental effectiveness. 
Efficiency: including integration costs in economic
analysis
Greece
While wind generation would be competitive by 2030
for most of Europe under a large-expansion scenario,
the high WACC for Greece, combined with the
Page 9
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 9 of 17
inclusion of system costs, would lead to wind being non-
competitive (relative to the current average electricity
production costs). The current electricity mix’  LCOE is
estimated to be just over 0.08€/kWh, while the cost of
wind power in a 2030 scenario including additional grid
related costs would be over 0.09€/kWh, as additional
grid investment is attributed to the renewable part of the
electricity system.
With grid-related portion of system costs included, the
costs for electricity in 2030 would rise by 1 cent, to 0.09
€/kWh. In addition, the “utilization effect” drives up
overall system costs (the use of more renewables means
that conventional plants would be used less efficiently,
leading them to increase their prices to recoup invest-
ments). However, a low-WACC scenario (representing a
potential de-risking of investment [43–45]) could result
in generation costs falling to competitive levels, even
when including integration costs.
The results change for the solar PV expansion sce-
nario, which is much larger in terms of final share of
the total electricity supply. In a high WACC scenario
including system costs (grid related),  electricity from
PV would still be over 0.015€/kWh cheaper than the
current electricity mix’  average cost. It should be
noted that scenario assumptions are more indicative
of large-scale installations, and costs may increase if a 
more rooftop-solar-oriented build-up of PV is
undertaken.
Factor market effects within the model are represented
as prices of labor and capital. With renewables expan-
sion, the demand for capital increases, raising its price
(i.e. capital rents), while the labor price (wage) decreases
due to less demand (see Fig. 1. While higher capital
rents and lower wages are seen in all EU regions, the
strongest effects emerge in Greece, with up to + 9% cap-
ital rent increases and reductions in wages for unskilled
labor of − 7%. The inclusion of integration costs into the
analysis has sharply negative effects on wages for skilled
and unskilled labor – particularly for a scenario with
large-scale PV production – and lower forecasted GDP
and welfare (w.r.t benchmark).  The impacts on a wind
scenario are less extensive than PV, but still emphasize
that analysis without incorporating integration costs may
be misconstruing possible economic impacts in the
future.
The relatively strong effects in Greece are due to a
higher capital cost share (due to high WACC) and due
to ambitious scenario renewable technology penetration
targets. When comparing across technologies, we see
that PV triggers stronger effects since it is even more
capital intensive than wind. For PV, capital rents in-
crease by up to + 9% and wages decline by up to − 7%.%;
Fig. 1 CGE analysis results comparing scenarios of PV (top) and wind (bottom) scale-up in Austria (left column) and Greece (right column), based
on Bachner et al. [21]; specifically, impacts of a scenario excluding (ignoring) or including integration costs. Impacts are conveyed as a percent
deviation from a benchmark scenario reflecting the current economy
Page 10
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 10 of 17
For wind, the maximum increase in capital rent is + 3%
and the strongest decline in wages is − 3%. When system
integration costs are included, the effects on factor
prices are slightly stronger, since the utilization effect
additionally drives up capital prices.
While results from [10] presume that economy-wide
effects (in terms of GDP) would be positive for Greece
in both scenarios, welfare would only see a positive
change in the PV scenario, with inclusion of integration
costs resulting in a negative welfare effects in the wind
scenario. The difference between GDP and welfare ef-
fects can be explained by price effects, which are in-
cluded in GDP, but not in Welfare (e.g. higher relative
prices would be reflected also as a higher GDP, but not
in a higher Welfare level, which measures consumption
quantities). However, if Greece could lower its WACC,
this would result in an eventual positive welfare effect
for both scenarios.
Austria
Similar to the Greek case, the inclusion of system inte-
gration costs (grid related) related to wind power expan-
sion would result in a cost (LCOE) increase of almost
0.0080075€/kWh compared to the current electricity
mix. This would result in an increase in the market price
for electricity in Austria, due to the low current LCOE
(as a result of the high share of hydropower) for its elec-
tricity mix in absolute terms (0.06€/kWh). However, suf-
ficiently lowering WACC due to de-risking of
investments would lead to wind LCOE being lower than
the conventional mix, but only if system integration
costs are not considered.
In comparison to wind power, the solar PV expansion
scenario would result in competitive PV in the country,
with an LCOE of about one tenth of a cent lower than
the current electricity mix, but in terms of economy-
wide effects and the market price of electricity, the even-
tual price would still be higher in 2030 than the current
benchmark estimate by about 1%.  This is again due to
the current LCOE being relatively low, producing an un-
favorable cost ratio between PV and conventional
generation.
In terms of follow-on effects, sectors are affected by a
decrease in the production of electricity (sector activity
falls 7%) and corresponding increase in price (rising
2.2%), due to the results of higher electricity costs. The
outlook is similar for PV expansion: electricity sector ac-
tivity falls (by 6.8%) and the price of electricity rises (by
2.5%).
While both the wind power and solar PV scenarios
would increase capital rents (by 0.75 and 2.2% respect-
ively) and reduce wages (0.5 and 1.25% respectively), the
effects on GDP are positive for the country. However,
with a scenario of high WACC and system integration 
costs, overall welfare is projected to be below the bench-
mark level, albeit minimally (~ 0.1%) in both scenarios,
as neither technology can compete with the conven-
tional mix. Even lowering WACC via de-risking would
not produce positive welfare effects.
Compared to the Greek case, the inclusion of integra-
tion costs does not change results as drastically, al-
though (as seen in Fig. 1) it does lead to further
reductions in wages for both skilled and unskilled labor
compared to the benchmark scenario (in line with
Greece), higher costs of capital, and lower GDP and wel-
fare, again with more prominent effects under a PV
scale-up scenario.
Netherlands
While the Greek and Austrian cases demonstrate the
impact of integration costs on static macroeconomic
analyses, the work of Mayer et al. [39] show how such
costs affect outcomes in a dynamic framework. As can
be expected by switching from a baseline scenario with
mainly offshore wind to a scenario with 33% PV (requir-
ing substantial investment in batteries to address inter-
mittency issues), average electricity generation costs rise
between 2 and 4% over a period of 10–16 years, depend-
ing on cost and learning rate (e.g. how much costs de-
cline per doubling in production capacity) assumptions,
compared to the benchmark. However, due to the re-
quired investments for battery storage consumption is
being reduced and therefore also demand for electricity.
Thus, its retail price drops below the baseline scenario
price by 10 years into the simulation.
In terms of macroeconomic effects, Mayer et al. [39]
initially show a substantial drop in GDP over the first
10 years of the scenario, being lower by as much as 0.5%
compared to the baseline,%, before the lower generation
costs for electricity results in rising GDP, with an overall
net positive effect on GDP as compared to the baseline.
The same trend holds true for welfare, although to a dif-
ferent degree, being lower in the first 10 years by 1%
(compared to the baseline),%,  but being higher 5 years
later by around 0.5% above baseline and maintaining
that level until the scenario concludes.
Estimating the potential for missed GHG reductions via
carbon payback times
Greece
As concerns wind power, estimates of country-specific
CPTs for Greece are supplied by Abeliotis and Pactiti
[42],  with an estimate payback time of seven months.
This falls well within the range of estimates for wind
turbines in Northwest Europe of 2.2 to 8.8 months
[4].  As Greece has relatively high solar insolation, PV
capacity factors are higher than elsewhere in Europe.
This leads to relatively short payback times: 1.62 years
Page 11
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 11 of 17
for Greece, compared to, e.g.,  Germany (3.54) and
progressively higher CPTs as latitude increases [4].
However, there are some caveats. First, it pertains
mainly to larger installations, with a reference plant
of 570 kW, employing over 4000 square meters of
panels [4].  Second, it has been shown that high PV
module temperatures in warmer climates limit their
efficiency somewhat, with a comparative study be-
tween Germany and Cyprus showing a performance
decrease of 4% in the southern country [47].  Thus,
any estimate of CPT for smaller-scale PV generation
in Greece (e.g.,  rooftop solar) may rather be a lower
bound or first-order estimate.
Given the short payback times for wind in Greece, the
vast majority of new capacity (as shown in Fig. 2) will be
net carbon-neutral by 2030; assuming new production
comes online evenly throughout the year, only 0.62
TWh of wind power would be ‘younger’  than its CPT.
The slightly longer CPT for PV lead to 1.134 TWh of
production not being carbon neutral, although again
this should be viewed as an optimistic case, and in
reality, given smaller e.g. rooftop plant sizes and loss
of efficiency due to higher ambient temperatures, the
CPT may be longer. In total, a first estimate of RES
production contributing to GHG reduction goals in
the NECP, but not being net neutral in actuality, is
1.756 TWh. 
Austria
In terms of the CPT of wind in Austria, a comparison of
its wind climatology versus the study area in Loriaux
et al. indicates less favourable wind conditions for most
of the country than northern European regions, which
consistently see mean wind speeds of 6 m/s and above
(especially offshore wind, with averages of mainly 9 m
per second (m/s) or higher) [4], while Austria averages
wind speeds of 6 m/s and below, and a power density
(depicted as watts per square meter, W/m2) of 200 W/
m2 or less in the majority of the country [48].  Thus,
while no concrete estimates can be derived as to the ac-
tual CPT for the country, wind turbines in Austria can
be assumed to have substantially higher CPTs than those
found for the region of North-western Europe.
For Austria a CPT for solar PV was estimated to be
9.64 years [4].  Austria’s very high hydropower capacity
results in its electricity grid’s carbon footprint being rela-
tively low (0.21 kg CO2
/kWh), which raises the country-
specific CPT. Due to the low carbon intensity of Aus-
tria’s energy market (large hydro-power share),  more
time is needed in Austria for Solar PV’s emission reduc-
tion to be large enough to outweigh the technology’s
life-cycle emissions. This long CPT results in approxi-
mately 8.59 TWh of production contributing to GHG in
the Austrian NECP, while in reality not being carbon
neutral. The lack of CPT for wind installations makes
Fig. 2 Cumulative (bottom) and yearly new capacity (top) of RES forecasted in country NECPs. Austria as a landlocked country is assumed to only
have onshore wind. Greece’s NECP makes no distinction between on- and off-shore capacity; only the Netherlands specifically differentiates
between the two. (Source: Own calculations based on projections from Austrian [26] and Greek [23] NECPs, and PBL [46])
Page 12
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 12 of 17
equivalent calculations unreasonable, but it is safe to as-
sume lower payback times implying at least the final year
or two of installations would not have reached carbon
neutrality.
The Netherlands
The Netherlands was the only case country to differenti-
ate between on- and off-shore wind production in their
NECP, with the bulk of new RES buildup to come from
offshore installations. Loriaux et al. [4] estimate the
CPTs for wind plants in northwest Europe, specifically
offshore and coastal areas, but does not provide separate
estimates for CPTs for the two. Instead, a range of esti-
mates are provided, with CPT varying between 2.2 and
8.8 months, with an average of 4 months. We assume
offshore wind to have a CPT at the lower bound, and
onshore the upper. The country-specific CPT for solar
PV installations as is 4.41 years [4].
These CPTs result in only 0.92 of 49.1 TWh of new
wind installations not being carbon neutral. New wind
installations are planned mainly earlier in the decade,
and the extremely short CPT implies they quickly be-
come net neutral. PV is another matter, however as the
majority of PV scaleup is projected to take place early in
the decade (see Fig. 2), only a relatively small amount of
total PV will be installed in the last 4.4 years of the dec-
ade, with 5.42 TWh of production not having reached
its CPT, resulting in a country total of 6.33 TWh being
counted towards GHG reduction goals, while in reality
not being net-neutral.
Potential feasibility barriers
Greece
As Fig. 2 illustrates, both wind and PV are expected to
grow almost linearly over the next decade, with wind
having an initially higher capacity buildup for the first
two years (1.4 TWh per year from 2020 to 2022, as com-
pared to 0.75 per year of PV), and subsequently adding
only slightly more production than PV per year. Wind
rises from 7.3 to 17.2 TWh, while PV increases from 4.5
to 11.8;
A survey of literature dealing with social acceptance
and public opinion of wind power in the country finds a
general preference for PV over wind power, which could
present issues with the planned early scaleup of wind.
Previous work has found that while 78% of the popula-
tion perceives wind energy as beneficial and almost two-
thirds of the population supports existing infrastructure
[49],  a huge gap appears in terms of support of future
wind development, with only 35% of the population in
favor, and 21% finding them aesthetically displeasing.
Further work highlights that residents in areas with wind
turbines generally supported expansion of capacity, but
not in their own region [50],  possibly due to fears of 
negative impacts on tourism [14] or a Not-In-My-Back-
yard (NIMBY) response. Comparatively, public opinion
for expansion of solar PV installation is seen as more
positive [51], with surveys by [52] showing that 94% of
respondents were in favor of PV parks. Over half of re-
spondents indicated that there were no visual impacts
from such installations, and 22% stating that they were
an annoyance.
Austria
Like Greece, Austria plans relatively linear development
of both its wind and PV resources, forecasting for both
technologies a rise of 0.833 TWh per year. While Austria
does not extensively outline measures to ensure public
agreement with its RES buildup, by-and-large, the coun-
try has not experienced much difficulty in terms of so-
cial acceptance in the past, having an extremely high
portion of electricity from hydropower, however, further
expansion of hydropower has started to target ecologic-
ally sensitive areas, with increasing public resistance
[53].  Walter & Gutscher [54] highlight frequent and
early public interaction as a key factor in dealing with
and solving public opposition to renewables develop-
ment. This, in addition to political support at all levels
of government, is viewed as the reason for Austria’s suc-
cess in diffusion of renewable energy resources.
A counter example to the successful development of
renewable energy sources is Austria’s lack of success at
introducing demand-side measures to reduce emissions,
namely in the building sector. While renewable energy
sources enjoy broad support across all political levels,
the structure and division of responsibilities of Austria’s
national and state-level authorities (building policies are
decentralized, with responsibilities mostly falling to re-
gional governments) led to provinces failing to meet EU
requirements on building energy performance [55].
The Netherlands
As a juxtaposition to the other cases, the Netherlands
NECP proposes larger increases in RES, heavily reliant
on wind power. The plan placed emphasis on involve-
ment of local and national stakeholders in participatory
processes, and a focus on local / municipal level plan-
ning, to improve public acceptance, and set a target of
50% local ownership in RES installations by the end of
the decade.
The plan’s objectives in terms of social acceptance are
backed up by observations in the literature, particularly
in regard to emphasis on local ownership, rather than
relying on new RES for jobs as economic incentive. In
general, expansion of the solar energy sector leads to in-
creases in employment, but these gains may be fleeting.
Koning, Smit & Dril [56] and Ligtvoet, Pickles & Barne-
veld [57] conclude that most jobs in the solar PV sector
Page 13
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 13 of 17
in the Netherlands are generated during the construc-
tion phase for both rooftop and large-scale projects, with
short term and flexible terms of appointment. Jobs for
operation and maintenance of ground-mounted solar
parks are more long-term, but their number is relatively
small. According to Koning et al. [56],  around 9165
work years of employment will be generated in the
period of 2014–2020 for 985 MW of solar panels, with a
resulting ratio of full-time equivalent work per megawatt
of 9.3.
At the same time, job losses in the traditional energy
production sector due to the growth of the renewable
sector is expected, and these workers will not necessarily
be redirected to the renewable sector, but will more
likely be employed in other sectors, thus a one to one re-
placement of jobs lost in fossil fuel-based energy by jobs
gained in renewable energy activities is unlikely [58].
According to stakeholder interviews, an important step
towards increasing public acceptance is to involve local
people and cooperatives in all stages of project develop-
ment. As an example, stakeholders referenced a solar
park planned in the north of the Netherlands, developed
without consulting the local population during project
development, resulting in local resistance. This insights
has been backed by research projects on the Dutch en-
ergy transition indicating that early engagement of stake-
holders and even co-ownership increases the likelihood
of public acceptance of projects under the low-emission
energy transition [59–63]. In principle it would be easier
to mount solar panels in the countryside, as developers
only need to agree with the landowner, and it is easier to
‘hide’ and fit the park in the existing landscape, leading
to lower public resistance risks. However, this may
contradict regional regulations, for instance in the prov-
ince of Fryslân, which prefers installing solar parks near
cities and towns [64].  As a result, there is an ongoing
political discussion on how to deal with land-use issues
and different point of views between and lack of over-
arching visions on spatial planning of solar parks at the
national, provincial and (local) government levels.
Along with local ownership, the Dutch NECP high-
lights a municipal focus also echoes findings from the
literature which emphasize varying local motivations for
support of RES. In some cases, the local population is
able to invest in and benefit from nearby solar parks via
crowd funding, purchase of certificates or obligations for
a park, or postal code ‘rose’  regulation, through which
citizens are able to invest in a nearby solar park and re-
ceive tax benefits on their electricity [65]. However, it is
unclear whether citizens mainly take part in such pro-
jects for financial reasons, or because of the environ-
mental benefits. It could be a motivating factor for
people to be part of a decision-making process and feel
that they contribute to societal and environmental 
improvements. This feeling may increase the more
people become familiar with climate change impacts and
needed solutions. In addition, people’s feedback might
improve the project design (aesthetics, location, etc.),
likely increasing overall acceptance [39].
With respect to acceptance of rooftop PV, the idea of
rooftop panels as status symbol, showing that the owner
of the panels invested money (cost signalling) and cares
about the environment, may increase acceptance. An-
other aspect is that of communication of all benefits of
renewable energy technologies to households, i.e. envir-
onmental and social in addition to financial benefits. Fi-
nancial incentives generally provide only a short-term
solution, and should this incentive be taken away, inter-
est in renewables may decline as households are insuffi-
ciently familiar with other environmental motivations
[39].
Discussion
Economic aspects
The three cases demonstrate the impact of including in-
tegration costs into macroeconomic analyses of large-
scale RES build-up as planned in the NECPs. The Aus-
trian and Greek cases highlight how similar economic
impacts, and implications of integration costs, may arise
in countries with wholly separate starting conditions:
Greece with little RES penetration and high costs of cap-
ital, and Austria with ample RES and cheap capital.
The results illustrate the importance of understanding
country contexts; for instance, the limited capital avail-
ability in Greece causes investments in capital-intensive
renewable energy technologies to become relatively
costly, eventually passed on to end users as higher elec-
tricity prices. Another example is Austria with its large
share of hydroelectricity; as hydropower generally has
relatively low operational costs, almost any investment
in non-hydro low-emission technologies will cause elec-
tricity prices to go up, as the competitive level is rela-
tively low already.
The cases have also made clear that scaling up a tech-
nology for mitigation does not mean simply implement-
ing a single technology project multiple times within the
country; while a single renewable project can be con-
nected to the grid without causing stability issues, scal-
ing up the technology to multiple projects may require
extensive stability investments, as seen in the
Netherlands case, with large economic impacts.
Environmental effectiveness
From an environmental perspective, scaling up low-
emission energy technologies will contribute to achiev-
ing medium- to long-term climate goals and reaching
targets of the Paris Agreement. Moreover, replacing fos-
sil fuel-based technologies with renewable energy or
Page 14
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 14 of 17
other low-emission technology options will contribute to
cleaner living environments and improved health condi-
tions. However, the benefits – and accounting in GHG
inventories – may be overstated, when one looks at life-
cycle-based CPTs and how RES scale-up is planned in
the NECPs. Greece, due to its southerly coastal location,
would benefit from short CPTs for both PV and solar,
while Austria conversely faces long CPTs due to low
solar insolation and wind speed, exacerbated by the high
RES share of current electricity generation. The
Netherlands, which takes a more front-loaded approach
to planned RES build-up, would avoid the bulk of their
new capacity not being carbon neutral in CPT terms,
with mainly a small share of new PV built later in the
decade not yet being net neutral.
An interesting insight from the Commission’s commu-
nication on the Winter Package is that a large share of
the installed renewable energy technologies is produced
in Europe. In CPT terms, this implies that GHG emis-
sions caused by producing, e.g.,  a wind turbine will be
accounted for in the GHG inventory of the Member
State where the production takes place, whereas the
emission reductions related to operating the turbine will
accrue to the Member States which operate it. In other
words, the CPT for this wind turbine is an indicator of
how long it takes to offset life-cycle emissions by emis-
sion reductions caused by the same technology within
Europe, even though these emission impacts appear in
different Member States’ INECPs and GHG inventories.
Therefore, in these cases, the CPT indicator may not
directly be determined at the level of individual Member
States, but rather for the EU as a whole, and thus func-
tion as an indicator of climate effectiveness of mitigation
options at the EU level.
Social acceptance
The three cases have highlighted a range of aspects re-
lated to social adoption and acceptance of technologies
for mitigation in the Member States. Technologies’  so-
cial implications can be broad, ranging from impacts on
employment to changes in the landscape nearby residen-
tial cores. With respect to the latter, the cases have illus-
trated how gaining public acceptance of scaled up
technologies can be a challenge under NECP develop-
ment. The cases strongly point to issues with contextual
factors; from Greek ‘NIMBY’ attitudes on wind parks to
the lack of public knowledge and skills for energy effi-
ciency, to other issues such as the structure of national-
and state-level authorities, and the powers and responsi-
bilities delegated to them.
As shown by the Netherlands case, and reflected in its
NECP, the close inclusion of stakeholders in planning
and development stages of RES policy can have a posi-
tive effect on acceptance; conversely a feeling of a 
project being imposed upon them could give rise to feel-
ings of discomfort and protest, especially when it is
clearly visible and considered to be a disruption of the
landscape (as is the opinion of wind farms in Greece).
The Dutch case also shows that public buy-in (either lit-
erally via local ownership, or via project co-design) may
enhance acceptance levels. While the Greek NECP also
highlighted the need for projects with local value added,
it is less clear (as reflected in the EC comments on draft
NECPs) how extensive public engagement was in this re-
gard, and the extent to which projects will have broad
public acceptance in the future.
The Netherlands NECP emphasized exploring how
plans fit within or competes with other activities in the
areas concerned and who will be impacted. This ‘area-
based’  innovation, preferably carried out at municipal
and provincial levels, focuses on addressing a combin-
ation of issues at the same time (e.g.,  not only energy
generation but also improving air quality, generating
jobs, etc.),  to balance multiple individual preferences
within an energy transition package. Such inclusive pro-
cesses may also imply more flexibility in terms of zone
planning and choosing locations for project activities,
and the approach of the Dutch NECP could provide a
blueprint for the other cases or outside countries which
were comparatively less extensive in addressing public
acceptance.
Conclusions
In this work, the impacts of scaling up options for miti-
gation as spelled out in country NECPs have been
assessed in further detail through case study analysis in
three EU Member States: Austria, Greece and the
Netherlands. These Member States have different char-
acteristics in terms of, for instance, capacity and uptake
of renewable energy, existing energy mix, as well as
availability of capital for scaling up technology options.
As final NECPs have been submitted to the EC by De-
cember 31st, 2019, our work assessed the NECPs under
three broad criteria for policy success (i) economic effi-
ciency, (ii) environmental effectiveness, (iii) feasibility,
and highlighted remaining research gaps needing to be
addressed as countries begin to implement their plans.
The three cases we assess provide examples of how
the approaches within NECPs may be inadequately ad-
dressing the three criteria above. Plans should achieve
objectives at the minimum cost to society, but large
scale RES implementation - a major contribution to re-
ducing GHG emissions - entails significant costs as dem-
onstrated in our cases, which are not typically taken into
consideration in current macroeconomic policy assess-
ment and which may lead to over or underestimation of
economic effects and subsequent inefficiencies in imple-
menting policy.
Page 15
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 15 of 17
In terms of environmental effectiveness, plans should
meet intended environmental objectives - in this case,
GHG reduction targets set by the EU. However, without
taking into account the life cycle emissions, and the fact
that the emissions involved in pr5oduction and con-
struction of RES may take place in other EU states or
elsewhere, NECPs may be overstating their contribution
to such goals. Under different measures of accounting
(e.g. consumption-based), such emissions may be inter-
nalized, changing the resulting estimates of GHG
reductions.
Finally, feasibility addresses the extent to which a pol-
icy is likely to gain acceptance; the NECPs of our cases
varied widely in how they addressed public acceptance.
While Greece indicated the need for projects with local
value-added, and both Greece and Austria held stake-
holder workshops and roundtables and allowed for pub-
lic comment on draft NECPs, there is no indication that
e.g. public sentiment is relatively negative to windfarms
in Greece, or that conversely PV is more highly looked
upon by the public, was taken into account. On the
other hand, the Netherlands demonstrated in its NECP
an extensive approach to public acceptance, which was
noted by the EC in its review of the draft plan, in con-
trast to the other cases. The Dutch case focuses on pro-
ducing plans which are acceptable at a municipal level
via a number of pathways for community engagement
and encouraging local acceptance, which could be used
as a blueprint by other countries who now have to im-
plement their plans.
The case study analysis in this paper has
highlighted a range of aspects to be considered for in-
tegrated energy and climate planning, such as in the
NECP context, all of which go far beyond evaluating
a technology solely based on their production-based
emissions. Instead, for finding optimal and cost-
effective solutions for electricity grid expansion under
climate change policy in the EU, the apparent ‘simple’
solutions may not necessarily be the best for reducing
emissions, and expansion of renewable technologies
may be constrained by factors to which policy makers
may have traditionally paid less attention.
Abbreviations
NECP: National Climate and Energy Plan; GHG: Greenhouse gas;
CGE: Computable General Equilibrium; CPT: Carbon payback time;
RES: Renewable energy sources; PV: Photovoltaic; WACC: Weighted average
cost of capital; LCOE: Levelized cost of electricity; GDP: Gross domestic
product; CES: Constant elasticity of substitution; MWh: Megawatt hour;
kW: Kilowatt hour; TWh: Terawatt hour; NIMBY: Not-In-My-Backyard; W/
m2: Watts per square meter; m/s: Meters per second
Acknowledgements
We thank Sören Lindner and Heleen deConinck for their thoughtful inputs in
the preparation of this work. 
Authors’ contributions
KW, GB and AT prepared the case studies on Austria and Greece, WG and KS
prepared the case study on the Netherlands, KW, WG and GB wrote the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
The reported research was conducted as part of the CARISMA project, which
received funding from the European Horizon 2020 programme of the EU
under the Grant Agreement No. 642242.
Availability of data and materials
All data and results discussed in this work can be obtained by referring to the
referenced sources (e.g. country National Energy and Climate Plans,
publications documenting economic analysis etc.) as they are noted in the text.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
1Wegener Center for Climate and Global Change, University of Graz,
Brandhofgasse 5, A-8010 Graz, Austria. 2JIN Climate and Sustainability, Ubbo
Emmiussingel 19, 9711 BB Groningen, The Netherlands. 3LIFE - Institute for
Climate, Energy and Society, Joanneum Research, Waagner-Biro-Straße 100,
A-8020 Graz, Austria.
Received: 14 September 2018 Accepted: 20 February 2022
References
1.  European Commission. Clean Energy For All Europeans. [URL: "https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/com_860_final.pdf"] https://ec.europa.
 eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/com_860_final.pdf (2016).
2.  European Commission Directorate-General for Energy, Clean energy for all
Europeans package [WWW Document]. European Commission. 2019.
 https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/energy-strategy/clean-energy-all-europea
 ns-package_en. Accessed 28 Feb 2022.
3.  Stavins R, et al. In: Edenhofer O, et al., editors. International Cooperation:
Agreements & Instruments. in Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate
Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press; 2014.
4.  Loriaux JM, Steinmann ZJN, Hanssen S, Daemen J, de Jonge M, Smits D,
et al. Life-cycle assessments of climate mitigation technologies. Nijmegen,
the Netherlands: Radboud University; 2016. (EU H2020 Project CARISMA).
5.  Elliott RJR, Lindley JK. Environmental jobs and growth in the United States.
Ecol Econ. 2017;132:232–44. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2016.09.030"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2016.09.030.
6.  Skoczkowski T, Bielecki S, Kochański M, Korczak K. Climate-change induced
uncertainties, risks and opportunities for the coal-based region of Silesia:
stakeholders’ perspectives. Environ Innov Societal Transit. 2019;35:460–81.
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.06.001.
7.  Keramidas, K. et al. Global energy and climate outlook 2018: sectoral
mitigation options towards a low-emissions economy - Global context to
the EU strategy for long-term greenhouse gas emissions reduction. 2018.
 http://publications.europa.eu/publication/manifestation_identifier/PUB_
 KJNA29462ENN.
8.  Hirth L, Ueckerdt F, Edenhofer O. Integration costs revisited – an economic
framework for wind and solar variability. Renew Energy. 2015;74:925–39.
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.08.065.
9.  Best R. Switching towards coal or renewable energy? The effects of financial
capital on energy transitions. Energy Econ. 2017;63:75–83.
10. Bachner G, Tuerk A, Williges K, Steininger KW. Economic Costs and Benefits
of Renewables Deployment in the EU. Graz, Austria: University of Graz; 2017.
(EU H2020 Project CARISMA).
11. Goulder LH, Parry IWH. Instrument Choice in Environmental Policy. [URL: "https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1117566"] https://pa
 pers.ssrn.com/abstract=1117566; 2008. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1117566"] https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1117566.
Page 16
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1  Page 16 of 17
12. Stavins RN. Policy Instruments for Climate Change: How Can National
Governments Address a Global Problem? vol. 39 [URL: "http://www.rff.org/files/sharepoint/WorkImages/Download/RFF-DP-97-11.pdf"] http://www.rff.org/files/sha
 repoint/WorkImages/Download/RFF-DP-97-11.pdf; 1997.
13. Duval R. A Taxonomy of Instruments to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions
and Their Interactions. OECD Economics Department Working Paper No.
636. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2008.
14. Konidari P, Mavrakis D. A multi-criteria evaluation method for climate
change mitigation policy instruments. Energy Policy. 2007;35(12):6235–57.
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2007.07.007.
15. Rey, L., Markandya, A., Gonzáles-Egiuno, M. & Drummond, P. Assessing
Interaction between instruments and the ‘optimality’ of the current
instrument mix. [URL: "http://cecilia2050.eu/system/files/Rey%20et%20al.%20%282013%29_Assessing%20Interaction%20between%20instruments%20and%20the%20%E2%80%98optimality%E2%80%99%20of%20the%20current%20instrument%20mix.pdf"] http://cecilia2050.eu/system/files/Rey%20et%20al.%20%282
 013%29_Assessing%20Interaction%20between%20instruments%20and%2
 0the%20%E2%80%98optimality%E2%80%99%20of%20the%20current%2
 0instrument%20mix.pdf (2013).
16. Hood C. Summing Up the Parts: Combining Policy Instruments for Least-
Cost Climate Mitigation Strategies, vol. 72 [URL: "http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/Summing_Up.pdf"] http://www.iea.org/publications/
 freepublications/publication/Summing_Up.pdf; 2011.
17. Görlach, B. What constitues an optimal policy mix? Defining the concept of
optimality, including political and legal framework conditions. [URL: "http://cecilia2050.eu/system/files/G%C3%B6rlach%20%282013%29_What%20constitutes%20an%20optimal%20policy%20mix_0.pdf"] http://cecilia2
[URL: "http://cecilia2050.eu/system/files/G%C3%B6rlach%20%282013%29_What%20constitutes%20an%20optimal%20policy%20mix_0.pdf"] 050.eu/system/files/G%C3%B6rlach%20%282013%29_What%2
 0constitutes%20an%20optimal%20policy%20mix_0.pdf (2013).
18. Bößner S, de Coninck H. Report WP4.4: Report on lessons learned from
technology assessment. Nimegen, the Netherlands: Radboud University;
2018. (EU H2020 Project CARISMA).
19. European Commission. 2019 EU report on policy coherence for
development. [URL: "https://ec.europa.eu/international-partnerships/system/files/swd-2019-20-pcdreport_en.pdf"] https://ec.europa.eu/international-partnerships/system/files/
 swd-2019-20-pcdreport_en.pdf. (2019).
20. Oikonomou V, Jepma CJ. A framework on interactions of climate and
energy policy instruments. Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Chang. 2007;13(2):131–
56. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-007-9082-9"] https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-007-9082-9.
21. Bachner G, Steininger KW, Williges K, Tuerk A. The economy-wide effects of large-
scale renewable electricity expansion in Europe: the role of integration costs.
Renew Energy. 2019;134:1369–80. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.09.052"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.09.052.
22. Eurostat. Share of energy from renewable sources [dataset]. 2020. [cited 2020 Feb
28] European Commission - EurostatUnit 5: Energy. Available from: [URL: "https://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=nrg_ind_ren&lang=en"] https://appsso.
 eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=nrg_ind_ren&lang=en.
23. Ministry of the Environment and Energy - Hellenic Republic. National
Energy and Climate Plan. [URL: "https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/el_final_necp_main_en.pdf"] https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/el_fina
 l_necp_main_en.pdf (2019).
24. European Commission. Assessment of the National Energy and Climate Plan
of Greece. Brussels, Belgium: European Commission; 2019 Jun. Report No.:
C(2019) 4408.
25. Eurostat. Wind and water provide most renewable electricity [Internet].
Eurostat News. 2020 [cited 2020 Mar 28]. Available from: [URL: "https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/-/DDN-20200129-1"] https://ec.europa.
 eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/-/DDN-20200129-1.
26. Federal Ministry of Sustainability and Tourism. Integrated national energy
and climate plan for Austria. [URL: "https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/at_final_necp_main_en.pdf"] https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/
 documents/at_final_necp_main_en.pdf (2019).
27. European Commission. Assessment of the draft National Energy and
Climate Plan of Austria. Brussels, Belgium: European Commission; 2019 Jun.
Report No.: C(2019) 4420.
28. Kirchengast, G. et al. Referenzplan als Grundlage für einen wissenschaftlich
fundierten und mit den Pariser Klimazielen in Einklang stehenden Nationalen
Energie- und Klimaplan für Österreich (Ref-NEKP) Vision 2050 und
Umsetzungspfade: Österreich im Einklang mit den Pariser Klimazielen und der
Weg dorthin. ISBN 1–30 (2020) [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1553/Ref-NEKP-Vision2050s1"] https://doi.org/10.1553/Ref-NEKP-Vision2050s1.
29. European Commission. 20 20 by 2020: Europe’s climate change opportunity.
Brussels, Belgium: European Commission; 2008 Jan. Report No.: COM(2008) 30.
30. Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy. Integrated National Energy
and Climate Plan 2021-2030 [Internet]. The Netherlands; 2019 Nov [cited
2022 Feb 28]. Available from: [URL: "https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/nl_final_necp_main_en.pdf"] https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/
[URL: "https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/nl_final_necp_main_en.pdf"] documents/nl_final_necp_main_en.pdf.
31. European Commission. Assessment of the National Energy and Climate Plan
of the Netherlands. Brussels, Belgium: European Commission; 2019 Jun.
Report No.: C(2019) 4419.
32. Pollitt H, Lewney R, Mercure J-F. Conceptual differences between macro-
econometric and CGE models. In: 27th International Input-Output
Association Conference [Internet]. Glasgow, Scotland; 2019 [cited 2022 Feb
28]. Available from: [URL: "https://www.iioa.org/conferences/27th/papers/files/3597_20190430081_IIOApaperE3MEsession.pdf"] https://www.iioa.org/conferences/27th/papers/files/3
 597_20190430081_IIOApaperE3MEsession.pdf. 
33. Ondraczek J, Komendantova N, Patt A. WACC the dog: the effect of
financing costs on the levelized cost of solar PV power. Renew Energy.
2015;75:888–98. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.10.053"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.10.053.
34. Böhringer, C., Rutherford, T. F. & Wiegard, W. Computable General
Equilibrium Analysis: Opening a Black Box. [URL: "http://ub-madoc.bib.uni-mannheim.de/363"] http://ub-madoc.bib.uni-ma
 nnheim.de/363 (2004).
35. Aguiar A, Narayanan B, McDougall R. An overview of the GTAP 9 Data Base. J
Glob Econ Anal. 2016;1(1):181–208. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.21642/JGEA.010103AF"] https://doi.org/10.21642/JGEA.010103AF.
36. Carrara S, Marangoni G. Including system integration of variable renewable
energies in a constant elasticity of substitution framework: the case of the
WITCH model. Energy Econ. 2016;64:612–26. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2016.08.017"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
 eneco.2016.08.017.
37. Hirth L. Market value of solar power: is photovoltaics cost-competitive? IET
Renew Power Gener. 2015;9(1):37–45. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-rpg.2014.0101"] https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-rpg.2014.0101.
38. Hirth L. The market value of variable renewables: the effect of solar wind
power variability on their relative price. Energy Econ. 2013;38:218–36.
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2013.02.004.
39. Mayer J, van der Gaast W, Bachner G, Spijker E. Qualitative and quantitative risk
assessment of expanding photovoltaics in the Netherlands. Environ Innov
Societal Transit. 2019;35:357–68. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.10.010"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.10.010.
40. Mayer J, Bachner G, Steininger KW. Macroeconomic implications of
switching to process-emission-free iron and steel production in Europe. J
Clean Prod. 2019;210:1517–33. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.11.118"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.11.118.
41. Bachner G, Wolkinger B, Mayer J, Tuerk A, Steininger KW. Risk assessment of
the low-carbon transition of Austria’s steel and electricity sectors. Environ Innov
Societal Transit. 2018;35:309–32. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2018.12.005"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2018.12.005.
42. Abeliotis K, Pactiti D. Assessment of the environmental impacts of a wind
farm in Central Greece during its life cycle. Int J Renew Energy Res (IJRER).
2014;4:580–5.
43. Schinko T, Komendantova N. De-risking investment into concentrated solar
power in North Africa: impacts on the costs of electricity generation. Renew
Energy. 2016;92:262–72. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2016.02.009"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2016.02.009.
44. Komendantova N, Schinko T, Patt A. De-risking policies as a substantial
determinant of climate change mitigation costs in developing countries:
case study of the Middle East and north African region. Energy Policy. 2019;
127:404–11. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2018.12.023"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2018.12.023.
45. Bachner G, Mayer J, Steininger KW. Costs or benefits? Assessing the
economy-wide effects of the electricity sector’s low carbon transition – the
role of capital costs, divergent risk perceptions and premiums. Energy
Strateg Rev. 2019;26:100373. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2019.100373"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2019.100373.
46. PBL. Klimaat- en Energieverkenning 2019. PBL Planbureau voor de
Leefomgeving [URL: "https://www.pbl.nl/publicaties/klimaat-en-energieverkenning-2019"] https://www.pbl.nl/publicaties/klimaat-en-
 energieverkenning-2019 (2019).
47. Makrides G, Zinsser B, Georghiou GE, Schubert M, Werner JH. Outdoor
efficiency of different photovoltaic systems installed in Cyprus and Germany.
In: 2008 33rd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference. 2008. p. 1–6.
48. DTU Wind Energy. Global Wind Atlas [dataset]. 2017 [cited 2022 Feb 28]. Technical
University of Denmark (DTU). Available from: [URL: "https://globalwindatlas.info/"] https://globalwindatlas.info/.
49. Kaldellis JK, Kapsali M. Kaldelli, El. & Katsanou, Ev. Comparing recent views of
public attitude on wind energy, photovoltaic and small hydro applications.
Renew Energy. 2013;52:197–208. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2012.10.045"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2012.10.045.
50. Kontogianni A, Tourkolias Ch, Skourtos M, Damigos D. Planning globally,
protesting locally: Patterns in community perceptions towards the
installation of wind farms. Renewable Energy. 2014;66:170–7.
51. Apostol D, Palmer J, Pasqualetti M, Smardon R, Sullivan R. The Renewable
Energy Landscape: Preserving Scenic Values in Our Sustainable Future:
Taylor & Francis; 2016.
52. Kaldellis JK, Kapsali M, Katsanou E. Renewable energy applications in
Greece—what is the public attitude? Energy Policy. 2012;42:37–48. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.11.017"] https://
 doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.11.017.
53. Fruhmann C, Tuerk A, Kulmer V, Gubina AF. Balancing environmental benefits
and damages of small hydropower generation in policy-making: assessing the
implementation of a contradicting EU policy framework in Austria and
Slovenia. International Journal of Sustainable Energy. 2019;38(1):37–49.
54. Walter G, Gutscher H. Public acceptance of wind energy and bioenergy
projects in the framework of distributive and procedural justice theories:
insights from Germany, Austria and Switzerland; 2010.
55. Steurer R, Clar C, Casado-Asensio J. Climate change mitigation in Austria
and Switzerland: the pitfalls of federalism in greening decentralized building
policies. Nat Res Forum. 2020;44(1):89–108. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1111/1477-8947.12166"] https://doi.org/10.1111/1477-894
 7.12166.
Page 17
Williges et al. Sustainable Earth (2022) 5:1
56. Koning M, Smit N, van Dril T. Energieakkoord - Effecten van de
energietransitie op de inzet en kwaliteit van arbeid. [Internet]. Economisch
Instituut voor de Bouw; 2016. Available from: [URL: "https://publications.tno.nl/publication/34632350/9q5k2Z/o16050.pdf"] https://publications.tno.nl/
 publication/34632350/9q5k2Z/o16050.pdf.
57. Ligtvoet A, Pickles A, Barneveld J v. Kwalitatieve impact van het
Energieakkoord op werkgelegenheid [Internet]. Technopolis group; 2016
[cited 2022 Feb 28]. Available from: [URL: "https://www.topsectorenergie.nl/sites/default/files/uploads/Algemeen/Eindrapport_Kwalitatieve_impact_Energieakkoord_op_werkgelegenheid%5B1%5D.pdf"] https://www.topsectorenergie.nl/sites/
 default/files/uploads/Algemeen/Eindrapport_Kwalitatieve_impact_Energiea
 kkoord_op_werkgelegenheid%5B1%5D.pdf.
58. Weterings A, Ivanova O, Diodato D, Lankhuizen M, Thissen M., Schure K,
et al. Effects of the energy transition in regional labour markets - a quick
scan. PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency; 2018. Report No.:
PBL-issue 3006.
59. Liu L, Bouman T, Perlaviciute G, Steg L. Effects of trust and public
participation on acceptability of renewable energy projects in the
Netherlands and China. Energy Research & Social Science. 2019;53:137–44.
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2019.03.006.
60. Bijvoet TN. Shared ownership between energy cooperations and
commercial investors in renewable energy projects [Master thesis]. Utrecht,
the Netherlands: Utrecht University; 2018.
61. Akerboom S. Between public participation and energy transition: The case
of wind farms [Internet] [PhD thesis]. Amsterdam, the Netherlands:
University of Amsterdam; 2018 [cited 2020 Mar 28]. Available from: [URL: "https://dare.uva.nl/search?identifier=4198a137-4c34-4b65-a442-a10387e60a62"] https://
 dare.uva.nl/search?identifier=4198a137-4c34-4b65-a442-a10387e60a62.
62. Rooijers F, Kerkhoven J, den Ouden B. Noodzakelijk beleid Klimaatakkoord:
Een maatschappelijke afweging [Internet]. Delft, the Netherlands: CE Delft,
Kalavasta, Berenschot; 2018 Nov [cited 2022 Feb 28]. Report No.: 18.180008.
152. Available from: [URL: "https://ce.nl/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/CE_Delft_180008_Noodzakelijk_beleid_Klimaatakkoord.pdf"] https://ce.nl/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/CE_Delft_1
 80008_Noodzakelijk_beleid_Klimaatakkoord.pdf.
63. de Coninck H, Revi A, Babiker M, Bertoldi P, Buckeridge M, Cartwright A,
et al. Strengthening and Implementing the Global Response. In: Masson-
Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pörtner H-O, Roberts D, Skea J, Shukla PR, et al., editors.
Global Warming of 15°C An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global
warming of 15°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse
gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response
to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to
eradicate poverty. In Press; 2018.
64. Gemeente Súdwest-Fryslân. Ruimte voor de zon [Internet]. 2015 [cited 2018
Aug 14]. Available from: [URL: "http://www.topentwelonline.nl/uploads/Dorpsbelang/notitie%20Ruimte%20voor%20de%20zon%20college12-7.pdf"] http://www.topentwelonline.nl/uploads/Dorpsbela
 ng/notitie%20Ruimte%20voor%20de%20zon%20college12-7.pdf.
65. DNV GL. Nationaal Actieplan Zonnestroom 2016 - op weg naar 10 GWp
zonnenstroom in Nederland in 2023. Arnhem, the Netherlands: DNV GL; 2016.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations. 
Page 17 of 17
