~ Lq~ °.
FRA~I~'~'~~~~AM
Mns~~nci-iu~,rT ~  , 
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
Ph:508-532-5655
Fax:508-532-5409
www.framinghamma.gov/CityCouncil
FRAMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL
ORDER N0. 2018-078
REQUEST OF COUNCILOR STEINER
UPON THE REQUEST OF COUNCILOR STEINER, THE CITY OF FRAMINGHAM, THROUGH THE FRAMINGHAM CITY
COUNCIL, IT IS SO ORDERED:
That the City Council endorse a Resolution Relating to Certain Immigration Policies as They Affect Family Rights.
The Resolution is attached.
YEAS: Cannon, Giombetti, Grove, King, Richardson, Sisitsl<v. Steiner, Tully Stoll
NAYS: None
ABSTAIN: Rossi
ABSENT: Shepard, Torres
PASSED IN COUNCIL: JUNE 19, 2018
A True Record, Attest: 
~/~~~/~~
Date Approved
.  I  f
C  ~  ~,
Lisa . Ferguso ,City Clerk
Page 2
RESOLUTYOI~ OF 'l["~YE
FRAMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL
RELATING T~ CERTAIN IMMIGRATION ~~~~CIES
AS THEY AFFECT FAMILY RIGHTS
WHEREAS, in 2008, President George W. Bush created an immigration policy to combat the
influx of children fleeing to the U.S. from Central American countries due to a surge of child
trafficking.
WHEREAS, under President Barack Obama, in August of 2009, the US Immigration and
Customs Enforcement Bureau(ICE) created the Office of Detention Policy and Planning, aimed
at combating certain injustices created by President Bush's program;
WHEREAS, over the ensuing seven years, under Pres. Obama, until August 2016, ICE
implemented aseries of humanitarian measures to assure, among other things: proper
notification of deaths among the detained population; physical, medical and mental health care;
parole for certain detainees who could demonstrate a basis of fear of persecution in the event of
repatriation; providing specific no-cost improvements to improve conditions of confinement,
such as increased recreation and contact visitation, and quality control; launching a web-
based detainee locator system enabling attorneys, family and friends to find a detainee in ICE
custody and to access information about the facility, including address and visiting hours; issuing
a new Transfer Directive to minimize the long-distance transfer of detainees within ICE's
detention system; issuing a Directive on Sexual Abuse and Assault Prevention and Intervention,
which establishes azero-tolerance policy with respect to sexual abuse or assault of individuals in
ICE custody; took definitive steps to improve transparency and uniformity in detention, custody
and classification decisions; took steps to better serve transgender individuals, including data
systems, initial processing, housing placements, and transfers; and took steps to monitor and
protect pregnant detainees.
WHEREAS, among the measures taken, specifically, in August of 2013, ICE Issued a directive
on "Facilitating Parental Rights in the Course of Civil Immigration Enforcement Actions,"
establishing policy and procedures to ensure that ICE immigration enforcement efforts do not
unnecessarily undermine the parental rights of parents or legal guardians of United States citizen
or legal permanent resident minor children, or parents and legal guardians who are primary
caretakers of minor children without regard to the dependent's citizenship. The Directive outlines
ICE policies and procedures concerning the placement, monitoring, accommodation, and
repatriation of parents or legal guardians. This policy allowed children to remain with their
parents and legal guardians throughout the process.
WHEREAS, on August 29, 2017, the Trump administration adopted zero tolerance policy on
border crossings, known as Policy Number 11064.2, governing "Detention and Removal of
Alien Parents or Legal Guardians."
WHEREAS, Policy Number 11064.2 mandated the removal of children from parents crossing
borders into the United States, under the misplaced guise, or ruse, of family court protection for
minors from their "criminal" parents.
Page 3
WHEREAS, the Trump Administration has adopted a strategy of labeling all border crossings as
"illegal,"unless the person crossing into the US presents proper doctunentation and is permitted
passage through traditionally accepted methods, and has deemed all adults passing into the US in
such "illegal" way, to be criminals.
WHEREAS, the Trump Administration began a program of separating children from their
parents and legal guardians, and placing them in facilities far distant from those of their parents
in October of 2017, and between October 1, 2017 and May 31, 2018, at least 2,700 children have
been split from their parents. 1,995 of them were separated over the last six weeks of that
window —April 18 to May 31 —indicating that at present, an average of 45 children are being
taken from their parents each day.
WHEREAS, the rate of separations of children from their parents continues at a current average
of 47 children per day.
WHEREAS, such treatment of minor children constitutes a human rights violation. The
conditions of housing include kennel-like cages, and the practice of chaining children to fences
for extended periods of time.
WHEREAS, many of these families have come to the US lawfully to request asylum from
violence and persecution in their own countries.
WHEREAS, such activities of asylum-seekers are protected by the Constitution and laws of the
United States, their treatment as "criminals,"and separation from their children and incarceration
without due process are unlawful violations of the civil rights of such families and asylum
seekers, causing trauma that, in many cases, will result in life-long injuries.
WHEREAS, the crime the parents are being charged with is a misdemeanor.
NOW, THEREFORE, The Framingham City Council condemns the heinous ICE policy of
separating immigrant children from their parents and legal guardians, and demands an immediate
halt to this inhumane practice.
FURTHERMORE, The Framingham City Council calls upon its Federal Delegation, State
Delegation, and Mayor Spicer to vehemently raise protest and bring awareness of this situation
to the floors of their respective Chambers.
FURTHERMORE, The Framingham City Council calls upon our Federal Delegation to take
action in the House of Representatives and the Senate, seeking bi-partisan rectification of the
issues raised in this Resolution.
ADOPTED, by a vote of 9-0-0in favor, this 19th day of June, 2018.
Dennis Giombetti, Chair
