CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Direct Pay Benefits
Policy Number: 2
Policy Number: # 2  Effective date: 
Revision Date: October 1, 2019  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New ( ) Amendment (x)  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
January 1, 2005 
N/A
2
Policy Statement: 
Employees whose positions are governed by collective bargaining agreement or Civil Service
Statute are subject only to those portions of this policy that are not specifically regulated by law
or agreement. 
This policy shall apply to all City of Framingham regular benefit eligible employees absent from
work due to any “approved” reason or retired from service to the City. 
All leaves/absences must be made in accordance with City of Framingham policy and/or
collective bargaining agreement. 
Policy Description: 
Any benefit eligible employee (defined as full-time “regular” and part-time “regular” working a
minimum of 20 hours weekly), who is on an approved leave of absence for up to twelve (12) 
months will be able to enjoy the split of City contribution and employee contribution, as it exists
at the time. If an employee is absent more than twelve (12) months, he/she is required to cover
the full cost of the insurance at 100%.
If the approved leave of absence is or becomes unpaid, the employee is required to arrange for
payment of benefits, in advance, with the City’s Financial Coordinator. Payment for one (1) 
month must be made the previous month. After two (2) months or sixty (60) days of non-
payment, the insurance will be cancelled on the last day of the second month and a Cobra notice
will be sent. If an employee’s insurance has terminated due to non-payment, he/she will only be
able to enroll during open enrollment if past due premiums have been paid. 
1 | City of Framingham – Direct Pay Benefits # 2
Page 2
Any retiree, or surviving spouse of a retiree, who does not receive enough money in his/her
pension check to cover benefits must pay benefit costs directly to the City of Framingham. After
two (2) months or sixty (60) days of non-payment, the insurance will be cancelled on the last day
of the second month and a Cobra notice will be sent. 
An active retiree who chooses to delay receipt of retirement benefits will be considered a
“deferred retiree” and will be required to pay 100% of the cost of elected insurances until they
activate their retirement benefit. 
2 | City of Framingham – Direct Pay Benefits # 2
