CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Inclement Weather
Policy Number: 39
Policy Number: # 39  Effective date: 
Revision Date: N/A  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New (x) Amendment ( )  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
November 1, 2019 
N/A
3
Employees whose positions are governed by collective bargaining agreement are subject only to
those portions of this policy that are not specifically regulated by agreement. 
The existence of this policy does not represent a “contract” for employment between the
employee and the City. 
Policy Statement: 
In the event of inclement weather conditions, unless otherwise notified by the Mayor or
authorized designee, employees are to consider City offices open and operating during normally
scheduled business hours. Employees should prepare for winter weather by: 
•  Ensuring their personal vehicle is safe or finding alternate sources of travel such as public
transportation, arranging car pools or other alternate means of transportation. 
•  Anticipating weather conditions and weatherize automobiles accordingly. 
•  Making every attempt to report to and remain at work. It is not the intent of this policy, 
however, to suggest that employees should risk danger or possible injury to person or
employee property in order to travel to and from work. 
In the event inclement weather conditions hamper or prevent travel, the following compensation
guidelines will apply to all full-time regular employees and (regular) part-time employees with
the understanding that said employees shall be compensated only for regularly scheduled work
hours on any given day. 
1 | City of Framingham – Inclement Weather # 39
Page 2
Definitions: 
•  Inclement/Adverse Weather – Weather conditions that can make travel in and around
the City limits of Framingham hazardous for the employee or weather that may endanger
the public, including weather causing major disruption to transportation and the operation
of businesses and schools. Some examples of inclement weather include hurricanes, 
floods, blizzards, heavy snow and ice storms, and excessive heat. 
•  Critical Need Employees – An employee whose job functions require that he/she be at
work during normally scheduled work hours (regardless of environmental factors) to
provide essential service to the public, or provide direct leadership or support. These are
departments that typically operate on a 24-hour a day rotating schedule, or play a critical
role in maintaining the safety and services to the City. 
•  Secondary Employees – Made up of both non-exempt and exempt personnel who are
not classified as a critical need employee and are typically considered working in an
administrative or in non-public safety function. 
Critical Need Departments and Functions: 
•  Police Department – All sworn/public safety personnel are designated as Critical Need
employees. Sworn administrative personnel may be assigned to patrol functions or other
duties to assist with maintaining traffic control or public safety. Civilian personnel may
be designated by the Chief of Police as Neither Critical need or secondary, based on
support needed for the police department to remain functional. 
•  Fire Department – All public safety personnel are designated as Critical Need
employees. Civilian personnel may be designated by the Fire Chief as either Critical
Need or secondary based on support needed for the fire department to remain functional. 
•  Public Works – All are assigned and expected to report to work as part of the response
team based on the type of adverse weather forecasted. 
•  Technology Services Department – All personnel are designated as Critical Need to
ensure that communication equipment and other technology equipment remains
functional. The Technology Services Director may determine if services could be
maintained via remote or on-site monitoring. 
Procedure: 
•  The Mayor or designee has the responsibility for making the determination regarding
closure of City facilities no later than two (2) hours before the facility is scheduled to
open to allow sufficient time for notifications. In making such determination both the
continuance of service to the public and the safety of employees will be taken into
consideration. 
•  If the City buildings/facilities will be closed for an entire day, the Mayor or designee will
notify media and post an alert on the City's webpage one and one half hours (1.5 hours) 
before a facility is scheduled to open. The notice will also be posted to an employee call-
in (hotline) number. That number is (508) 532-5488. 
2 | City of Framingham – Inclement Weather # 39
Page 3
Compensation: 
Employee arrives late to work due to adverse
weather 
As stated above, employees are expected to make
every attempt to report to and remain at work. If an
employee follows the guidelines of this policy and
makes a good faith effort in reporting to work, 
while using discretion about their personal safety
and the safety of others, they will not be charged
leave for being tardy. If one's tardiness is outside
what is determined to be a good faith effort or if
one has not followed the guidelines of this policy, 
absence is charged to vacation or personal leave, 
comp time (with employee permission) or unpaid
leave if no appropriate accrued leave is available. 
Employee does not report to work due to
adverse weather 
Absence for the full day is charged to vacation or
personnel leave, comp time (with employee
permission) or unpaid leave if no appropriate
accrued leave is available for the number of hours
of scheduled work for the day. 
Supervisor approves employee's request to
leave early due to adverse weather 
Remaining scheduled work hours are charged to
vacation leave, comp time (with employee
permission) or unpaid leave if no appropriate
accrued leave is available. 
Employee is sent home early by supervisor by
the direction of the Mayor or designee due to
adverse weather 
Employee is paid for the entire scheduled workday. 
There is no charge to leave if, you are at work and
the building closes (time sheet shows inclement
weather.)
City offices are closed or there is a delayed Employee is paid for entire scheduled work day, 
opening due to adverse weather by direction of no charge to leave accrual (time sheet shows
the Mayor  inclement weather.)
Employee is unable to leave after their work
shift due to adverse weather and, with
permission of their supervisor, continues to
work. 
Employee is paid for all actual hours worked, 
including overtime if applicable. At the discretion
of the employee’s supervisor, the employee may
be allowed to flex within the same pay period and
report late or leave early from work on a
subsequent day to make up for the additional
hours worked. 
Note: An employee who has previously scheduled, submitted, and been approved for paid leave
prior to a paid time-off inclement weather event, will have his/her absence charged against the
originally approved leave accrual. 
3 | City of Framingham – Inclement Weather # 39
