CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Criminal Offender Record Information Policy and Procedure
Policy Number: 35
Policy Number: # 35  Effective date: 
Revision Date: December 1, 2019  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New ( ) Amendment (x)  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
February 10, 2006 
N/A
5
Policy Statement: 
This policy is applicable to the criminal history screening of prospective and current employees, 
subcontractors, vendors, volunteers, and interns, professional licensing applicants, rental or
leased housing applicants, and state, county, and municipal employees and applicants as those
terms are defined in M.G.L. c. 268, 1. 
The City of Framingham seeks to provide a safe and productive environment for employees, 
visitors, and customers. In order to accomplish this goal, the City performs criminal history
record checks for certain positions to identify individuals who have committed serious crimes
and are disqualified from employment by law or because their presence in the work place would
create an unacceptable risk to the City. 
Definition: 
For purposes of this policy, evidence of a criminal history includes any conviction or plea of
guilty, a plea of no contest, a suspended imposition of sentence, any suspended execution of
sentence, any period of probation or parole, or any other action (other than an arrest record) 
involving a finding that an individual committed or attempted to commit a crime. 
References: 
M.G.L. c. 6, 167-175
Policy Description: 
1 | City of Framingham – Criminal Offender Record Information # 35
Page 2
This policy is applicable to all applicants for full-time, part-time, or temporary, staff and
volunteer positions where it is required by law to complete a criminal history record check and
exclude persons with a criminal history from employment. 
The City of Framingham currently conducts criminal history record checks for all applicant
positions in public safety, and those positions with duties that involve direct clients. The City
reserves the right to perform criminal history record checks for other positions or in individual
circumstances whenever it is deemed appropriate to protect the interests of the City. 
When Criminal Offender Record Information (CORI) and other criminal history checks may be
part of a general background check for employment, volunteer work, licensing purposes, or the
rental or leasing of housing, the following practices and procedure will be followed. 
Conducting a Criminal Offender Record Information Screening: 
CORI checks will only be conducted as authorized by the DCJIS and M.G.L. c. 6, 172, and only
after a CORI Acknowledgement Form, page 8-9, has been completed. If a requestor is screening
for the rental or leasing of housing, a CORI Acknowledgement Form shall be completed for each
and every subsequent CORI check. 
A CORI Acknowledgement Form shall be completed on an annual basis for checks submitted for
any other purpose, provided, however, that the requestor has adopted the language from the
DCJIS CORI Acknowledgement Form. This Form notifies individuals that their CORI may berequested at any time within the one (1) year that the Acknowledgement form is valid. If the
requestor has not adopted the DCJIS CORI Acknowledgement Form language, then it must
ensure that an Acknowledgement Form is completed for each and every subsequent CORI check. 
Access to CORI: 
All CORI obtained from the DCJIS is confidential, and access to the information must be limited
to those individuals who have a “need to know.” This may include, but not be limited to, hiring
managers, staff submitting the CORI requests, and staff charged with processing job
applications. The City of Framingham must maintain and keep a current list of each individual
authorized to have access to, or view, CORI. This list must be updated every six (6) months and
is subject to inspection upon request by the DCJIS at any time. 
CORI Training: 
An informed review of a criminal record requires training. Accordingly, all personnel authorized
to review or access CORI at the City of Framingham will review, and will be thoroughly familiar
with, the educational and relevant training materials regarding CORI laws and regulations made
available by the DCJIS. 
Additionally, if the City of Framingham is an agency required by M.G.L. c. 6, s. 171A, to
maintain a CORI Policy, all personnel authorized to conduct criminal history background checks
2 | City of Framingham – Criminal Offender Record Information # 35
Page 3
and/or to review CORI information will review, and will be thoroughly familiar with the CORI
Policy. 
Use of CORI in Background Screening: 
CORI used for employment purposes shall only be accessed for applicants who are otherwise
qualified for the position for which they have applied. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, a criminal record will not automatically disqualify an
applicant. Rather, determinations of suitability based on background checks will be made
consistent with this policy and any applicable law or regulations. 
Verifying a Subject’s Identity: 
If a criminal record is received from the DCJIS, the information is to be closely compared with
the information on the CORI Acknowledgement Form and any other identifying information
provided by the applicant to ensure the record bellows to the applicant. 
If the information in the CORI record provided does not exactly match the identification
information provided by the applicant, a determination is to be made by an individual authorized
to make such determinations based on a comparison of the CORI record and documents provided
by the applicant. 
Questioning a Subject About His/Her Criminal History: 
In connection with any decision regarding employment, volunteer opportunities, housing, or
professional licensing, the subject shall be provided with a copy of the criminal history record, 
whether obtained from the DCJIS or from any other source, prior to questioning the subject
about it. The source(s) of the criminal history record is also to be disclosed to the subject.
Determining Suitability: 
If a determination is made, based on the information as provided in Section 5 of this policy, that
the criminal record belongs to the subject, and the subject does not dispute the record’s accuracy, 
then the determination of suitability for the position or license will be made. Unless otherwise
provided by law, factors considered in determining suitability may include, but are not limited to
the following: 
•  Relevance of the record to the position sought; 
•  The nature of the work to be performed; 
•  Time since the conviction; 
•  Age of the candidate at the time of the offense; 
•  Seriousness and specific circumstances of the offense; 
•  The number of offenses; 
•  Whether the applicant has pending charges; 
•  Any relevant evidence of rehabilitation or lack thereof; and
3 | City of Framingham – Criminal Offender Record Information # 35
Page 4
•  Any other relevant information, including information submitted by the candidate or
requested by the organization. 
The applicant is to be notified of the decision and the basis for it in a timely manner. 
Adverse Decisions Based on CORI: 
If an authorized official is inclined to make an adverse decision based on the results of a criminal
history background check, the applicant will be notified in accordance with DCJIS regulations
803 CMR 2.18, 2.19, 5.14, 11.12. The subject shall be provided with a copy of the organization’s
CORI policy and a copy of the criminal history (unless a copy was provided previously). The
source(s) of the criminal history will also be revealed. The subject will then be provided with an
opportunity to dispute the accuracy of the CORI record. Subjects shall also be provided a copy of
DCJIS’ Information Concerning the Process for Correcting a Criminal Record. 
Secondary Dissemination Logs: 
All CORI obtained from the DCJIS is confidential and can only be disseminated as authorized by
law and regulation. A central secondary dissemination log shall be used to record any
dissemination of CORI outside this organization, including dissemination at the request of the
subjects. 
City of Framingham Process: 
1. The Human Resources Department will initiate a criminal history record check after
finalist has been selected for which review is required, or for which Human Resources
determines that a criminal history record check is in the best interests of the City. 
2. A request for a criminal history record check form will be completed and signed by the
employee or candidates who are applying for those positions subject to mandatory
criminal history record checks by law. Human Resources will use only the approved
request forms and document that individuals have been provided all required notices. 
3. The request form will be completed once interviews are completed and finalist has been
selected. Conditional job offers may be extended pending the results of the criminal
history record check. 
4. If a criminal history record check is reported affirmatively, Human Resources will
determine whether or not the employee or candidate should be disqualified from
employment due to legal requirements or other considerations. Except where
employment is expressly prohibited by law, the City will review each individual’s
criminal history record. In the case of a disagreement among these parties on whether
there are grounds for disqualification, the Human Resources Director will review the case
and make the final decision. 
4 | City of Framingham – Criminal Offender Record Information # 35
Page 5
5. Prior to taking any adverse employment action based on information contained in a criminal
history record check report, Human Resources will provide the employee or candidate a copy
of the report. The employee or candidate will have reasonable opportunity to submit
information to Human Resources disputing the accuracy or completeness of the report before
a final decision is made and communicated. 
6. If a candidate did not disclose a criminal history on his/her application and is found to have
such a record, a job offer may be rescinded or employment terminated due to falsification. 
Human Resources will notify the department and the candidate as soon as possible after the
decision is made. 
7. A list of positions that are subject to a criminal history check report, though not inclusive, 
are: 
All Library Department Positions
All Police Department Positions
All Recreation Employees
Arena Assistant 
Arena Cashier
Arena Laborer
Backflow/Meter Supervisor
Backflow/Meter Technician
Board of Health Director
Building Commissioner
Building Inspector
Deputy Building Commissioner
Director of Veterans Services
Firefighter
Heavy Equipment Operator
Medium Equipment Operator
Pump Station Operations Manager
Pump Station Technician
Sanitarian
Sewer Technician
Wastewater Operations Manager
Wastewater Systems Supervisor
Water & Sewer Director
Water Meter Reader
Water Operations Manager
Water Systems Supervisor
Water Technician
5 | City of Framingham – Criminal Offender Record Information # 35
