CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Discriminatory Harassment
Policy Number: 37
Policy Number: # 37  Effective date: August 31, 2017 
Revision Date: June 1, 2020  Supersedes: October 1, 2018 
Type of policy: New ( ) Amendment (x)  Total Pages: 5
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) (Excluding Schools) 
Policy Statement: 
This policy supplements the Personnel Policy of the City of Framingham regarding harassment
in the workplace by managers, supervisors, employees, vendors, contractors, and members of the
public who use “City facilities”. This policy also describes examples of conduct which may
constitute unlawful harassment, and sets forth a complaint procedure, to be followed by persons, 
who believe that they are victims of unlawful harassment and/or retaliation due to a harassment
complaint. 
References: 
M.G.L. c. 151B; Title VII of the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1964; M.G.L. c. 272 §.92A (Public
Accommodations); 42 U.S.C. §§ 12111-12117 (Americans With Disabilities Act) and the 2008
ADA Amendment Act; 29 U.S.C. § 621 (Age Discrimination in Employment Act); City of
Framingham Personnel Policy Elimination of Sexual Harassment in the Workforce; A.D.A. 
Grievance Procedure; Maternity Leave; Religious Holidays; Board of Selectmen Affirmative
Action Policy. 
Special Terms: 
This policy recognizes that persons are protected from discriminatory harassment under both
Federal and State laws as referenced herein and that persons have rights under both Federal and
State laws regarding discriminatory harassment. It is the intent of this policy to be consistent
with these laws and in all respects to provide equal protection offered by these laws. This policy
supplements and does not supersede the City Personnel Policy governing Sexual Harassment. 
1 | City of Framingham – Discriminatory Harassment # 37
Page 2
Policy Description: 
It is the goal of Framingham to promote a workplace that is free of discriminatory harassment of
any type, including sexual harassment. Discriminatory harassment consists of unwelcome verbal
or physical conduct that is based on a characteristic or category protected by State and Federal
laws. Characteristics or categories include; gender, gender identity, race, color, national origin, 
ancestry, religion, age, disability, genetics, military status, sexual orientation, and persons who
are retaliated against because they are or have been complainants or cooperating witnesses in
discriminatory harassment matters. Framingham will not tolerate harassing conduct that affects
employment conditions, that interferes unreasonably with an individual’s performance, or that
creates an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment. 
Discriminatory harassment of employees occurring in the workplace, or in connection with
work-related travel, and/or work-sponsored events will not be tolerated. Further, any retaliation
against an individual who has complained about harassment or retaliation against individuals for
cooperating with an investigation of a discriminatory harassment complaint is similarly unlawful
and will not be tolerated. 
Because the City of Framingham takes allegations of discriminatory harassment seriously, we
will respond promptly to complaints of discriminatory harassment. Upon receipt of complaints
where it is determined that conduct which violates this policy has occurred, we will act promptly
to eliminate the conduct and impose such corrective action as is necessary, including disciplinary
action where appropriate. 
While this policy sets forth City goals of promoting a workplace that is free of discriminatory
harassment, the policy is not designed or intended to limit the authority of authorized City
officials to discipline or take remedial action for workplace conduct which authorized City
officials deem unacceptable, regardless of whether that conduct satisfies the definition of
harassment. 
Definitions: 
Discriminatory harassment is a form of discrimination which includes unwelcome conduct, 
whether verbal or physical, that is based on a characteristic protected by law. Discriminatory
harassment includes, but is not limited to: 
•  Display or circulation of written materials or pictures that are degrading to a member of a
protected category or class of persons as previously described. 
•  Verbal abuse, slurs, derogatory comments, or insults about, directed at, or made in the
presence of an individual or group as previously described. 
Sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination which includes unwelcome sexual advances, 
requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature between
members of the opposite sex or of the same sex when: 
2 | City of Framingham – Discriminatory Harassment # 37
Page 3
•  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of
an individual’s employment; or is used as a basis for decisions affecting an individual’s
employment; or
•  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual’s
work performance by creating a hostile work environment. 
Gender identity is a person’s internal, deeply-felt sense of being male, female, or something
other or in-between, regardless of the sex they were assigned at birth. Everyone has a gender
identity. 
Unwelcome sexually oriented conduct that has the effect of creating a work environment that is
hostile, offensive, intimidating or humiliating to either male or female workers may constitute
sexual harassment. 
The following examples of workplace conduct may constitute sexual harassment. The following
examples include unwelcome conduct which, depending upon the totality of the circumstances, 
including the severity of the conduct and its pervasiveness, may violate this policy: 
•  Unwelcome sexual advances – whether they involve physical touching or not; 
•  Sexual epithets, jokes, written or oral references to sexual conduct, gossip regarding
one’s sex life; sexually oriented comments on an individual’s body, comments about or
discussion of an individual’s sexual activity, deficiencies, or prowess; 
•  Displaying sexually suggestive objects, pictures, cartoons, leering, whistling, brushing
against the body, sexual gestures, and suggestive comments; 
•  Inquiries into one’s sexual experiences; and/or
•  Retaliation against an individual who has complained about sexual harassment, and
retaliation against individuals for cooperating with an investigation of a sexual
harassment complaint is unlawful and will not be tolerated by this organization. 
For further information and clarification of prohibited conduct, please consult City Personnel
Policy - “Policy and Procedures for the Elimination of Sexual harassment in the Workforce”.
Complaint Procedures for Discriminatory Harassment: 
All officials, whether appointed or elected, employees, managers, and supervisors of the City
share responsibility for preventing, discouraging and reporting any form of discriminatory
harassment. The primary responsibility for ensuring proper investigation and resolution of
harassment complaints rests with the Director of Human Resources or his/her designee, who will
administer the policy and procedures described herein as well as the City’s Affirmative Action
Policy and the Personnel Policy on Elimination of Sexual Harassment in the Workplace. 
If any City employee believes that while performing their City duties he or she has been
subjected to discriminatory harassment by any person, the employee has the right to file a
complaint with the person(s) appointed under this policy as the investigating officer(s). This may
be done in writing or orally. In addition, persons who believe they have been subjected to
discriminatory harassment by City employees or officials, while using or attempting to use City
3 | City of Framingham – Discriminatory Harassment # 37
Page 4
public accommodations such as recreational facilities, parks, and meeting places may also file a
complaint with the City using the procedures described herein. 
Prompt reporting of discriminatory harassment is in the best interest of the City and is essential
to a fair, timely, and thorough investigation. Accordingly, complaints should be filed as soon as
possible following the incident(s) at issue. Complaints may be made by contacting the Director
of Human Resources or the Chief Operating Officer/EEO Officer. The City Human Resources
Director may be contacted at (508) 532-5490 and the Chief Operating Officer may be contacted
at (508) 532-5404 or they may be visited in City Hall at 150 Concord St., Framingham, MA. 
Complaint Investigation: 
When we receive a complaint, the City Human Resources Director shall determine if an
investigation is necessary, and if so, whether the complaint should be investigated by the Human
Resources Department, other in-house personnel, or an outside investigator, and shall designate
an investigative officer. If the complaint pertains to the City Human Resources Director, the
Chief Operating Officer shall make this determination and designation. The designated
investigative officer will promptly investigate the allegation in a fair and expeditious manner to
determine whether there has been a violation of City policy. The investigation will be conducted
in such a way as to maintain confidentiality to the extent practicable under the circumstances. 
Our investigation will include private interviews with the person filing the complaint, with the
person alleged to have committed the discriminatory harassment, and with any first hand
witnesses. Every employee, whether they are the complainant, the person alleged to have
committed harassment, or a witness are expected to fully cooperate with all aspects of an
investigation. The investigating officer shall determine whether attorneys are permitted to be
present or participate in the complaint investigation. When we have completed our investigation, 
we will, to the extent appropriate, inform the person filing the complaint and the person alleged
to have committed the conduct of the results of that investigation. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this policy, we reserve the right to investigate and take action
on our own initiative in response to behavior and conduct which may constitute discriminatory
harassment regardless of whether an actual complaint has been filed. 
If it is determined that conduct which violates this policy has occurred, we will act promptly to
eliminate the offending conduct, and where it is appropriate authorized City officials may also
impose disciplinary action. 
Disciplinary Action: 
As a result of a complaint and investigation, if it is determined that during the course of their
working duties or official duties a City employee or official has engaged in conduct in violation
of this policy, authorized City officials may take such action as is appropriate under the
circumstances. Such action will be in compliance with any and all applicable disciplinary
procedures of Local and State laws, City policy, and applicable collective bargaining agreements
and may range from counseling to termination from employment, as well as such other forms of
disciplinary action as authorized officials deem appropriate under the circumstances. 
4 | City of Framingham – Discriminatory Harassment # 37
Page 5
State and Federal Remedies: 
In addition to the above, a person who believes they have been subjected to discriminatory
harassment of any type, including sexual harassment, may file a formal complaint with either or
both of the government agencies set forth below. Using the City complaint process does not
prohibit a person from filing a complaint with these agencies. Each of the agencies requires that
claims be filed within specified time periods as relates to the complained of incident therefore a
person who wishes to make a complaint to these agencies should promptly contact these
agencies to verify how the deadlines apply to the complaint and to be advised of any filing
procedures. 
United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC”)
J.F.K. Federal Building
Government Center
4th Floor, Room 475
Boston, MA 02203
(800) 669-4000
(617) 565-3200
TTY (617) 565-3204 (M-F 8:30-5:00) 
Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (“MCAD”)
Boston Office: 
One Ashburton Place, Room 601
Boston, MA 02108
(617) 727-3990 (M-F 8:45 – 5:00) [URL: "http://www.mass.gov/mcad"] www.mass.gov/mcad
Springfield Office: 
424 Dwight Street, Room 220
Springfield, MA 01103
(413) 739-2145
Worcester Office: 
22 Front Street, 5th Floor
P.O. Box 8038
Worcester, MA 01641
(508) 799-6379
5 | City of Framingham – Discriminatory Harassment # 37
