CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Diversity in Hiring
Policy Number: 44
Policy Number: # 44  Effective date:
Revision Date:  Supersedes:
Type of policy: New (x) Amendment ( )  Total Pages:
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
September 1, 2020
2
Policy Statement:
The City of Framingham is committed to fostering, cultivating and preserving a culture of
diversity, equity and inclusion. The City values and celebrates the diversity of the community, 
recognizing the contributions from all of our employees and citizens. This has enriched the
character and quality of life in Framingham. Therefore, to best serve all residents, the
government of the City will promote, as well as respect and accommodate, diversity in its
workforce.
Policy Description:
This policy applies to all City department’s hiring managers when filling full-time, part-time, 
seasonal, or temporary positions. Employees whose positions are governed by collective
bargaining agreements are subject only to those portions of this policy that are not specifically
regulated by agreement. Positions governed by G.L. c. 31, the Civil Service Law, will be hired
pursuant to the requirements of the Civil Service Law.
The existence of this policy does not represent a “contract” for employment between the
employee and the City.
The goal of the City during the hiring process is to fill vacancies with the most diverse candidate
with the appropriate skill set and motivation available from all candidates. The City will adhere
to the principles of Affirmative Action and Equal Employment Opportunity. It is the City’s
policy to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act and all State and Federal laws in all
phases of the hiring process, including making reasonable accommodations.
1 | City of Framingham – Diversity in Hiring # 44
Page 2
Hiring managers will work with the Human Resources Department to advertise the vacant
position to intentionally attract a larger, more diverse pool of qualified candidates. The City will
actively seek a culturally and linguistically diverse candidate pool. It is the policy of the City of
Framingham not to discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of
age, race, color, religion, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, 
disability, or Veteran status.
The Human Resources Department, in conjunction with the hiring manager and division head, 
shall use both traditional and non-traditional sources and methods of recruiting applicants for
employment as may be deemed effective in affirming the City’s commitment to equal
employment opportunities for all individuals regardless of protected status. The City shall also
provide reasonable accommodations to job applicants with disabilities when necessary to enable
such applicants to complete the job application process, and if hired, to enable them to perform
the essential functions of the job. The Human Resources Department shall review job
descriptions and job postings to ensure that job specifications and qualification standards
accurately reflect essential requirements for the position. The Human Resources Department
shall ensure that all interviews and background investigations are conducted consistently and in
accordance with Federal and State laws, the City’s Discriminatory Harassment Policy, and other
applicable laws.
2 | City of Framingham – Diversity in Hiring # 44
