CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Compensatory Time for Exempt Employees
Policy Number: 6A
Policy Number: # 6A  Effective date: 
Revision Date: April 1, 2020  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New (x) Amendment ( )  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
September 13, 2013 
N/A
2
Policy Statement: 
Exempt Employees are not eligible for overtime according to the Fair Labor Standards Act. The
existence of this policy does not represent a “contract” for employment between the employee
and the City. Employees whose positions are governed by a Collective Bargaining agreement or
the Civil Service Statute of the Massachusetts General Laws are only subject to the portions of
this policy that are not specifically regulated by law or agreement. 
Policy Description: 
Compensatory time off may be granted to exempt positions. There is no legal requirement or
obligation by the City of Framingham to grant compensatory time off to exempt employees. A
division head/supervisor may choose to grant compensatory time off to exempt employees who
are required to work in excess of forty (40) hours per week for special projects, unusual/irregular
events or during weekends or any normally scheduled time off. Compensatory time will be
granted on an hour-for-hour basis. 
The Division/Department Heads must pre-approve time to be worked and must sign the
timesheet is authorizing the payroll department to grant compensatory time off to exempt
employees only. The supervisor’s approval of the employee’s timesheet will constitute the
granting of employee’s compensatory time. All employees should record the appropriate time
worked and time taken on the timesheet. Any employee earning compensatory time for
responding to an emergency must report nature of emergency and amount of compensatory time
earned at the start of the next scheduled work day or within twenty-four (24) hours of the
emergency, whichever is earliest. 
1 | City of Framingham – Compensatory Time for Exempt Employees # 6A
Page 2
An employee who has accrued compensatory time and requests use of the time must be
permitted to use the time off within three (3) months after making the request. Employees must
request approval to use comp time five (5) days prior to date requested off. Supervisors may
deny the request if the use of compensatory time will “unduly disrupt" the department's
operations. Supervisors can require an employee to take compensatory time off in order to
manage the accrual limitation. 
All compensatory time earned by exempt employees in any workweek must be taken during the
three-month period following the end of the workweek during which the compensatory time was
earned. Compensatory time must be used prior to using vacation or personal time. 
Compensatory time accrued is subject to an accrual limitation of thirty-seven and one half
(37.5) hours. Employees cannot accrue compensatory hours in excess of thirty-seven and one
half (37.5) in a three-month period. Compensatory time may not be carried over into the next
fiscal year without authorization of the Mayor. 
Compensatory time must be used in the fiscal year it was earned. All comp time will be cashed
out on June 1st of each calendar year. Any comp time earned in June must be used or cashed out
by July 31st of the following fiscal year. 
References: 
Fair Labor Standards Act and the Massachusetts Wage Act
2 | City of Framingham – Compensatory Time for Exempt Employees # 6A
