CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Personal Days
Policy Number: 18
Policy Number: # 18  Effective date: 
Revision Date: April 1, 2020  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New (x) Amendment ( )  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
January 1, 2005 
N/A
2
The existence of this policy does not represent a “contract” for employment between the
employee and the City of Framingham. 
Policy Statement: 
A. Each permanent non-represented full-time and part-time employee shall be granted two (2) 
personal days in each fiscal year in accordance with this policy. Personal time is paid at
straight time. 
B. Newly hired full-time regular employees shall be granted personal days according to the
following schedule: 
First Day of Employment: 
July 1 – December 31
January 1 – June 30 
Personal Days: 
2 days
1 day
C. Employees whose positions are governed by collective bargaining agreement are subject only
to those portions of this policy which are not specifically regulated by agreement. 
D. Personal days are for personal use without loss of pay. They are to be taken with prior
approval of the Department Head in order that the employee’s absence does not interfere
with the operation of the department. 
E. In cases where an employee overuses sick time, and there is no sick time available when an
employee calls in sick, personal time will be docked as paid absent time. If there is no
personal time available to dock, vacation time will be taken. 
1 | City of Framingham – Personal Days # 18
Page 2
F. Personal time may not be taken in increments less than two (2) hours. 
G. Personal time is not cumulative and must be used in the fiscal year in which it is granted. If
the personal time is not used within this prescribed time period, it is forfeited. 
H. Unused personal time will be paid out at separation of service from the City. 
I. Part-time employees who work on a schedule of twenty (20) hours per week or more but less
than the established weekly hours, will be eligible for personal days (prorated according to
schedule) as follows: 
First Day of Employment: 
July 1 – December 31
January 1 – June 30 
Personal Days: 
2 (part-time) days
1 (part-time) day
2 | City of Framingham – Personal Days # 18
