CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Covid-19 Temporary Vacation Policy
Policy Number: 45
Policy Number: # 45  Effective date: 
Revision Date: August 5, 2020  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New (x) Amendment ( )  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
August 7, 2020
N/A
3
Policy Statement: 
This is a temporary vacation policy related to the Covid-19 pandemic and may be updated from
time to time. This policy will be in effect until December 31, 2020. As we move through the re-
opening phases, during the summer vacation season, we are trying to anticipate ways to keep
employees safe. 
Policy Description: 
A number of states have issued travel restrictions. The situation is rapidly changing. For national
travel information, please visit [URL: "http://www.travel.state.gov/"] www.travel.state.gov. 
Currently, all travelers arriving to Massachusetts – including Massachusetts residents returning
home – are instructed to self-quarantine for 14 days, except that, beginning August 7, 2020, 
travelers from low risk states, currently Connecticut, Vermont, New Hampshire, Maine, New
York, and New Jersey, are exempt from this directive and need not self-quarantine for 14
days. In addition, workers designated by the federal government as essential critical
infrastructure workers are exempt from the directive to self-quarantine for 14 days if traveling to
Massachusetts for work purposes. All persons are instructed not to travel to Massachusetts if
they are displaying symptoms of Covid-19. 
Effective August 1, 2020, all visitors and returning residents entering Massachusetts must follow
new travel orders. The Commonwealth has made great progress to slow the spread of COVID-19
and gradually re-open the economy, and all visitors have a responsibility to help us keep
transmission levels as low as possible. 
1 | City of Framingham – Covid-19 Temporary Vacation Policy # 45
Page 2
All visitors entering Massachusetts, including returning residents, who do not meet an
exemption, are required to: 
•  Complete the [URL: "https://www.mass.gov/forms/massachusetts-travel-form"] Massachusetts Travel Form prior to arrival, unless you are visiting from a
lower-risk state designated by the [URL: "https://www.mass.gov/orgs/department-of-public-health"] Department of Public Health. 
•  Quarantine for 14 days or produce a negative COVID-19 test result that has been
administered up to 72-hours prior to your arrival in Massachusetts. 
If your COVID-19 test result has not been received prior to arrival, visitors, and residents must
quarantine until they receive a negative test result. 
Failure to comply may result in a $500 fine per day.
Please use the travel form on the state website. Here is the link: 
https://www.mass.gov/forms/massachusetts-travel-form
Please find more information on the state website, including updated lists of lower-risk states, 
exemptions, and other details. 
https://www.mass.gov/info-details/covid-19-travel-order
City of Framingham employees are encouraged not to travel to areas of the country that are
experiencing a spike in Covid-19 cases and not to travel outside of the United States. This
advisory is to keep you, your family, your co-workers and our residents safe. Should you travel
to an area of the country that is experiencing a spike in Covid-19 cases, or if you travel outside of
the United States, you are instructed to quarantine upon your return for 14 days. You may use
your accrued sick leave during the 14 day quarantine. If you test positive for Covid-19 which
you contracted during your travel you may be forced to quarantine or self-isolate. 
In addition, employees who take vacation leave whether within or out of Massachusetts must
conduct a self-assessment prior to returning to work. The self-assessment checklist is attached. 
Please review and report any symptoms to your supervisor and/or Human Resources. You should
also contact your personal physician advising him/her of your symptoms and your recent travel. 
In the event that you are ordered to quarantine upon your return, you may be eligible for leave
under the Family Friendly Coronavirus Relief Act (FFCRA) and should contact the Human
Resources Department for further information. 
2 | City of Framingham – Covid-19 Temporary Vacation Policy # 45
Page 3
3 | City of Framingham – Covid-19 Temporary Vacation Policy # 45 
