CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Equal Employment Opportunity
Policy Number: 40
Policy Number: # 40  Effective date: 
Revision Date: N/A  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New (x) Amendment ( )  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
November 1, 2019 
N/A
2
Policy Statement: 
The City of Framingham is an equal opportunity employer. In accordance with anti-
discrimination law, it is the purpose of this policy to effectuate these principles and mandates. 
The City of Framingham prohibits discrimination and harassment of any type and affords equal
employment opportunities to employees and applicants without regard to race, color, religion, 
age, sex, national origin, disability status, genetics, protected veteran status, sexual orientation, 
gender identity or expression, or any other characteristic protected by federal, state or local laws. 
Scope: 
The policy of equal employment opportunity (EEO) and anti-discrimination applies to all aspects
of the relationship between the City of Framingham and its employees, including: 
•  Recruitment
•  Employment
•  Promotion
•  Transfer
•  Training
•  Working Conditions
•  Wages and salary administration
•  Employee benefits and application of policies
1 | City of Framingham – Equal Employment Opportunity # 40
Page 2
The policies and principles of EEO also apply to the selection and treatment of independent
contractors, personnel working on our premises who are employed by temporary agencies and
any other persons or firms doing business for or with the City of Framingham. 
Dissemination and Implementation of Policy: 
The HR Director of the City of Framingham will be responsible for the dissemination of this
policy. Directors, managers and supervisors are responsible for implementing equal employment
practices within each department. The HR department is responsible for overall compliance and
will maintain personnel records in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
Procedures: 
The City of Framingham administers our EEO policy fairly and consistently by: 
•  Posting all required notices regarding employee rights under EEO laws in areas highly
visible to employees. 
•  Advertising for job openings with the statement "We are an equal opportunity employer
and all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability status, protected veteran status, or
any other characteristic protected by law."
•  Posting all required job openings with the appropriate state agencies. 
•  Forbidding retaliation against any individual who files a charge of discrimination, 
opposes a practice believed to be unlawful discrimination, reports harassment, or assists, 
testifies or participates in an EEO agency proceeding. 
•  Requires employees to report to a member of management, an HR representative or the
general counsel any apparent discrimination or harassment. The report should be made
within forty-eight (48) hours of the incident. 
Promptly notifies the general counsel of all incidents or reports of discrimination or harassment
and takes other appropriate measures to resolve the situation. 
Harassment: 
Harassment is a form of unlawful discrimination and violates the City of Framingham policy. 
Prohibited sexual harassment, for example, is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, request for
sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when: 
•  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of
an individual's employment. 
•  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
employment decisions affecting such individuals. 
•  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's
work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
2 | City of Framingham – Equal Employment Opportunity # 40
Page 3
Harassment also includes unwelcome conduct that is based on race, color, religion, age (40 or
older), sex, national origin, disability status, genetics, protected veteran status, sexual orientation, 
gender identity or expression, disability or genetic information or any other characteristic
protected by federal, state or local laws. 
Harassment becomes unlawful where: 
•  Enduring the offensive conduct becomes a condition of continued employment, or
•  The conduct is severe or pervasive enough to create a work environment that a reasonable
person would consider intimidating, hostile, or abusive. 
The City of Framingham encourages employees to report all incidents of harassment to a
member of management or the HR department. The City of Framingham conducts harassment
prevention training for all employees, and maintains and enforces a separate policy on
harassment prevention, complaint procedures and penalties for violations. The City of
Framingham investigates all complaints of harassment promptly and fairly, and, when
appropriate, takes immediate corrective action to stop the harassment and prevent it from
recurring. 
Remedies: 
Violations of this policy, regardless of whether an actual law has been violated, will not be
tolerated. The City of Framingham will promptly, thoroughly and fairly investigate every issue
that is brought to its attention in this area and will take disciplinary action, when appropriate, up
to and including termination of employment. 
3 | City of Framingham – Equal Employment Opportunity # 40
