CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
Policy Number: 1
Policy Number: # 1  Effective date: 
Revision Date: April 1, 2020  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New (x) Amendment ( )  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
January 1, 2005 
N/A
4
Policy Statement: 
It is unlawful to discriminate against qualified individuals on the basis of disability in any aspect
of employment in the City of Framingham. 
The existence of this policy does not represent a “contract” for employment between the
employee and the City. 
Policy Description: 
The City of Framingham provides an equal opportunity for individuals with disabilities to
participate in all aspects of employment. Under Title 1 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990, prohibiting discrimination in employment based on disability, a qualified person with a
disability is an individual with a disability who “satisfies the requisite skills, experience, 
education, and other job-related requirements for a job.” For the purposes of the ADA, a
“disability” is defined as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
major life activities. Temporary injuries, such as broken bones or sprains, usually do not qualify
as disabilities. 
It is the policy of the City of Framingham to base candidate evaluations on the individual
applicant’s qualifications to perform the essential functions of a particular job. The “essential
functions” of a job are those tasks listed in the job postings and job descriptions and are
generally the tasks that comprise the majority of the time in performing that job. All other pre-
employment as well as employment information and inquiries shall be related to the performance
of essential job functions as outlined in the City’s job descriptions and will be conducted on the
basis of conditional or final offer of employment, and be kept confidential. 
1 | City of Framingham – Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) # 1
Page 2
The City will maintain accurate and detailed occupational requirements for all positions. These
requirements will be included in the job posting and job description. It is the responsibility of the
individual to request an accommodation. If an individual applicant or employee believes that he
or she is entitled to a reasonable accommodation, it is his or her responsibility to request an
accommodation through the Director of Human Resources. A reasonable accommodation will be
made for an otherwise qualified individual to the extent that such accommodation will permit the
individual to perform the essential functions of the job, unless such accommodation will impose
undue hardship on the City. Those employees or applicants who do not meet the qualifications or
requirements for the job will not be provided an accommodation. 
Applicants and employees should note that under the ADA, the City is not required to provide an
individual with his or her choice of accommodation and may exercise discretion in choosing a
reasonable accommodation. The City will engage in an interactive process with the individual to
identify potential accommodations. The Department Head will work with the Director of Human
Resources to examine the job involved, determine the essential functions, evaluate the disability
and determine which, if any, accommodations could be made. Any employee wanting to request
an accommodation should meet with the Director of Human Resources. The final determination
of the reasonableness, approval or denial of any accommodation will be made by the Mayor or
his/her designee. 
If anyone feels that the City of Framingham has violated the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 and this policy, the grievance procedure may be utilized to seek resolution. 
2 | City of Framingham – Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) # 1
Page 3
CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA) GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Employees whose positions are governed by Civil Service Law or collective bargaining
agreement are subject only to those portions of this policy that are not specifically regulated by
law or agreement. 
Purpose: 
The following Grievance Procedure is established to meet the requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA). It may be used by anyone who wishes to file a complaint alleging
discrimination on the basis of disability in employment practices and policies or the provision of
services, activities, programs and benefits by the City of Framingham. 
Scope: 
This is the internal procedure for dealing with complaints rapidly, discreetly and directly, if
possible. 
How to File a Complaint: 
The complaint should be in writing and contain information about the alleged discrimination
such as name, address, phone number of the complainant and location, date, and description of
the problem. Reasonable accommodations, such as personal interviews or a tape recording of the
complaint, will be made available for persons with disabilities who are unable to submit a written
complaint. Complaints will be treated with confidentiality. 
The complaint should be submitted by the grievant and/or his/her designee as soon as possible, 
but no later than sixty (60) calendar days after the alleged violation. 
Complaints related to City employment practices and policies, excluding the School Department
practices and policies, should be submitted to: 
Dolores Hamilton, Human Resources Director
Human Resources Department, Room B-7
Memorial Building, 150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
Voice (508) 532-5490
TTY (508) 620-4851
Other complaints should be submitted to: 
ADA Coordinator
Memorial Building, 150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
3 | City of Framingham – Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) # 1
Page 4
Voice (508) 620-4806
TTY (508) 620-4851
Resolution of a Complaint: 
Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the complaint, the complaint receiver will meet with the
complainant to discuss the complaint and possible resolutions. Technical assistance may be
sought from members of the Disabilities Commission. Within fifteen (15) days after the meeting, 
the complaint receiver will respond in writing and, when appropriate, in a format accessible to
the complainant such as audiotape or Braille. The response will explain the position of the City
of Framingham and offer options for substantive resolution of the complaint. These deadlines
may be waived by mutual agreement. 
Appeal: 
If the response by the complaint receiver does not satisfactorily resolve the issue, the
complainant and/or his/her designee may appeal that decision within fifteen (15) calendar days
after receipt of the response. The Division Head, Chief Operating Officer, Director of Human
Resources, and/or ADA Coordinator will serve as the appeal body for all complaints. 
Within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the appeal, the appeal body or its designee will
meet with the complainant to discuss the complaint and possible resolutions. Within fifteen (15) 
calendar days after the meeting, the appeal body or its designee will respond in writing and, 
when appropriate, in a format accessible to the complainant such as audiotape or Braille, with a
final resolution of the complaint. These deadlines may be waived by mutual agreement. 
Records of Complaints: 
All complaints received by the City appeal body will be kept by the City of Framingham for at
least three (3) years. 
4 | City of Framingham – Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) # 1
