CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Compensatory Time for Non-Exempt Employees
Policy Number: 6
Policy Number: # 6  Effective date: 
Revision Date: January 1, 2014  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New (x) Amendment ( )  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
September 3, 2019 
N/A
2
Policy Statement: 
Employees whose positions are governed by collective bargaining agreement or Civil Service
Statute are subject only to those portions of this policy that are not specifically regulated by law
or agreement. 
This policy shall apply to all City of Framingham full-time regular employees. 
The existence of this policy does not represent a “contract” for employment between the
employee and the City. 
Policy Description: 
•  Compensatory time is authorized in those instances when the employee is not entitled to
overtime pay or elects to not be paid for work performed in excess of the employees’ 
normal workweek in accordance with the provisions of the U.S. Fair Labor Standards
Act. 
•  Compensatory time is not an entitlement and is only given with the authorization of the
direct supervisor and the agreement of the employee. 
•  For hours required to be worked* in excess of thirty-seven and one half (37.5) up to forty
(40), compensatory time will be allowed at the employee’s option at the rate of one (1) 
hour compensatory time for one (1) hour of required work. 
•  For hours required to be worked* in excess of forty (40) per week, compensatory time
will be allowed at the employee’s option at the rate of one and one half (1.5) hours
compensatory time for one (1) hour of required work. 
1 | City of Framingham – Compensatory Time for Non-Exempt Employees # 6
Page 2
Calculation example: 
Employee works 42 hours = 4.5 comp hours = 2.5 hours straight time
Total hours worked over 40 = 2.0 hours x 1.5 = 3 hours 
Total compensation hours = 2.5 + 3 hours = 5.5 hours
•  Using the Compensatory Time Authorization Form, track and record the project being
completed and the estimated number of hours being accrued. Keep a copy of the form
and forward a copy to the Human Resources Department with the department payroll
paperwork. Accrued compensatory time will be tracked both in the HR Department and
the employee’s department. 
•  Use of any accrued compensatory time must be requested via the usage of a City of
Framingham Time Usage Request Form and should be requested five (5) days in advance
of the designated date and will be granted or denied based on staffing and workload
levels. 
•  Compensatory time used within a workweek will not be counted towards time worked in
computing overtime hours. It is not considered “time worked”.
•  Existence of this policy does not imply the automatic authorization of compensatory
time. It is ultimately the decision of your direct supervisor as to whether or not you or
your department is eligible to accrue compensatory time. 
•  Compensatory time must be used within three (3) work months of completion of a
project. If it is not used within this time period, the time will be cashed out. 
•  All compensatory time must be used by June 30th of each fiscal year or it will be cashed
out in the first paycheck after July 1st of each fiscal year. 
•  All time worked outside of the workday must be documented and authorized. 
•  Maximum accrual of compensatory is thirty-seven and one half (37.5) hours at any given
time. 
•  Seasonal employees are not eligible for compensatory time. Employees whose service is
governed by civil service law or collective bargaining agreement are subject only to those
portions of this policy, which are not specifically regulated by law or agreement. 
*Holiday pay, sick, vacation or personal leave pay taken within a pay period is not considered
time worked. In a week where one (1) sick, vacation or personal day was paid, compensatory
time will not accrue at time and one half until after forty (40) hours. It will accrue at straight
time. 
2 | City of Framingham – Compensatory Time for Non-Exempt Employees # 6
