CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Alcohol and Drug
Policy Number: 34
Policy Number: # 34  Effective date: 
Revision Date: July 1, 2020  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New ( ) Amendment (x)  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
April 1, 2006
April 1, 2006 
8
Policy Statement: 
The City of Framingham has a strong commitment to its employees to provide a safe work place
and to establish programs promoting high standards of employee health. Consistent with the
spirit and intent of this commitment, the City of Framingham has established this policy
regarding drug and alcohol use or abuse. Our goal will continue to be one of establishing and
maintaining a work environment that is safe and free from the effects of alcohol and drug use. 
While the City has no intention of intruding into the private lives of its employees, the City does
expect employees to report for work in condition to perform their duties. The City recognizes
that employee off-the-job involvement with drugs and alcohol can have an impact on the work
place and on our ability to accomplish our goal of an alcohol and drug-free environment. 
Policy Description: 
A. General: 
1. The illegal use, sale or possession of narcotics, drugs, or controlled substances while on
the job or on City property is an offense warranting discharge. Any illegal substances will
be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
2. Employees who are under the influence of alcohol or narcotics, drugs or controlled
substances, either on the job or when reporting for work, or who possess or consume
alcohol or drugs during work hours have the potential for interfering with their own, as
well as their co-workers’ safe and efficient job performance. Consistent with existing
1 | City of Framingham – Alcohol and Drug # 34
Page 2
City of Framingham policies and practices, such conditions will be proper cause for
administrative action up to and including termination of employment. 
3. Off-the-job illegal drug activity which could adversely affect an employee’s job
performance or which could jeopardize the safety of other employees, the public, or City
property or equipment is proper cause for administrative or disciplinary action up to and
including termination of employment as additionally provided for in the Omnibus
Transportation Act of 1991. In deciding what action to take, management will take into
consideration the nature of the charges, the employee’s present job assignment, the
employee’s record with the City and other factors relative to the impact of the employee’s
arrest upon the conduct of City business. 
4. Some of the drugs which are illegal under federal, state or local laws include, among
others, marijuana, heroin, hashish, cocaine, hallucinogens and/or depressants not
prescribed for current personal treatment by a licensed physician. 
5. Employees are expected to follow any directions of their health care provider concerning
prescription medications, and must immediately notify their supervisor if any prescription
drug is likely to have an impact on job performance and safety. In addition, notification
must be given at the time of any testing or screening as to any drugs or medicine being
taken. 
6. Any employee, while on City property or during that employee’s work shift who
consumes or uses, or is found to have in his or her personal possession, in his/her locker
or desk or other such repository, alcohol or drugs which are not medically authorized or
is found to have used or to be using such alcohol or drugs, will be suspended
immediately, without pay, pending further investigation. If use or possession is
substantiated, disciplinary action, up to and including discharge, will be imposed. Second
violations will result in discharge. 
7. Any employee who voluntarily requests assistance in dealing with a personal drug
addiction or alcohol problem may participate in the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) 
without jeopardizing his or her continued employment with the City of Framingham. 
Because the program is being offered confidentially, an employee may utilize the
program without the City’s knowledge. If an employee chooses to notify the City or
request assistance from the City regarding an alcohol or drug problem, that notice or
request will not jeopardize his or her continued employment, provided the employee
stops any and all involvement with the substance being abused, and maintains adequate
job performance. While the EAP is a valuable source in dealing with personal problems, 
participation in the program will not prevent disciplinary action for a violation of this
policy. 
8. This statement is to clarify the City of Framingham’s operational stance and to provide
for prompt effective reaction to any alcohol or drug related situation which has or could
have any impact on operations. It does not alter in any way the policy of assisting
2 | City of Framingham – Alcohol and Drug # 34
Page 3
employees in securing proper treatment or extending the coverage of the health benefits
plan as indicated for problem drinking, alcoholism, or other drug dependencies. 
B. Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991: Testing for Drugs and
Alcohol
It is the policy of the City of Framingham to comply fully with the Rules issued by the US
Department of Transportation under the 1991 Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act
dealing with limitations on alcohol and drug use by transportation workers, drug and alcohol
testing of such workers and the reporting/record-keeping requirements relative to such
testing. The Rules found in 49 C.F.R. s382.100 et seq. apply to all interstate and intrastate
truck and motor coach operators, including, but not limited to school bus drivers and all City
employees with commercial driver’s licenses. 
The following conduct is prohibited: 
•  Reporting for duty or remaining on duty requiring the performance of safety-sensitive
functions with a breath/blood alcohol content of 0.04 percent (or higher) 
•  Use of alcohol within the four (4) hours prior to performing a safety-sensitive
function like driving
•  Use of alcohol on the job
•  Use of alcohol during the eight (8) hours following an accident or until tested
•  Possession of any medication or food containing alcohol while driving a vehicle
•  Refusal to take a required test
•  Use of controlled substances on or off duty unless a doctor has prescribed the
controlled substance and the doctor has informed the employee that the substance
does not adversely affect the employee’s ability to operate a vehicle safely and
provided that the employee is using the medication as prescribed and is not misusing
the substance
C. Procedures: Alcohol and Drug Testing Pursuant to 49 C.F.R. s382.100 et seq. 
Types of Tests. The following tests are required: 
1. Pre-Placement Testing for Controlled Substances and Alcohol: All applicants for
employment in covered positions, or candidates for transfer or promotion to such
positions, as well as those covered employees returning from layoff, are subject to
screening for use of alcohol or controlled substances. All applicants who test positive for
either drugs or alcohol will not be offered employment, promoted or returned to service
with the City of Framingham. 
2. Post-Accident: All covered employees shall be tested for alcohol and drugs after an
accident under the following conditions: When the accident has involved a fatality; or
when the accident has resulted in an injury to any party involved in the accident that
requires immediate treatment away from the scene of the accident; when the accident
results in a citation being issued to the employee, when the accident caused significant
3 | City of Framingham – Alcohol and Drug # 34
Page 4
property damage, or when the circumstances preceding the occurrence of an accident are
inexplicable to a supervisor. 
Tests for alcohol use should be conducted within two (2) hours, but in no case more than
eight (8) hours since the accident, while tests for controlled substances shall be conducted
within thirty-two (32) hours of the accident. Employees must refrain from all alcohol and
controlled substance use until the tests are complete. Employees are obligated to
cooperate in such testing or will be deemed to have refused to take the test and will be
treated as a positive test result. It is the employee’s responsibility to make him/herself
available for testing. 
Generally, the employee will be accompanied to/from the testing site by a City of
Framingham employee/supervisor. If the employee tests positive on the alcohol test, 
he/she is not allowed to drive back home or to the workplace. If not accompanied by a
City of Framingham employee or supervisor, the employee shall call, or have called for
him/her, a supervisor to arrange for transportation. The employee will immediately
suspended without pay until further action is taken in accordance with this policy. 
3. Reasonable Suspicion: An employee shall be tested when a supervisor or manager
observes behavior, speech, appearance or odor that leads to a reasonable suspicion that
the employee has violated Numbers 1-7 of Section II of the guidelines or has been or is
using controlled substances without a doctor’s prescription. In the case of alcohol use, the
observation shall be made during, preceding or after the workday. No such limitations are
placed on observations for impermissible use of controlled substances. Tests for alcohol
use shall be conducted within two (2) hours, but in no case more than eight (8) hours, 
after the observation is made. If a test cannot be administered, the driver must be
removed from performing safety sensitive duties for at least 24 hours. 
4. Random: Employees shall be tested for the use of alcohol and controlled substances on a
random, unannounced basis just before, during or after performance of safety sensitive
functions for alcohol or at any time for controlled substances. Each year, the number of
random alcohol tests conducted by the City must equal at least 25% of all the covered
employees. Random drug tests conducted by the City must equal at least 50% of all
covered employees. 
5. Return to Duty and Follow-Up: An employee who has violated the prohibited alcohol or
drug standards shall be tested for alcohol and/or drug use prior to his/her return to
performing safety sensitive duties. Follow-up tests are unannounced and at least six (6) 
tests must be conducted in the first twelve (12) months after an employee returns to duty. 
The City of Framingham agrees to bear the expense of the six (6) follow-up tests. Follow-
up testing may be extended for up to sixty (60) months following the return to duty. 
D. Conducting Tests: 
1. Alcohol: Department of Transportation (DOT) rules require breath testing using
evidential breath- testing (EBT) devices. Two breath tests are required to determine if a
person has a prohibited alcohol concentration. A screening test is conducted first. Any
4 | City of Framingham – Alcohol and Drug # 34
Page 5
result less than 0.02 alcohol concentration is considered a “negative” test. If the alcohol
concentration is 0.02 or greater, a confirmation test must be conducted. Refusal of an
employee to complete and sign the breath alcohol testing form shall be deemed to be a
refusal to test. In addition, blood alcohol testing can be used in reasonable suspicion and
post-accident testing where an evidentiary breath testing device is not available or where
an employee is not capable of producing adequate breath. 
2. Drugs: Drug testing is conducted by analyzing an employee’s urine specimen, and must
be conducted through a U.S. Department of Health and Human Services certified facility. 
Specimen collection procedures and chair of custody requirements ensure that the
specimen’s security, proper identification and integrity are not compromised. DOT rules
require a split specimen procedure. Each urine specimen is subdivided into two bottles
labeled as primary and split. Both bottles are sent to the laboratory. Initially, only the
primary specimen is opened and used for the urinalysis. The split specimen remains
sealed at the laboratory. If the analysis of the primary specimen confirms the presence of
illegal controlled substances, the driver has seventy-two (72) hours to request that the
split specimen be sent to another DHHS certified laboratory for analysis. 
Testing is conducted using a two-stage process. First, a screening test is performed. If the
test is positive for one or more of the drugs, a confirmation test is performed for each
identified drug. Sophisticated testing requirements ensure that over-the-counter
medications or preparations are not reported as positive results. 
All drug tests are reviewed and interpreted by a physician designated as a Medical
Review Officer (MRO) before they are reported to the employer. If the laboratory reports
a positive result to the MRO, the MRO will contact the employee and conduct an
interview to determine if there is an alternative medical explanation for the drugs found
in the urine specimen. For all the drugs listed above, except PCP, there are some limited, 
legitimate medical uses that may explain a positive test result. If the MRO determines
that the drug use is legitimate, the test will be reported to the City as a negative result. 
3. Refusal to Participate/Tampering: Any refusal to participate in any of the types of alcohol
and/or drug tests authorized in this policy will be treated as indicative of a positive result. 
If there is any evidence that an employee engaged in sample tampering, such conduct
shall be treated as a refusal t participate in testing for purposes of imposing discipline. 
E. Consequences of Alcohol/Drug Misuse: 
1. Safety-sensitive employees/Drivers who have an alcohol concentration defined between
0.02 and 0.04 who tested just before, during, or just after performing safety-sensitive
functions must be removed from performing such duties for twenty-four (24) hours and
will be suspended without pay for any lost work time. Employees of the City, in any
capacity, who test positive for alcohol during work time, will also be suspended without
pay until further action is taken. All will be required to be evaluated by a substance abuse
professional and comply with any treatment recommendations to assist them with an
5 | City of Framingham – Alcohol and Drug # 34
Page 6
alcohol or drug problem. Employees may be placed on non-occupational sick leave or
leave without pay during the treatment period. Once a treatment program has been
successfully completed, and/or the employee is cleared to return to duty by the treatment
program, he/she must be tested for alcohol prior to return and placed in the continued
testing program as outlined by this policy. 
Drivers/Safety Sensitive employees as well as all other City employees, who test positive
for alcohol (any level of concentration, at the second offense is considered a positive) a
second time shall be terminated from employment with the City of Framingham. (See #2
below) This second positive may be either alcohol or drug induced. A second
positive of any kind is grounds for termination. 
2. Drivers who have an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or greater, must be immediately
removed from safety-sensitive functions and will be suspended without pay until further
action is taken in accordance with this policy. 
Employees, including drivers, who wish to continue employment with the City of
Framingham must be evaluated by a substance abuse professional and comply with any
treatment recommendations to assist them with an alcohol or drug problem. Employees
may be placed on non-occupational sick leave or leave without pay status during the
treatment period. 
Employees, including drivers, who have been evaluated by a substance abuse
professional, who comply with any recommended treatment, who have taken a return to
duty test with a result less than 0.02, and who are then subject to unannounced follow-up
tests may return to work. 
Said employees will be subject to random alcohol testing for a minimum period of
one year. 
Employees, including drivers, who have returned to work under these conditions and who
subsequently test positive for alcohol or drugs in accordance with this policy will be
terminated from employment with the City of Framingham. Any level of concentration, 
at the second offense is considered a positive. This second positive may be either
alcohol or drug induced. A second positive of any kind is grounds for termination. 
3. Prohibited alcohol and drug conduct shall also include using alcohol or having an open
container inside a City vehicle. Said conduct shall constitute just cause for disciplinary
action up to and including termination of employment with the City of Framingham. 
4. Any employee, including drivers, who have tested positive for drug use will be
suspended without pay until further action is taken in accordance with this policy. Said
employee, who wishes to continue employment with the City of Framingham, must be
evaluated by a substance abuse professional and comply with any treatment
recommendations to assist them with a drug problem. The payment for any recommended
treatment will be strictly at the expense of the employee (or his/her health insurance
6 | City of Framingham – Alcohol and Drug # 34
Page 7
program, if applicable). Employees may be placed on non-occupational sick leave or
leave without pay status during the treatment period. 
Employees, including drivers who have been evaluated by a substance abuse
professional, who comply with any recommended treatment, and have taken a return to
duty test with a negative result, will be subject to unannounced follow-up tests for a
minimum of one year following the date after which they return to work. 
Said employees will be subject to random drug testing for a minimum period of one
year. 
Employees, including drivers, who have returned to work under these conditions
and who subsequently test positive for drugs, or alcohol (being a second positive test
result, in accordance with this policy will be terminated from employment with the
City of Framingham. 
F. Information/Training: 
1. All current and new employees will receive written information about the testing
requirements and how and where they may receive assistance for alcohol or drug misuse. 
All employees must receive a copy of this policy and sign the Confirmation of Receipt
(Attachment 1).
2. All supervisory and management personnel in the Departments of Public Works, Parks
and Recreation, and the Fire and Police Department’s Deputy Chiefs must attend at least
two hours, total, of training on alcohol and drug misuse symptoms and indicators used in
making determinations for reasonable suspicion testing. 
G. Record Keeping: 
1. The City is required to keep detailed records of its alcohol and drug misuse prevention
program. 
2. Employee alcohol and drug testing records are confidential. Test results and other
confidential information may only be released to the employer, the employee, the
substance abuse professional, the MRO, and any arbitrator of a grievance filed in
accordance with this policy. Any other release of this information may only be made with
the employee’s consent. 
H. Pre-Employment References: 
1. The City must obtain and review the following information from each employer that the
prospective driver worked for, in a safety-sensitive position, during the previous two
years; information about a test in which the employee’s blood alcohol was 0.04 or
greater; information about a positive drug test; and information about any refusal to
participate in the alcohol and drug testing program. 
7 | City of Framingham – Alcohol and Drug # 34
Page 8
2. The prospective employee must provide the former employer with a written release
allowing the release of this information or he/she may not be hired. 
3. If the previous employer indicates that a positive result was received, or that the
employee refused to participate when selected for an alcohol or drug test, the applicant
my not be appointed unless he/she has consulted with a substance abuse professional, 
received recommended treatment, and tested negative in a return-to-duty test series. 
4. The City of Framingham must provide the same information to subsequent employers of
current/former City employees when provided with a written release. 
I. Questions: 
Questions about this policy should be referred to the employee’s Division Supervisor, 
Department Head, and/or the Human Resource Department. 
8 | City of Framingham – Alcohol and Drug # 34
