CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Sick Leave
Policy Number: 20
Policy Number: # 20  Effective date: 
Revision Date: April 1, 2020  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New (x) Amendment ( )  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
March 12, 2015 
N/A
3
Policy Statement: 
Employees whose positions are governed by Civil Service Law or collective bargaining
agreement are subject only to those portions of this policy that are not specifically regulated by
law or agreement. 
The existence of this policy does not represent a “contract” for employment between the
employee and the City. 
Policy Description: 
Any regular full-time employee, following completion of his/her first calendar month of service, 
shall be eligible for sick leave at the rate of one and one quarter (1¼) days for each calendar
month of employment. Regular part-time employees shall accrue sick leave on a prorated basis, 
in the ratio that their part-time employment bear to full-time employment. Said sick leave may be
accumulated without limit. Upon regular retirement, unused sick leave may be reimbursed in
accordance with the City of Framingham’s Sick Leave Buy Back Policy. 
All non-bargaining staff may elect to donate two sick days to the non-bargaining sick bank (if
they elect to participate). These days will be taken from each employee’s accrual upon the
completion of their six-month introductory period, and the sick bank will be maintained in
accordance with the Sick Bank Policy. Enrollment into this benefit is optional and can only be
elected at point of eligibility or hire. Participation in the sick leave bank may only be utilized by
those employees who have elected to donate time and enrolled as a participant. 
1 | City of Framingham – Sick Leave # 20
Page 2
Sick leave shall be used only for personal injury or illness, and medical, dental and optical
appointments with advanced approval. A physician’s statement may be required to attest to said
illness or injury or appointment. 
Absence due the illness of a member of the immediate household, which necessitates the absence
of the employee, may be granted under this policy up to three days annually. A Department Head
may require a physician’s statement attesting to the illness of the member of the household. 
If an employee is to be absent by sickness or injury, he/she shall so notify his/her Department
Head no less than thirty (30) minutes prior to the start of the workday unless otherwise directed
by the Department Head. 
Failure to notify the Department Head shall be grounds for denial of sick leave, and the absence
shall become unexcused absence. In this case, the non-work day will become an unpaid day and
the employee may be subject to disciplinary action. 
An employee will not accrue sick leave benefits for any calendar month in which he/she was on
leave without pay, absent without pay, on worker’s compensation for more than five (5) days. 
Should absence for sick leave be three (3) or more consecutive workdays, the employee shall be
required to submit a doctor’s certificate upon his/her return to work. 
In the case where a Department Head has reason to believe that an employee is abusing sick
leave, the Department Head shall require the employee to provide verification of illness from a
physician. Any employee who does not provide such documentation, when requested, within five
(5) working days, shall be denied payment for the absent days in question and may be subject to
disciplinary action. 
An employee who uses no sick leave in his/her anniversary year (based upon date of hire) shall
accrue five (5) extra sick leave days for that year (or twenty (20) sick leave days for that
anniversary year).
An employee who exhausts their sick leave shall be docked personal and/or vacation time by the
number of hours that exceeded the available sick time. This action shall be automatic. If there is
no vacation or personal time accrued, the days will be unpaid. 
In order to ensure fitness to perform the essential functions of their positions, employees may be
required to submit medical verification of their current ability to perform their essential job
functions upon return to work following use of sick leave in excess of ten (10) consecutive work
days, or after hospitalization or surgery. 
Sick time use will be tracked by Department Heads and will be kept on file in the Human
Resource Department and incorporated into the payroll process. 
A position will be kept open for twelve (12) weeks while the employee is out on sick leave. 
Return to the same position, after twelve (12) weeks, will be allowed only with the approval of
2 | City of Framingham – Sick Leave # 20
Page 3
the Mayor or his/her designee. Placement in a similar position may be considered in accordance
with Federal and/or State Law. 
An employee who is terminated, in good standing, as a result of abolishment of his/her position
and subsequently is rehired to a position eligible for sick leave within six (6) months from the
date of termination will be credited with his/her unused sick leave. Such unused sick leave will
be restored after completion of a six (6) month introductory period. 
3 | City of Framingham – Sick Leave # 20
