CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
Sick Leave Bank
Policy Number: 22
Policy Number: # 22  Effective date: 
Revision Date: April 1, 2020  Supersedes: 
Type of policy: New (x) Amendment ( )  Total Pages: 
Level: Department ( ) Division ( ) City Wide (x) 
May 11, 2005 
N/A
3
Policy Statement: 
The existence of this policy does not represent a “contract” for employment between the
employee and the City. 
Employees whose positions are governed by collective bargaining agreement or Civil Service
Statute are subject only to those portions of this policy that are not specifically regulated by law
or agreement. 
The existence of this policy does not represent a short-term or long-term disability benefit for the
employee. Enrollment in the bank does not guarantee any grant of sick leave time, and sick leave
time will be granted according to the provisions herein. 
Policy Description: 
The Sick Bank is available to those employees who are eligible to accrue sick leave in
accordance with the Sick Leave Policy. Each eligible employee, who has elected to join the Sick
Bank, must donate two (2) sick days to the non-bargaining sick bank. These days are taken from
each employee’s accrual upon the completion of their six-month introductory/probationary
period. Any new employee may not draw from the Sick Bank until this time has been donated or
after six (6) months of continuous employment is completed. An authorization/participation form
must be filled out during employee orientation at the hire date. An employee may only join the
Sick Bank within their first thirty (30) days of employment. Beyond that period, enrollment is
closed. 
1 | City of Framingham – Sick Leave Bank # 22
Page 2
This bank of time shall be tracked and maintained by the Payroll Department. If the Bank falls
below one hundred (100) sick leave days, it shall be replenished by the contribution of one (1) 
additional day of sick leave by each eligible employee. Notification will be made to all
participating employees if this becomes necessary. This time will be taken from each employee’s
accumulated sick leave. If a participating employee does not have any time available, the time
will be taken from the next deposit of hours into that employee’s leave bank. 
An employee who retires, terminates or otherwise leaves the employ of the City of Framingham
and who has accrued sick days at the time of the said severance from employment, may donate
such accrued sick leave days to the Sick Leave Bank up to a maximum of ten (10) days plus one
(1) sick leave day for each year of the employee’s service with the City. Sick leave hours may
not be donated to an individual, only to the Sick Bank. 
The Sick Leave Bank shall be administered by a Sick Leave Bank Committee. The Committee
shall consist of three (3) members. These members shall be the Mayor or his/her designee, the
Director of Human Resources and the Director of the Parks and Recreation Department. This
Committee may only convene when needed or when a petition for time has been made to the
Bank and as many times thereafter required to settle the request. Minutes will be taken at each
meeting and made available to each member of Committee and kept on file in the Human
Resource Department. 
Any employee wishing to request leave time from the Bank must present the request in written
form and submit it with medical documentation regarding the requirements for their absence. A
doctor’s note explaining the illness, the day on which the absence will commence and a probable
return date must be included in the medical documentation. The Committee will review the
request, the employees’ attendance history and any other information deemed relevant. After
discussion on the topic and a review of all relevant documents, a decision is made by majority
vote. The employee will be notified in writing of the Committee’s decision. If granted, the leave
time will be deposited into the employee’s leave bank via the Human Resource Department. The
employee’s department will also be notified. If the Committee votes to deny the request, the
employee may appeal the decision. An appeal is made in writing to the Director of Human
Resources. The full Committee must meet to hear the appeal, reconsider and decide by majority
vote. Only one (1) appeal per request for Sick Leave Bank benefits may be made by an
employee. The decision of the Committee upon the appeal is final and binding. 
An employee may be granted up to a maximum of sixty (60) sick leave days per anniversary year
from the Sick Leave Bank. If an employee is granted less than sixty (60) days and requires an
extension of leave benefits, he or she may request an extension of benefits from the Sick Leave
Bank via the same process used to make the initial request. The Committee will convene to
review the documentation and rule on the extension request. Members must exhaust all accrued
sick leave before drawing from the Bank. 
Serious illness shall be defined as one which, diagnosed by a physician, will result in an
employee’s absence from work for a minimum of twenty (20) working days. A second opinion, 
by a physician designated by the Sick Leave Bank Committee, may be required. A physician’s
statement is required for all requests. 
2 | City of Framingham – Sick Leave Bank # 22
Page 3
The available sick bank balance shall be considered as having collective value to all employees
and shall be treated so by the Sick Bank Committee. The employee’s leave records will be
examined as part of the decision making process. A record of excess leave use over the course of
the employee’s employment, will be taken into consideration by the Committee. This will not
reflect favorably on the decision and may result in ineligibility of sick leave bank benefits. If
there are extenuating circumstances surrounding the employee’s attendance history, the
employee should present them with their petition for time. 
The Committee may, as part of its decision, grant sick leave from the bank with the
understanding that the employee will return the “borrowed” time to the bank from subsequent
sick leave accruals. This will be an option offered by the Committee and may or may not be
accepted by the employee. A mutually agreed upon payback schedule will be designed and
implemented upon acceptance. 
References: 
A Sick Leave Bank was established for non-bargaining personnel by the Personnel Board
effective February 1, 1983 and amended on February 12, 1986 and on July 6, 1994. 
3 | City of Framingham – Sick Leave Bank # 22
