BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods/Aims
  Conclusion
Introduction
Methods
  Recruitment
  Inclusion criteria
  Exclusion criteria
  Food Allergy related Quality of Life Questionnaires-(FAQLQ)
  Non-Responder Questionnaire (NRQ)
  Single dose Oral Food Challenge (OFC)
  Criteria for a positive OFC result
  Blood test
  Sample size estimation
  Ethics/Patient safety
Discussion
Conclusion
Additional files
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Authors’ information
Acknowledgement
Author details
References
Page 1
Zurzolo et al. Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2013, 9:35
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/9/1/35  ALLERGY, ASTHMA & CLINICAL
IMMUNOLOGY
RESEARCH  Open Access
Peanut Allergen Threshold Study (PATS):
validation of eliciting doses using a novel
single-dose challenge protocol
Giovanni A Zurzolo1,2, Katrina J Allen1,3,4, Steve L Taylor5, Wayne G Shreffler6, Joseph L Baumert5,
Mimi L K Tang1,3,4, Lyle C Gurrin7, Michael L Mathai2, Julie A Nordlee5, Audrey DunnGalvin8
and Jonathan O’B Hourihane8*
Abstract
Background: The eliciting dose (ED) for a peanut allergic reaction in 5% of the peanut allergic population, the
ED05, is 1.5 mg of peanut protein. This ED05 was derived from oral food challenges (OFC) that use graded,
incremental doses administered at fixed time intervals. Individual patients’ threshold doses were used to generate
population dose-distribution curves using probability distributions from which the ED05 was then determined. It is
important to clinically validate that this dose is predictive of the allergenic response in a further unselected group
of peanut-allergic individuals.
Methods/Aims: This is a multi-centre study involving three national level referral and teaching centres.
(Cork University Hospital, Ireland, Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne, Australia and Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, U.S.A.) The study is now in process and will continue to run until all centres have recruited 125 participates
in each respective centre.
A total of 375 participants, aged 1–18 years will be recruited during routine Allergy appointments in the centres.
The aim is to assess the precision of the predicted ED05 using a single dose (6 mg peanut = 1.5 mg of peanut
protein) in the form of a cookie. Validated Food Allergy related Quality of Life Questionnaires-(FAQLQ) will be
self-administered prior to OFC and 1 month after challenge to assess the impact of a single dose OFC on FAQL.
Serological and cell based in vitro studies will be performed.
Conclusion: The validation of the ED05 threshold for allergic reactions in peanut allergic subjects has potential
value for public health measures. The single dose OFC, based upon the statistical dose-distribution analysis of past
challenge trials, promises an efficient approach to identify the most highly sensitive patients within any given
food-allergic population.
Keywords: Eliciting dose (ED), Food Allergy related Quality of Life Questionnaires-(FAQLQ), Single dose, Peanut
thresholds, Oral Food Challenges (OFC), Voluntary Incidental Trace Allergen Labelling (VITAL), Peanut Allergen
Threshold Study (PATS)
Introduction
The eliciting dose (ED) for a peanut allergic reaction in
5% of the peanut allergic population (ED05) has been es-
timated at 1.5 mg of peanut protein. This ED05 estimate
was derived from the statistical dose- distribution of pea-
nut allergic individuals (children and adults).  All
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:J.Hourihane@ucc.ie"] J.Hourihane@ucc.ie
8Paediatrics and Child Health, University College, Cork, Ireland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
individuals participated in oral food challenge (OFC)
protocols that use graded, incremental doses adminis-
tered at short, fixed time intervals, as shown in Figure 1,
with a strong, monotonic relationship between dose and
the proportion of study participants reacting at each ac-
tual or extrapolated dose [1]. It is not always possible to
determine whether a reaction has occurred to a discrete
threshold dose of allergen or alternatively has been the
result of the cumulative dose consumed by the allergic
© 2013 Zurzolo et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Page 2
Zurzolo et al. Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2013, 9:35
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/9/1/35 
Page 2 of 7
Figure 1 Population dose distribution models for peanut thresholds. Adapted from the manuscript title “Clinical challenge data for
development of allergen management thresholds for precautionary labeling of foods- VITAL 2.0” [1].
individual at the time of reaction. Statistical methods can
be used to model the dose-distribution of the peanut-
allergic population when the precise threshold dose is
known to fall within a defined dosing interval but the exact
threshold value is unknown [2,3]. Since the ED05 is de-
rived from statistical dose-distribution models of the
peanut-allergic population, it is important to clinically val-
idate that this dose is predictive of the allergenic response
in a further unselected group of peanut-allergic individuals.
This issue is of importance to all stakeholders in food
allergy because over the last 10 years an increasing num-
ber of food manufacturers have incorporated voluntary
allergen precautionary statements which advise the aller-
gic consumer of the potential presence of allergens using
“may contain allergen” statements which are not legis-
lated for and are variable in content around the world
[4]. Regulatory thresholds for allergen labelling currently
do not exist in most countries, with the exception of
Japan and Switzerland. Voluntary industry-led initiatives
that use clinical thresholds as the basis for precautionary
labelling decisions are based on ED estimates derived from
multiple dosing food challenges. Although attempts to
improve labelling have been introduced in some countries
(e.g. Australia with Voluntary Incidental Trace Allergen
Labelling VITAL 2.0), these are still hampered by being vol-
untary and currently are considered to lack credibility [5].
This study aims to assess the precision of the pre-
dicted ED05 using a single dose (6 mg peanut = 1.5 mg
of peanut protein, approximately 1/100th of a peanut 
kernel) challenge and to validate the modelling that has
been used to develop precautionary labelling criteria
for VITAL 2.0, as currently VITAL 2.0 uses ED01
(0.2 mg of peanut protein) to estimate its reference
doses [6]. In addition this study will examine whether
95% of peanut-allergic consumers are tolerant of an
amount that is more than 5 times higher than the
VITAL ED01 threshold, thus suggesting if 95% of partic-
ipants are tolerant to an ED05 then there would be an
exceedingly low probability that they would react to an
ED01. The ED05 has been chosen pragmatically as it
will allow the study to proceed with the recruitment of
an achievable number of peanut-allergic individuals to
provide sufficient statistical power to validate the accur-
acy of the population threshold distribution of peanut
allergic individuals (discussed in detail below). A validation
study of the ED01 would have required a prohibitively
large, much more expensive study. In contrast it would be
feasible to study further the 5% of subjects who DO react
at ED05, with lower doses, including the ED01.
We feel it is important to standardise this approach at
an international level since the findings in this study
have consequences for the food manufacturing industry
at a global level. Our plans to initiate this study have re-
cently been supported in a review by a large multidiscip-
linary European group [7].  This may contribute to
improvement of precautionary labelling thresholds to be
set for use by regulators and manufacturers to protect
the food allergic consumer.
Page 3
Zurzolo et al. Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2013, 9:35
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/9/1/35 
Page 3 of 7
Methods
Recruitment
This is a multi-centre study involving three teaching cen-
tres. A total 375 participants will be recruited (125 in each
centre) during their follow-up appointments in the
Department of Allergy in each respective centre.
Inclusion criteria
Each patient must meet all of the following criteria to be
enrolled in this study.
 Age between 1 to 18 years old and
 Demonstrate evidence of peanut allergy as defined
by either
(a) History of unequivocal exposure (including
accidental) and typical acute allergic reaction
within the preceding 2 years and positive peanut
SPT/sIgE, or
(b) Positive oral food challenge with peanut
performed within 2 years - either open oral food
challenge or DBPCFC (Double-blind, placebo-
controlled food challenges)
(c) Peanut never ingested, but sensitisation to
peanut above the 95% positive predictive value
(PPV) for clinical allergy, i.e. peanut serum IgE ≥
to 15 kU/L (by CAP FEIA) and/or peanut SPT
wheal size ≥ to 8 mm within 2 months of the
single dose challenge.
Exclusion criteria
Patients meeting any of the following criteria will be ex-
cluded from the study.
 Family or child does not consent to participate
 Medically unfit for challenge according to local unit
OFC guidelines/protocol (e.g., high fever, unwell
with intercurrent illness,
 Any objective sign of an acute allergic reaction
 Oral corticosteroids within 14 days prior to
challenge
 Episode of anaphylaxis of any cause in 4 weeks prior
to challenge
 Use of antihistamines within 5 days of oral food
challenge
 Asthma that is not well controlled as demonstrated
by FEVI < 85% of predicted best.
Food Allergy related Quality of Life
Questionnaires-(FAQLQ)
Validated FAQL questionnaires will be self-administered
prior to OFC and 1 month after challenge to assess whether
the impact of this novel single dose OFC protocol is similar
to that of “routine” diagnostic OFC, (Figure 2) (Additional
files 1, 2 and 3). 
Non-Responder Questionnaire (NRQ)
We aim to administer a non-responder questionnaire
(NRQ): a set of questions intended to permit compari-
son of basic demographic and clinical allergy data in
those choosing not to participate and in study partici-
pants (Additional file 4). The NRQ that we have devel-
oped is similar to the NRQ that was used by Osborne
et al. (2010) [8].
Single dose Oral Food Challenge (OFC)
A standard OFC administers multiple doses over 45–
120 minutes depending on the challenge protocol. We will
give a single dose of peanut, taken in isolation, at the level
of the predicted ED05 (6 mg whole peanut = 1.5 mg pea-
nut protein) in the form of a cookie consisting of granu-
lated sugar, brown sugar, all-purpose wheat flour, vegetable
shortening, salt and baking soda. Peanut flour will be added
at a level that represents 6 mg whole peanut equivalent to
1/100th of whole peanut. For subjects allergic to other
cookie ingredients e.g. wheat, the peanut dose will be ad-
ministered in a food known to be tolerated. The challenge
materials are shelf-stable and are manufactured at The Uni-
versity of Nebraska and then distributed to participating
clinic centres.
Criteria for a positive OFC result
Only objective criteria will be used in the validation of the
ED05, since that dose was predicted on the basis of
challenge-associated objective responses only. Objective
criteria are outlined by Sampson et al. in the PRACTALL
criteria [9] and have been validated in the Healthnuts
study [10].  These criteria include urticaria, perioral or
periorbital angioedema, vomiting, diarrhoea, respiratory
or cardiovascular compromise (including anaphylaxis) and
rhinoconjuctivitis. All objective signs will be quantitated in
number, site and duration of presence. Participants in
OFC often expect severe outcomes following ingestion;
this may manifest as subjective symptoms. Subjective
symptoms will be recorded but not used in the analysis of
the reactions to validate the derived ED05 because the
ED05 was developed only on the basis of objective reac-
tions. Subjective symptoms to be recorded include: Head-
ache, dizziness, bloating, abdominal pain, cramps, muscle
aches, aching joints, anxiety, tension, agitation [11,12].
The prior agreed objective criteria for a positive OFC
result are any objective signs occurring within 2 hours of
ingestion. All objective signs will be recorded:
 3 or more concurrent noncontact urticaria
persisting for at least 5 minutes;
 perioral or periorbital angioedema;
 rhinoconjunctivitis
 diarrhoea
 vomiting (excluding gag reflex); or
Page 4
Zurzolo et al. Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2013, 9:35
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/9/1/35 
Page 4 of 7
Informed consent
Yes
Quality of Life
(QOL)food
allergy
questionnaire
If participant is
subsequently is
found to be
ineligible
Data will be
destroy
Only data from
non-responder
will be kept
End of
study
No follow
up
Figure 2 Study design diagram. 
Assessed for eligibility
Single dose OFC 
(Cookie) 
No
Blood test
2hrs observation in
the department
Discussions of results by
principal investigator via
information handouts and study
Phone call the next day to
ensure no late reactions
QOL food allergy questionnaire 1
month after challenge
Phone call to remind
participants of QOL 
Non-
responder
questionnaire
End of
recruitment
 evidence of circulatory or respiratory compromise
(anaphylaxis eg, persistent cough, wheeze, change in
voice, stridor, difficulty breathing, and collapse) [10].
Blood test
A blood sample (10 ml) will be taken for peanut com-
ponent analysis and quantitative peanut-specific IgE
fluoroenzyme immunoassays 20 minutes after OFC. 
100, 150, 200 and 375 if the estimated prevalence is equal
to the nominal value of 5%, are displayed in Table 1. A
sample size of 150 corresponds to a lower confidence limit
of 2.3% and an upper confidence limit of 10%. While this
implies that the population proportion may be as little as
half or as much as double the observed proportion, this
calculation is conservative since it uses the sample size
expected in a single centre, not from the three centres
Sample size estimation
The population proportion of peanut allergic children
who react to the nominal ED05 dose of peanut will be
estimated, separately for each of the three participating
centres, as the corresponding observed proportion of
participants. If, based on these three proportions, there
is strong evidence against the null hypothesis that the
proportion reacting is the same in all three centres then
centre-specific estimates will be reported, otherwise the
proportion aggregated over all three centres will serve as
a single centre-independent estimate. 95% confidence
intervals for these population proportions will be calcu-
lated using the properties of the binomial distribution.
Example of 95% confidence intervals for sample sizes 70, 
Table 1 Projected 95% confidence intervals for the
prevalence of clinical reactivity in peanut allergic
children and adults receiving the ED05 
dose
(6 mg of whole peanut = 1.5 mg of peanut protein)
for sample sizes ranging from 70 to 200
Sample size
(of peanut allergic
individuals)
70 
Value of target
prevalence
(5% for the ED05
)
5% 
Projected 95%
confidence
interval
0.9% - 12%
100  5%  1.6% - 11%
150  5%  2.3% - 10%
200  5%  2.4% - 9%
375  5%  3.1% - 7.8%
Page 5
Zurzolo et al. Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2013, 9:35
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/9/1/35 
Page 5 of 7
combined, so it is sufficiently accurate to rule out gross in-
compatibility between the nominal and observed propor-
tion of participants reacting.
Summary statistics will be used to compare the fea-
tures of participants and non-participants, and of ED05-
reactors and non-reactors. Variables to be examined will
include clinical severity of previous reactions, age, sex,
SPT wheal size and peanut component-specific IgE
levels. Multivariable logistic regression analyses will be
used to identify combinations of these features that
identify the low-dose reactors.
Ethics/Patient safety
This Study has been approved by Cork University Hospital
Research Ethics Committee (ECM 4 g), Royal Children’s
Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee (HRECApp
32166A),  and Massachusetts General Hospital Research
Ethics Committee (2012P002475). Written, informed par-
ental and adolescent consent and assent from younger
children will be recorded before participation in the PATS
challenge. An External Safety Monitor has been appointed
who is an experienced allergist, not otherwise involved in
this study or related studies in the study centres.
Discussion
The estimation of the threshold dose for allergic reaction
to peanut in peanut allergic subjects has potential value
for public health measures. The use of statistical dose-
distribution modelling based upon the results of low-
dose clinical challenges of peanut-allergic individuals has
been viewed as a strong approach to estimation of the
population threshold for peanut [13,14].
However, the clinical determination of individual
thresholds is based upon graded incrementally increas-
ing challenge doses administered at convenient time in-
tervals, sometimes as short as 15–20 minutes between
doses. The individual threshold doses are frequently
reported as cumulative doses because it is impossible to
claim that each dose is fully assimilated before adminis-
tration of the next dose [15].
Allen et al. (2013) used this approach to estimate a
population threshold for the peanut-allergic population
based upon challenges of 750 individuals. The ED05 from
the log normal dose-distribution was 6 mg of whole pea-
nut or 1.5 mg of peanut protein. Since cumulative doses
were used in the evaluation of individual challenges and
subsequent statistical dose-distribution modelling, it is im-
portant to validate the peanut ED05 using a single-dose
approach. Peanut is the best-studied food allergen in terms
of low dose OFC to date. This novel PATS approach could
be adapted for other major food allergens, if this proposed
clinical study supports the statistically determined ED05
based upon population dose-distribution modelling [1]. 
The plan to approach all peanut allergic subjects in 3
distinct geographical regions the varied or permissive
entry criteria and the analysis of the non-participants
will address the most common criticism of OFC studies:
how representative of the general peanut allergic popula-
tion are the subjects who volunteered? Peanut allergic
subjects who have food challenges are highly selected
and they may not represent the whole spectrum of re-
activity to peanut in peanut allergic subjects [16].
The strict requirement for only objective signs being
used to determine a case is important, because subjective
reactions are known to resolve during a routine OFC that
is continued until objective signs are recorded [10,17].
Peanut allergic patients are usually advised to avoid
foods that are labelled as “may contain” peanut. A recent
study by Madsen et al. (2012) has showed that it is under-
stood and accepted by clinicians, patients and food pro-
ducers that zero risk is not a realistic or attainable option
[18]. However clinical risk communications that are not
specific may increase anxiety and risk taking behaviours
without increasing awareness, confidence or safety [7].
Currently there is no standard approach being used by
all manufacturers in relation to precautionary labelling.
This may be due, in part, to the lack of agreement
among the scientific community regarding clinically safe
threshold levels. If this current study validates the ED05
this will aid the scientific and medical communities and
also the manufacturing industry in the use of quantita-
tive precautionary labelling, backed with sound scientific
evidence for the establishment of safe threshold levels
for 95% of the peanut allergic community.
The PATS study offers a new clinical paradigm and
methodology with regards to assessing clinical risk; this
current study may potentially define the 5% of patients
who are most highly sensitive. Validated questionnaires
assessing FAQL have shown patients gain nearly as much
from a “failed” OFC as they do from a “passed” OFC,
probably due to decreased uncertainty about the next and
future reactions [19] and we hypothesise that individual
families may also show such an improvement after a PATS
single dose challenge. This tangible impact could promote
adoption of PATS single dose peanut challenges in units
not currently performing diagnostic OFC. If this proposed
clinical study supports the statistically determined ED05
based upon population dose-distribution modelling of
peanut, it may show promise for clinical validation of
other allergenic food sources where sufficient threshold
data is available to model the population dose-distribution.
Eventually a single-dose diagnostic OFC using other food
allergens may be adopted as well.
Clinicians may be able to use PATS single dose OFCs
as they are easier to perform than routine diagnostic
OFC or DBPCFC and they could contribute to the com-
plex analysis of risk that clinicians currently make in a
Page 6
Zurzolo et al. Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2013, 9:35
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/9/1/35 
Page 6 of 7
heuristic fashion that varies between practitioners. Cur-
rently clinicians make value judgements about whether
they believe a child to be exquisitely sensitive to a food
or not and therefore what to advise with regards to
avoiding trace amounts of allergen in food (i.e. foods
with precautionary labelling).
The single dose protocol does not replace current clin-
ical food challenges which are for the diagnosis of food al-
lergy but would provide extra clinical information of
patients’  level of risk and could help inform consumer
choices and physician advice to patients regarding precau-
tionary labelling [20,21]. This project may offer a practical
way to discern whether allergic patients can safely ingest
foods with labels such as “may contain traces”, although
this outcome would require collaboration with the food
industry and more uniform adoption of criteria for use
of precautionary labels as proposed in the Australian
VITAL strategy.
Conclusion
The PATS single dose OFC, based upon the statistical
dose-distribution analysis of past challenge trials, promises
an efficient approach to identify the most highly sensitive
patients within any given food-allergic population. The
peanut protocol described herein will evaluate the practi-
cality of this approach and allow assessment of its safety.
The validation of the ED05 originally statistically deter-
mined from the dose-distribution analysis would be a
major benefit of the study as it would serve to inform gov-
ernments in the application of a more transparent and
sensible approach in the use of precautionary labelling. It
will also aid public health agencies in the establishment of
approaches to allergen management that will protect the
vast majority of food-allergic consumers/patients.
Additional files
 Additional file 1: Food Allergy Quality of Life Questionnaire –Parent
Form (0–12 years).
 Additional file 2: Food Allergy Quality of Life Questionnaire–Child
Form (8–12 years).
 Additional file 3: Food Allergy Quality of Life
Questionnaire–Teenager Form (13-18 years).
 Additional file 4: Peanut single dose study, non-participant
questionnaire.
Competing interests
GZ declares that he has no competing interests. JH has received speaker
honoraria and travel support from Stallergenes, Nutricia, Mead Johnson,
Pfizer, Astra Zeneca, and MSD. He has received research funding from
Danone and Stallergenes. KA has received speaker’s honorarium from Pfizer,
Abbott and Danone. ST declares that he has no competing interests. WS, JB,
LG, MM, MT, JN, ADG declares that he has no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
GZ made substantial contribution to the conception, design and revising the
manuscript. KA is local clinical PI on the study and made substantial 
contributions to the development of the study design and protocol made
substantial contribution to the conception and design of the manuscript. ST
devised the original research concept with JH, JB and others and has revised
the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. WS has revised
the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. JB devised the
original research concept with JH, ST and others and has revised the
manuscript critically for important intellectual content. MT has contributed to
refinement of the study protocol and review of manuscript LG reviewed the
epidemiological study design, proposed the statistical analysis plan and
contributed to the writing and revision of the paper. MM has contributed to
the revision of the paper. JN has contributed to the drafting of the
manuscript. ADG contributed to study design and has contributed in
drafting and revising the manuscript. JH is lead clinical PI on the study and
developed the original research concept with ST. He made substantial
intellectual contribution to the manuscript, has been involved in drafting
and giving final approval of the version to be published. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Authors’ information
Giovanni Zurzolo is a PhD scholar and is funded by the Victoria University.
Professor Katrina J. Allen, paediatric gastroenterologist and is funded by the
Viertel Senior Medical Research Followership. Steve Taylor is a Professor at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln and co-Director of Food Allergy Research &
Resource Program (FARRP), a food industry-funded consortium with 70
supporting food companies. Wayne Shreffler is the Chief of Pediatric Allergy
and Immunology at MGH and Associate Professor of Pediatrics at Harvard
Medical School. Joseph Baumert is an Assistant Professor at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln and co-Director of Food Allergy Research & Resource Program
(FARRP). A/Prof Mimi Tang is the Director of the Department of Allergy and
Immunology, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne. A/Prof Lyle Gurrin is a Senior
Lecturer in Biostatistics at The Centre for Molecular, Environmental, Genetic and
Analytic (MEGA) Epidemiology. A/Prof Michael Mathai is a Senior Lecturer at The
College of Health and Biomedicine at Victoria University. Julie Nordlee work’s at
FARRP at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Audrey DunnGalvin is a Lecturer in
Clinical Psychology in UCC, Cork. Jonathan Hourihane is a Professor of
Paediatrics and Child Health in UCC, Cork.
Acknowledgement
This project is funded by Food Allergy Research & Resource Program (FARRP).
Dr Dean Tey who is a consultant Paediatrician at the Department of Allergy at
the Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne for his contribution to the manuscript.
The Murdoch Childrens Research Institute is supported by funding from the
Victorian Government’s Operational Infrastructure Support Program. Also to
Victoria University for providing funding for the publishing of this manuscript.
Author details
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia. 2Biomedical and
Lifestyle Diseases Unit, School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Victoria
University, Melbourne, Australia. 3Department of Allergy and Immunology,
Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. 4University of Melbourne
Department of Paediatrics, Melbourne, Australia. 5Food Allergy Research and
Resource Program, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska. 6Food Allergy
Centre and the Centre for Immunology and Inflammatory Disease,
Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
7Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. 8Paediatrics and Child Health, University
College, Cork, Ireland.
Received: 6 June 2013 Accepted: 14 August 2013
Published: 12 September 2013
References
1.  Allen KJ, Remington BC, Baumert JL, Crevel R, Houben GF, Brooks-Taylor S,
et al: Clinical challenge data for development of allergen management
thresholds for precautionary labeling of foods- VITAL 2.0. J Allergy Clin
Immun 2013: In press.
2.  Taylor SL, Crevel RWR, Sheffield D, Kabourek J, Baumert J: Threshold dose for
peanut: risk characterization based upon published results from challenges
of peanut-allergic individuals. Food Chem Toxicol 2009, 47(6):1198–1204.
3.  Taylor SL, Moneret-Vautrin DA, Crevel RWR, Sheffield D, Morisset M, Dumont
P, et al: Threshold dose for peanut: risk characterization based upon
Page 7
Zurzolo et al. Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2013, 9:35
http://www.aacijournal.com/content/9/1/35 
Page 7 of 7
diagnostic oral challenge of a series of 286 peanut-allergic individuals.
Food Chem Toxicol 2010, 48(3):814–819.
4.  Zurzolo GA, Mathai ML, Koplin JJ, Allen KJ: Precautionary allergen labelling
following new labelling practice in Australia. J Paediatr Child Health 2013,
49(4):E306. E10.
5.  Zurzolo G, Koplin J, Mathai M, Mimi T, Allen K: Perceptions of
precautionary labelling among parents of children with food allergy and
anaphylaxis. Med J Aust 2013, 198(11):621–623. Epub 2013/08/08.
6.  Allergen, Bureau: Summary of the VITAL scientific expert panel
recommendations; 2011. Available from: [URL: "http://www.allergenbureau.net/downloads/vital/VSEP-Summary-Report-Oct-2011.pdf"] http://www.allergenbureau.net/
 downloads/vital/VSEP-Summary-Report-Oct-2011.pdf.
7.  Madsen CB, Hattersley S, Allen KJ, Beyer K, Chan CH, Godefroy SB, et al: Can
we define a tolerable level of risk in food allergy? Report from a
EuroPrevall/UK Food Standards Agency workshop. Clinical & Experimental
Allergy 2012, 42(1):30–37. n/a-n/a.
8.  Osborne NJ, Koplin JJ, Martin PE, Gurrin LC, Thiele L, Tang ML, et al: The
HealthNuts population-based study of paediatric food allergy: validity,
safety and acceptability. Clinical & Experimental Allergy 2010, 40(10):1516–1522.
9.  Sampson HA, Gerth van Wijk R, Bindslev-Jensen C, Sicherer S, Teuber SS,
Burks AW, et al: Standardizing double-blind, placebo-controlled oral food
challenges: American academy of allergy, asthma and immunology–
European academy of allergy and clinical immunology PRACTALL
consensus report. J Allergy Clin Immun 2012, 130(6):1260–1274.
10. Koplin JJ, Tang MLK, Martin PE, Osborne NJ, Lowe AJ, Ponsonby A-L, et al:
Predetermined challenge eligibility and cessation criteria for oral food
challenges in the HealthNuts population-based study of infants. J Allergy
Clin Immun 2012, 129(4):1145–1147.
11. DunnGalvin A, Hourihane JB: Developmental Aspects of Health Related
Quality of Life (HRQL) in Food Related Chronic Disease: the example of
food allergy. In Handbook of Behavior, Food and Nutrition. Edited by Preedy
VR, Watson RR, Martin CR. New York: Springer; 2011:3077–3098.
12. DunnGalvin A, Hourihane JOB: Chapter 3 developmental trajectories in
food allergy: a review. In Advances in food and nutrition research. Edited by
Steve LT. Waltham, Massachusetts, USA: Academic Press; 2009:65–100.
13. Kruizinga AG, Briggs D, Crevel RWR, Knulst AC, Bosch LMC, Houben GF:
Probabilistic risk assessment model for allergens in food: sensitivity
analysis of the minimum eliciting dose and food consumption.
Food Chem Toxicol 2008, 46(5):1437–1443.
14. Madsen CB, Hattersley S, Buck J, Gendel SM, Houben GF, Hourihane JOB,
et al: Approaches to risk assessment in food allergy: report from a
workshop “developing a framework for assessing the risk from allergenic
foods”. Food Chem Toxicol 2009, 47(2):480–489.
15. Mills ENC, Valovirta E, Madsen C, Taylor SL, Vieths S, Anklam E, et al:
Information provision for allergic consumers – where are we going with
food allergen labelling? Allergy 2004, 59(12):1262–1268.
16. Marklund B, Wilde-Larsson B, Ahlstedt S, Nordstrom G: Adolescents’
experiences of being food-hypersensitive: a qualitative study. BMC Nurs
2007, 6:8. Epub 2007/10/10.
17. Hourihane JOB, Bedwani SJ, Dean TP, Warner JO: Randomised, double
blind, crossover challenge study of allergenicity of peanut oils in
subjects allergic to peanuts. BMJ 1997, 314(7087):1084.
18. Madsen CB, Crevel R, Chan C-H, Dubois AEJ, DunnGalvin A, Flokstra-de Blok
BMJ, et al: Food allergy: stakeholder perspectives on acceptable risk.Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 2012, 57(2–3):256–265.
19. DunnGalvin A, Cullinane C, Daly DA, Flokstra-de Blok BMJ, Dubois AEJ,
Hourihane JOB: Longitudinal validity and responsiveness of the Food
Allergy Quality of Life Questionnaire – Parent Form in children 0–12
years following positive and negative food challenges. Clinical &
Experimental Allergy 2010, 40(3):476–485.
20. DunnGalvin A, Gaffney A, Hourihane JOB: Developmental pathways in
food allergy: a new theoretical framework. Allergy 2009, 64(4):560–568.
21. DunnGalvin A, Hourihane JOB: Self-assessment of reaction thresholds in
food allergy: a new theory of risk taking which changes over time.
J Allergy Clin Immun 2009, 123(2):S142.
doi:10.1186/1710-1492-9-35
Cite this article as: Zurzolo et al.: Peanut Allergen Threshold Study
(PATS): validation of eliciting doses using a novel single-dose challenge
protocol. Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology 2013 9:35. 
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
