Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
Title: The prevention of musculoskeletal injuries in volleyball: the systematic development of an intervention and its feasibility
Keywords: Volleyball,Musculoskeletal injuries,Prevention,Intervention mapping
ModDate: 2017/08/04 16:11:40+02'00'
Subject: Injury Epidemiology, 2017, doi:10.1186/s40621-017-0122-y
Author: Vincent Gouttebarge
CreationDate: 2017/08/04 05:40:36+08'00'
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Volleyball,Musculoskeletal injuries,Prevention,Intervention mapping
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s40621-017-0122-y
xmp:dc:publisher: Injury Epidemiology
xmp:dc:description: Injury Epidemiology, 2017, doi:10.1186/s40621-017-0122-y
xmp:dc:subject: Volleyball; Musculoskeletal injuries; Prevention; Intervention mapping
xmp:dc:title: The prevention of musculoskeletal injuries in volleyball: the systematic development of an intervention and its feasibility
xmp:dc:creator: Vincent Gouttebarge; Marije van Sluis; Evert Verhagen; Johannes Zwerver
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2017-08-04T16:11:40+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2017-08-04T05:40:36+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2017-08-04T16:11:40+02:00
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:99afa4e7-02e1-4bdf-ae5b-5c39a308daa6
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:88a2e59c-a82e-4d6c-ad9b-12ee8ac4edd5
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:e38fc572-f275-4602-8ea3-ce533a0801f2
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2017-08-04T19:26:33+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Vincent Gouttebarge
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0126-4177
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernaturBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Systematic development of the intervention
  Feasibility of the intervention
  Conclusion
Background
  The systematic development of the intervention
    Needs assessment (step 1 of the IM process)
    Objective and target group(s) of the intervention (step 2 of the IM process)
    Selection of preventive measures and strategies for the intervention (step 3 of the IM process)
    Development of the intervention (step 4 of the IM process)
    The feasibility of the intervention
Methods
Results
Discussion
  Injury prevention programmes across sports
  Future directions
Conclusions
Appendix
Abbreviations
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Authors’ contributions
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Author details
References
Page 1
Gouttebarge et al. Injury Epidemiology (2017) 4:25
DOI 10.1186/s40621-017-0122-y
ORIGINAL CONTRIBUTION  Open Access
The prevention of musculoskeletal injuries
in volleyball: the systematic development
of an intervention and its feasibility
Vincent Gouttebarge1,2,3,4* [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0126-4177"] , Marije van Sluis5, Evert Verhagen3,4,6,7 and Johannes Zwerver5
Abstract
Background: A scientific research project has started in the Netherlands with the aim of developing and implementing
an evidence-based intervention to prevent the occurrence of musculoskeletal injuries among young and adult
recreational volleyball players. This article describes (i) the systematic development of the intervention; and (ii) the
assessment of its feasibility in terms of relevancy, suitability and usability.
Systematic development of the intervention: The development of the intervention was based on the Intervention
Mapping structured and systematic process. First, the needs assessment conducted among the main actors within
recreational volleyball revealed that an intervention was needed for injury prevention, ideally embedded prior to a
volleyball activity (training or match) within the warm-up, delivered by trainers/coaches, and available in an application for
smartphone/tablet or website. Second, the objective and target groups of the intervention were defined, namely to
prevent or reduce the occurrence of finger/wrist, shoulder, knee and ankle injuries among both young and adult
recreational volleyball players. Third, preventive measures and strategies (e.g. core stability, strength and balance) were
selected in order to accomplish a decrease in injury incidence. Last, the intervention ‘VolleyVeilig’ was finally developed, a
warm-up programme including more than 50 distinct exercises and lasting 15 min.
Feasibility of the intervention: A quasi-experimental research based on a one-group post-test design was conducted
over a period of 3 weeks among 41 volleyball players and five coaches from five adult recreational teams, who were
asked to use the intervention. Degree of relevancy, suitability and usability of the warm-up programme ‘VolleyVeilig’ were
measured among players and coaches on an 11-point scale (varying from ‘completely disagree’ to ‘completely agree’).
All groups of exercises within the warm-up programme were positively assessed with regard to their relevancy, suitability
and usability, mean scores ranging from 7.7 to 8.3. Group interviews revealed especially that the warm-up programme in
its current form was not suitable as a pre-match warm-up.
Conclusion: The warm-up programme ‘VolleyVeilig’  developed in order to prevent or reduce the occurrence of
musculoskeletal injuries in recreational volleyball was positively assessed by volleyball players and coaches
with regard to its relevancy, suitability and usability. Before its nationwide implementation, the effectiveness of
the intervention on injury reduction among volleyball players should be conducted.
Keywords: Volleyball, Musculoskeletal injuries, Prevention, Intervention mapping
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:v.gouttebarge@veiligheid.nl"] v.gouttebarge@veiligheid.nl
1Dutch Consumer Safety Institute, Overschiestraat 65, 1062 XD Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
2Academic Center for Evidence based Sports medicine (ACES), Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2017 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
Page 2
Gouttebarge et al. Injury Epidemiology (2017) 4:25  Page 2 of 7
Background
Volleyball is one of the big five international sports being
played today, relying on 220 affiliated national federations
with an estimate of 800 million players who play volleyball
at least once a week (Fédération Internationale de
Volleyball 2016).  While being undoubtedly beneficial to
physical, mental and social well-being, volleyball, like other
sports, is also associated with a risk for musculoskeletal
injuries. The incidence of musculoskeletal injuries among
volleyball players ranges from 1.7 to 10.7 injuries per 1000
playing hours, occurring more often during matches and
among male players (Bahr & Bahr 1997; Kilic et al. 2017).
In the Netherlands, similar incidence rates are reported an-
nually, reaching up to 5.7 injuries per 1000 playing hours in
2014 (Dutch Consumer Safety Institute 2015).  Musculo-
skeletal injuries among volleyball players can be either
acute or overuse injuries, and occur principally in the fin-
gers/wrists, ankles, shoulders and knees (Dutch Consumer
Safety Institute 2015; Kilic et al. 2017). These injuries lead
to substantial direct and indirect healthcare costs and are
likely to induce impairments in daily life, sport and/or work
(Verhagen et al. 2005). With regard to the high incidence
of musculoskeletal injuries among volleyball players and its
negative consequences and societal impact, one might ex-
pect effective preventive measures to be available, especially
for the common finger/wrist, shoulder, knee and ankle
injuries.
However, volleyball-specific preventive measures re-
main scarce in the Netherlands. This was demonstrated
in a recent study of the Dutch Volleyball Federation
(Nevobo) in which volleyball players emphasised their
need for more attention and specific measures regarding
injury prevention (Elling et al. 2014).  Consequently, a
scientific research project was started in the Netherlands
with the aim of developing and implementing an
evidence-based volleyball-specific intervention to
prevent the occurrence of musculoskeletal injuries
among young and adult recreational volleyball players.
This article describes subsequently: (i) the systematic
development of the intervention; and (ii) the assessment
of its feasibility (in terms of relevancy, suitability and
usability) in recreational adult volleyball teams.
The systematic development of the intervention
In health promotion research, interventions have been
developed according to Intervention Mapping (IM),  a
structured and systematic process often applied in this
field of health research that can also be used within
sport injury prevention research (Bartholomew et al.
1998; Kok et al. 2016; Verhagen et al. 2014).  The IM
process relies on six consecutive steps, namely: 1) needs
assessment; 2) formulating the objectives and target
group(s) of the intervention; 3) selection of theories and/
or practical strategies for the intervention; 4) development 
of the intervention; 5) development of an adoption and
implementation plan; 6) development of an evaluation
plan (Bartholomew et al. 1998; Kok et al. 2016). Steps 5
and 6 of the IM process are typically assessed through a
thorough evaluation (effectiveness and implementation) of
the intervention. This evaluation (effectiveness and - in
case the intervention appears to be effective- implementa-
tion) has already been planned for the upcoming years. To
strictly develop an intervention aiming at the prevention
of musculoskeletal injuries among recreational young and
adult volleyball players, steps 1 to 4 of the IM structured
and systematic process were applied.
Needs assessment (step 1 of the IM process)
The key purposes of the needs assessment were: (i) to
assess the needs (content, form, behaviour) and support
for the intervention; (ii) to identify the objectives and
target groups of the intervention; and (iii) to discuss
strategies for the implementation of the intervention.
Therefore, two semi-structured focus-group interviews
were held with the 12 to 16 main actors within
recreational volleyball, namely players, trainers/coaches,
(para-)medics, policy makers and representatives of
clubs, and policy makers and representatives of the
Nevobo. Each focus-group interview took 1 hours (with
a  10-min break) and was held in April 2016.
Subsequently, an anonymous electronic survey (in
Dutch) was set up and distributed by Nevobo (June
2016) to volleyball players and trainers/coaches in order
to explore whether the qualitative information gathered
through the focus-group interviews was largely supported.
Fifteen questions were formulated in relation, among
others, to: (i) current and future injury prevention
behaviour; (ii) needs and support for the intervention; (iii)
characteristics (content, form) of the intervention; and (iv)
strategies to deliver the intervention.
Information collected through the focus-group inter-
views indicated that: (i) injuries among young and adult
recreational volleyball players occur principally in the fin-
gers/wrists, shoulders, knees and ankles; (ii) support mea-
sures or interventions concerning injury prevention were
lacking in clubs; (iii) there was a need for an injury pre-
ventive intervention for both young and adult recreational
volleyball players; (iv) an injury preventive intervention
could be embedded prior to a volleyball activity (training
or match) within the warm-up; (v) the injury preventive
intervention could be delivered by trainers/coaches; (vi)
information and instructions about the injury preventive
intervention could be presented in an application for
smartphone/tablet or website. The aforementioned quali-
tative information was confirmed by the outcomes of the
electronic survey completed by nearly 2000 volleyball
players (95%) and trainers/coaches (5%).  The main out-
comes of the survey are presented in Table 1.
Page 3
Gouttebarge et al. Injury Epidemiology (2017) 4:25  Page 3 of 7
Table 1 Needs assessment towards an injury preventive
intervention in volleyball
Current and future injury prevention behaviour
▪ 30% of the respondents mentioned that there was no attention given
to injury prevention in their clubs.
▪ 55% of the respondents indicated that their knowledge and capacities
towards injury prevention was insufficient.
▪ 95% of the respondents stated that any attention for injury prevention
should be given within the warm-up prior a volleyball activity.
Needs and support for an injury preventive intervention
▪ 95% of the respondents indicated that the intervention was needed
for both young and adult recreational volleyball players.
Characteristics of an injury preventive intervention
▪ 92% of the respondents mentioned that the intervention for young
and adult recreational volleyball players should be embedded
within the warm-up prior a volleyball activity (training or match).
▪ 25%, 44% and 22% indicated that they were likely to use the
intervention once, twice and three times a week, respectively.
▪ 43% and 36% of the respondents stated that they were likely to
spend each time 10 and 15 min, respectively, to the intervention.
Strategies to deliver an injury preventive intervention
▪ Two-third of the respondents indicated that the intervention needed
to be delivered through an application for smartphone/tablet and
website.
▪ The majority of the respondents stated that the content of the
intervention should be principally with videos by a trainer/coach
(62%), a physical therapist (55%) or an elite volleyball player (52%).
Objective and target group(s) of the intervention (step 2 of
the IM process)
Experts in volleyball (players, trainers/coaches, club
representatives) and/or injury prevention (strength and
conditioning trainers, physical therapists, sports
physicians) were approached in order to formulate
clearly the objective of the intervention and specify its
target groups. For this purpose, a meeting was held dur-
ing which information gathered through the needs as-
sessment (focus-group interviews and survey) was used,
as well as the findings of a recent systematic literature
review on the incidence, prevalence, etiology and prevent-
ive measures of volleyball injuries (Kilic et al. 2017). The
following intervention objective and target groups were
formulated, namely to prevent or reduce the occurrence
of finger/wrist, shoulder, knee and ankle injuries among
both young and adult recreational volleyball players.
Selection of preventive measures and strategies for the
intervention (step 3 of the IM process)
Two multidisciplinary expert meetings were held in
order to select preventive measures (content) and
strategies (form) for the intervention. A total of 15
participants were selected with regard to their expertise
and role in volleyball (players, trainers/coaches, club
representatives) and/or injury prevention (strength and
conditioning trainers, physical therapists, sports 
physicians).  Relevant preventive measures (content) for
the intervention were selected accordingly to the Van
Mechelen’s ‘sequence of prevention’  model (four steps
related to incidence, etiology and effective prevention of
sports injuries (Van Mechelen et al. 1992)).  For this
purpose, information gathered through the needs assess-
ment (focus-group interviews and survey) was used, as
well as the findings of a recent systematic literature
review on the incidence, prevalence, etiology and pre-
ventive measures of volleyball injuries (Kilic et al. 2017).
Led by an experienced researcher, the experts’ meetings
were audiotaped and notes were taken. Each expert
meeting took 3 hours (with a 10-min break).  Both
multidisciplinary expert meetings were held in June and
July 2016.
Experts identified preventive measures (content)
directed towards the modifiable risk factors of shoulder,
knee and ankle injuries. For instance, experts looked
closely at a proprioceptive balance board training
programme that was found to be effective in preventing
ankle sprains among volleyball players as well as a
preventive programme that was found to be effective in
reducing shoulder injuries among handball players
(Andersson et al. 2016; Verhagen et al. 2004).  Experts
discussed the identified preventive measures and
consensus between experts was reached for the selection
of preventive measures. The key preventive measures
and strategies selected by the experts for the prevention
of shoulder, knee and ankle injuries were related to core
stability, strength, coordination and balance, and
mobility, i.e. flexibility. Due to the lack of scientific evi-
dence for the primary prevention of finger/wrist injuries,
experts chose to include advice about taping (secondary/
tertiary prevention).  In accordance to the needs of
volleyball players and trainers/coaches, experts agreed
that all selected preventive measures (content) should be
embedded within the warm-up prior to a volleyball
activity (training or match) and made available through
a website and an application for smartphone/tablet.
Development of the intervention (step 4 of the IM process)
All information gathered in the previous steps were
synthetized and translated for the development of the
intervention. For this purpose, three work sessions with
four experts in the field of volleyball and injury preven-
tion (player, physical therapist, strength and conditioning
trainer) were held. Led by an experienced researcher,
each work session took 4 hours (with three breaks of
10 min). The three work sessions were held in July and
September 2016.
The intervention (in Dutch) consists of a warm-up
programme including more than 50 distinct exercises
(with different variations and levels for young and adult
players) that has to be used at least twice a week prior
Page 4
Gouttebarge et al. Injury Epidemiology (2017) 4:25  Page 4 of 7
to any volleyball activity (training or match). The inter-
vention is divided into six phases of 5 to 6 weeks (in line
with a typical volleyball season),  providing volleyball
trainers/coaches every week with a new warm-up
programme that shows progressive increments in terms
of intensity, frequency, duration and/or complexity. Each
warm-up programme lasts 15 min and is divided into a
preparatory cardiovascular warm-up (2 to 3 minutes),
core stability exercises (2 to 3 minutes),  exercises
principally directed at preventing knee injuries (4 to 5
minutes),  and exercises principally directed towards
preventing shoulder injuries (4 to 5 minutes).  The
exercises directed towards preventing ankle injuries are
integrated within each stage of the warm-up programme.
All warm-up programmes and related exercises of the
intervention are embedded into a website and an
application for smartphone/tablet (automatic synchron-
isation) that are accessible with a user name and
password by trainers/coaches. Information and instruc-
tions about the exercises are available as texts and videos
(including voice-over).  Advice about taping fingers/
wrists is available within the application for smartphone/
tablet. Trainers/coaches are informed and instructed
about the warm-up programme and related exercises
during a one-hour training session (delivered by an
injury prevention consultant). Illustrations of the website
and application for smartphone/tablet, as well as
examples of exercises within the intervention are
presented in Appendix.
The feasibility of the intervention
The objective was to explore the feasibility (in terms of
relevancy, suitability and usability) of the developed
intervention among recreational adult volleyball players.
Methods
A quasi-experimental research based on a one-group
post-test design was conducted over a period of 3 weeks
(Bowen et al. 2009). This study did not meet the criteria
for the Medical Research Involving Human Subjects Act
and therefore did not require approval from a Dutch hu-
man ethics research committee. This study was con-
ducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki
and the Personal Data Protection Act.
The participants were healthy recreational adult
volleyball players and their coaches. Inclusion criteria for
players were: (i) 18 years of age or older; (ii) playing in a
volleyball team competing recreationally; (iii) training
and/or competing at least three times a week; (iv)
speaking and reading Dutch fluently. Inclusion criteria
for coaches were: (i) 18 years of age or older; (ii)
speaking and reading Dutch fluently. As it concerns a
‘feasibility study’,  a convenient sample of at least 30
volleyball players and three coaches from three teams 
(8–10 players and one coach per team on average) of three
different clubs was to be recruited (Bowen et al. 2009).
For each exercise within the intervention, the
following outcomes (assessed among players and
coaches) were measured: (i) degree of relevancy, i.e.
added value of the exercises; (ii) degree of suitability
of the exercises within training sessions; (iii) degree
of usability of the exercises. For this purpose, ques-
tions were formulated, for instance: “Is this exercise
relevant and of added value within the warm-up of
volleyball players?”;  “Are the instructions for this
exercise clear and complete?”;  “Can this exercise be
performed by volleyball players?”.  All outcomes were
measured on an 11-point scale (varying from ‘com-
pletely disagree’  to ‘completely agree’).  Players and
coaches were informed by the Nevobo by email about
the intervention and related feasibility study (aim and
procedures).  If willing to participate voluntarily in the
study, players and coaches signed an informed con-
sent. The different weekly warm-up programmes (and
related core elements, i.e. exercises) were divided over
the different teams, and players and their coaches
were asked to use a new weekly warm-up programme at
every session (training or competition) during a period of
3 weeks. After using a new warm-up programme, players
and coaches were asked to complete a paper questionnaire
including all outcomes under study. After the whole
period of 3 weeks, a semi-structured face-to-face group
interview (15 min) was held in each club with players and
coaches about the feasibility of the intervention.
All data were entered within the statistical software
IBM SPSS Statistics 23.0 for Windows. For each out-
come and group of exercises, descriptive data analyses
were conducted. In addition, outcomes on an 11-point
scale were transformed as a dichotomous variable, with
a score of six or more being interpreted as being positive
in favour of a group of exercises.
Results
In total, 41 volleyball players and five coaches from five
teams (three different clubs from the regional levels)
were enrolled in the study. All groups of exercises within
the warm-up programme ‘VolleyVeilig’  were positively
assessed by the volleyball players and coaches. For all ex-
ercises, the mean degree of relevancy was 7.7 (SD = 0.9;
min-max = 6.3–9.0), the mean degree of suitability was
8.3 (SD = 0.85; min-max = 7.0–9.5), and the mean de-
gree of usability was 8.1 (SD = 0.7; min-max = 7.0–9.5).
The group interviews confirmed that: (i) players and
coaches were very pleased with the six phases of 5 to 6
weeks as this coincides with the regular periodization of
a volleyball season; (ii) the videos and texts describing
the exercises of the warm-up programme were necessary
for their optimal execution; and (iii) the warm-up
Page 5
Gouttebarge et al. Injury Epidemiology (2017) 4:25  Page 5 of 7
programme could be executed within the intended time
of 15 min. The group interviews also revealed that: (i)
an explanation of the purpose of the exercises was ne-
cessary; and (ii) the warm-up programme in its current
form was not suitable as pre-match warm-up (too
demanding).
Discussion
This article aimed to describe: (i) the systematic
development; and (ii) the assessment of the feasibility
of an intervention aiming to prevent or reduce the
occurrence of fingers/wrists, ankle, shoulder and knee
injuries among both young and adult recreational
volleyball players. The systematic development of the
intervention was based on parts of the IM process,
involving all main actors within recreational
volleyball. As a  result, the warm-up programme
‘VolleyVeilig’  was developed, including more than 50
distinct exercises and lasting 15 min. All groups of
exercises within ‘VolleyVeilig’  were positively assessed
with regard to their relevancy, suitability and usability
by volleyball players and coaches.
Injury prevention programmes across sports
As sports injuries can have negative influences on sport
participation and might result in high costs for society,
exercise-based interventions to prevent or reduce multiple
(location and type) injuries have been developed across
several sports. In South Africa, the BokSmart Safe Six
intervention for rugby was developed in order to prevent
injuries in the most commonly injured areas (knee,
hamstring, lower limb, ankle and shoulder) (Sewry et al.
2016).  Based on easy-to-perform exercises to increase
strength, joint stability, balance and control, the BokSmart
Safe Six intervention can be performed any place, any
time, without requiring any equipment or facility, and is
of a short enough duration that it does not interfere with
regular training (Sewry et al. 2016). Also in rugby, a recent
study showed that a preventive movement control
exercise programme reduced match injury outcomes
among young rugby players (Hislop et al. 2017).  In the
Netherlands, an integral exercise-based intervention
(more than 50 exercises; age- and gender-specific) was
developed to prevent musculoskeletal injuries in the lower
limbs among youth/adult hockey players (Gouttebarge &
Zuidema 2017). An effectiveness study is still ongoing, but
this specific hockey warm-up programme showed to have
a moderate effect on the level of knowledge and skills
of hockey coaches/trainers about injury prevention
(Gouttebarge & Zuidema 2017).  The Fédération
Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) has de-
veloped and promoted the FIFA 11+ injury prevention
programme (Bizzini & Dvorak 2015).  Divided into
three parts and based on 15 exercises, the FIFA11+ is 
a warm-up programme focussing on injury prevention
among football players aged 14 and older (Bizzini &
Dvorak 2015).  Several randomized controlled trials
have evaluated the programme, showing that the
FIFA11+ reduces injuries by 35% among female
players and by 50% among male and youth players
(Bizzini & Dvorak 2015).  Considering the conceptual
similarities between the aforementioned programmes and
the warm-up programme ‘VolleyVeilig, and with regard to ’
the 35–50% reduction achieved with the FIFA11+,  one
might be confident that the use of the ‘VolleyVeilig’ is likely
to lead to the prevention or reduction of finger/wrist,
shoulder, knee and ankle injuries in recreational volleyball.
Future directions
As indicated through our feasibility study, a warm-up
programme suitable as pre-match warm-up should be
designed (being shorter and lighter),  while an explan-
ation of the purpose of the exercises should be added.
Then, in accordance with the fourth step within the
Van Mechelen’s ‘sequence of prevention’  model, the
systematic development of ‘VolleyVeilig’  as an inter-
vention to prevent the occurrence of musculoskeletal
injuries among recreational volleyball players should
be followed by an evaluation of its effectiveness (Van
Mechelen et al. 1992).  To this end, a randomized
prospective controlled trial will be conducted in the
Netherlands during the 2017–2018 volleyball season
among 640 recreational adult volleyball players
(Gouttebarge et al. 2017).  If the warm-up programme
‘VolleyVeilig’  is found to prevent or reduce injuries in
a controlled setting, its impact in a real-world sport
setting will be evaluated according to the Reach
Efficacy Adoption Implementation Maintenance
(RE-AIM) framework. Originally designed by Glasgow
et al. (1999) to evaluate the public health impact of
health promotion interventions, the RE-AIM frame-
work has been used to optimally translate research
into practice (Glasgow et al. 1999).  A clear under-
standing in the barriers and facilitators for all five
RE-AIM dimensions remains a prerequisite for a
successful implementation and for a significant impact
among volleyball players.
Conclusions
The warm-up programme ‘VolleyVeilig’  which has been
developed in order to prevent or reduce the occurrence of
injuries in fingers/wrists, ankles shoulders and knees in
recreational volleyball, was positively assessed by volleyball
players and coaches with regard to its relevancy, suitability
and usability. Before its nationwide implementation, the
effectiveness of the intervention on injury reduction
among volleyball players should be conducted.
Page 6
Gouttebarge et al. Injury Epidemiology (2017) 4:25
Appendix 
Page 6 of 7
Fig. 1 The intervention for volleyball players
Abbreviations
FIFA: Fédération Internationale de Football Association; IM: Intervention
Mapping; Nevobo: Dutch Volleyball Federation; RE-AIM: Reach Efficacy
Adoption Implementation Maintenance
Acknowledgements
We greatly thank all volleyball experts involved in the development of the
intervention. We are also thankful to all clubs, trainers and players for their
participation in the feasibility study. 
Authors’ contributions
VG was responsible for the conceptualization of the idea, the preparation of
the study proposal, data collection, data analysis, interpretation of data and
preparation of the manuscript. MvS was responsible for data collection, data
analysis, interpretation of data and preparation of the manuscript. EV was
responsible for the conceptualization of the idea, the preparation of the
study proposal, interpretation of data and critical review of the manuscript.
JZ was responsible for the conceptualization of the idea, the preparation of
the study proposal, data collection, interpretation of data and critical review
of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
The study was partly funded by the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research
and Development (ZonMw). 
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Since this study did not meet the criteria for the Medical Research involving
Human Subjects act, it was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of
Helsinki and the Personal Data Protection Act.
Availability of data and materials
The data supporting the conclusions of this article is included within the article. 
Consent for publication
All authors have provided consent for publication.
Page 7
Gouttebarge et al. Injury Epidemiology (2017) 4:25  Page 7 of 7
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
1Dutch Consumer Safety Institute, Overschiestraat 65, 1062 XD Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. 2Academic Center for Evidence based Sports medicine
(ACES), Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 3Amsterdam
Collaboration for Health & Safety in Sports (ACHSS), IOC Research Center,
Academic Medical Center / VU University Medical Center , Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. 4Division of Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, University of
Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. 5Center for Sport and Exercise
Medicine, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands. 6Department of Public and Occupational
Health, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
7Australian Centre for Research into Injury in Sport and its Prevention
(ACRISP), Federation University Australia, Ballarat, Australia.
Received: 7 June 2017 Accepted: 20 July 2017 
prevention of ankle sprains: a prospective controlled trial. Am J Sports
Med. 2004;32:1385–93.
Verhagen E, van Tulder M, van der Beek AJ, Bouter L, van Mechelen W. An
economic evaluation of a proprioceptive balance board training
programme for the prevention of ankle sprains in volleyball. Br J Sports
Med. 2005;39:111–5.
Verhagen E, Voogt N, Bruinsma A, Finch CF. A knowledge transfer scheme
to bridge the gap between science and practice: an integration of
existing research frameworks into a tool for practice. Br J Sports Med.
2014;48:698–701.
References
Andersson SH, Bahr R, Clarsen B, Myklebust G. Preventing overuse shoulder
injuries among throwing athletes: a cluster-randomised controlled
trial in 660 elite handball players. Br J Sports Med. 2016;
doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-096226"] 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096226.
Bahr R, Bahr IA. Incidence of acute volleyball injuries: a prospective cohort study
of injury mechanisms and risk factors. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 1997;7:166–71.
Bartholomew LK, Parcel GS, Kok GJ. Intervention mapping: a process for
developing theory- and evidence-based health education programs. Health
Educ Behav. 1998;25:545–63.
Bizzini M, Dvorak J. Fifa 11+: an effective programme to prevent football injuries
in various player groups worldwide-a narrative review. Br J Sports Med. 2015;
49:577–9.
Bowen DJ, Kreuter M, Spring B, Cofta-Woerpel L, Linnan L, Weiner D, et al. How
we design feasibility studies. Am J Prev Med. 2009;36:452–7.
Dutch Consumer Safety Institute (VeiligheidNL). Volleyball injuries. 2015.
 https://www.veiligheid.nl/sportblessures/kennis/cijfers-over-sportblessures.
Accessed 8 Dec 2016.
Elling et al. Ervaringen en informatiebehoefte bij sporters, trainers en
(sport)fysiotherapeuten, Mulier instituut; 2014.
Fédération Internationale de Volleyball (FIVB). [URL: "http://www.fivb.org/en/volleyball/index.asp"] http://www.fivb.org/en/volleyball/
 index.asp. Accessed 8 Dec 2016.
Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health
promotion interventions: the RE-AIM framework. Am J Public Health.
1999;89:1322–7.
Gouttebarge V, Zuidema V. Prevention of musculoskeletal injuries among Dutch
hockey players: development and pilot-implementation of the KNHB
intervention. Monaco: Accepted abstract in IOC World Conference on
Prevention of Injury and Illness in Sport; 2017.
Gouttebarge V, Zwerver J, Verhagen E. Preventing musculoskeletal injuries
among recreational adult volleyball players: design of a randomised
prospective controlled trial. BMC Musculoskel Dis. 2017;18:333.
Hislop MD, Stokes KA, Williams S, McKay CD, England ME, Kemp SPT, et al.
Reducing musculoskeletal injury and concussion risk in schoolboy rugby
players with a pre-activity movement control exercise programme: a cluster
randomised controlled trial. Br J Sports Med. 2017; May 17; doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-097434"] 10.1136/
 bjsports-2016-097434.
Kilic O, Maas M, Verhagen E, Zwerver J, Gouttebarge V. Incidence, etiology and
prevention of musculoskeletal injuries in volleyball: a systematic review of
the literature. Eur J Sport Sci. 2017; doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17461391.2017.1306114"] 10.1080/17461391.2017.1306114.
Kok G, Gottlieb NH, Peters GJ, Mullen PD, Parcel GS, Ruiter RA, Fernández ME,
Markham C, Bartholomew LK. A taxonomy of behaviour change methods: an
intervention mapping approach. Health Psychol Rev. 2016;10:297–312.
Sewry N, Verhagen E, Lambert M, van Mechelen W, Brown J. Evaluation of
the effectiveness and implementation of the BokSmart safe six injury
prevention Programme: a study protocol. Inj Prev. 2016 Nov 2.
pii:injuryprev-2016-042188. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/injuryprev-2016-042188"] 10.1136/injuryprev-2016-042188.
Van Mechelen W, Hlobil H, Kemper HC. Incidence, severity, aetiology and prevention
of sports injuries. A review of concepts. Sports Med. 1992;14:82–99.
Verhagen E, van der Beek A, Twisk J, Bouter L, Bahr R, van Mechelen W. The
effect of a proprioceptive balance board training program for the
