A Message From The Chief
A relationship of trust and confidence between the employees of this police department and the
community is essential to the successful accomplishment of law enforcement objectives. Our officers
are sworn to protect the rights of all people, regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, sexual
orientation, or disability. We take this duty seriously and for that reason we have adopted internal
safeguards to prevent abuses of authority by police employees. Complaints of such abuses will be
vigorously investigated. 
If you believe that an employee of the Framingham Police Department has acted in an abusive or
unprofessional manner toward you or others, I encourage you to report that employee to a police
supervisor. I also welcome your commendations for police department employees who have
performed their duties in an admirable manner. The Framingham Police Department prides itself on
providing quality services to our community. We always encourage questions, complaints, and
comments from the community. This input allows us to evaluate employee performance, review
organizational procedures, and maintain high standards. 
Sincerely, 
Chief Lester Baker 
Information To Retain For Your Records
It is recommended that you obtain the following information and keep it for your records. Having
this information will make it less complicated for you to check on the status of your case. Please ask
the supervisor taking your report to provide you with this information. 
Name of Supervisor Taking Complaint: 
Date Reported: 
Investigating Supervisor: 
Employee(s) Involved: 
For information on the status of your 
complaint, please contact: 
Framingham Police Department
Office of Professional Standards
508-872-1212 
COMMENDATION
&
COMPLAINT
PROCEDURE GUIDE
Framingham Police Department
1 William Welch Way
Framingham, MA 01702
508-872-1212
Dedicated to Excellence 
in Public Safety 
Page 2
How To Commend A Police Department Employee
It is best to contact that employee’s supervisor as soon after the event as possible. You may make the
commendation, however, at any time to any supervisor. 
You may contact the Framingham Police Department 24 hours a day and speak with a supervisor. 
508-872-1212
The supervisor may request that you submit a written commendation. The supervisor will notify the
employee of the commendation, which will be permanently recorded in his/her personnel file. 
How To File A Complaint Against A Police Department Employee
Any person, who witnesses or has direct knowledge of misconduct by a Framingham Police
Department employee, may file a complaint. The following misconduct should be reported
immediately. 
•  Violations of State or Federal Laws
•  Violations of Town By-Laws
•  Excessive Use of Force or Abusive Treatment
•  Discourteousness
Any person who wishes to initiate a complaint against a police department employee should call by
telephone or visit the Framingham Police Department. You should always ask to speak with a
supervisor. The supervisor will attempt to resolve your complaint. If the supervisor is unable to
resolve the matter, you will be asked to forward a written complaint to the Office of Professional
Standards. 
Investigative Procedure
Framingham Police Department supervisors are responsible for maintaining discipline and
overseeing the conduct of employees assigned to them. In most cases when a complaint is filed, the
supervisor will conduct an inquiry. This will usually involve speaking with the complainant and the
police officer separately. If the complaint involves a less serious infraction, such as discourteousness, 
the supervisor may attempt to resolve the matter to the satisfaction of the complainant. 
All reports, whether or not they are resolved will be forwarded by the supervisor to the Office of
Professional Standards. 
Serious incidents may be investigated by the
Office of Professional Standards. Members of
this unit report directly to the Chief of Police. 
The investigating officer will usually meet
with the complainant to ask additional
questions, 
interview witnesses, and gather physical
evidence. 
At the completion of his/her investigation, the
investigating officer will forward the findings
to the Chief of Police. If it is established that
there is sufficient evidence that the employee
committed the alleged misconduct, the Chief
will determine what corrective action, if any, 
should be taken. The nature and severity of
the misconduct will be considered in
determining the corrective action, which may
include retraining, reassignment, counseling, 
oral/written reprimand, suspension, or
termination. Incidents involving criminal
activity, may be referred by the Chief of
Police, to the Middlesex County District
Attorney’s Office or the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Attorney General’s Office. 
How You Will Be Notified Of
The Results Of The
Investigation
At the conclusion of the investigation, you will
be notified, in writing of the outcome. The
investigating officer will make every attempt
to complete the investigation within thirty
days of the receipt of the complaint. If for
some reason, the investigation is not
completed within thirty days the investigating
officer will notify you about the delay. 
