Town of Framingham
Board of Selectmen 
Policy on Complete Streets
Issue date: January 6, 2015 
Type of policy: New ( x )  Amendment ( )
Effective date: January 6, 2015 
Level: Department ( )  Division ( )  Town Wide ( x )
Policy Statement
Complete Streets principles will contribute toward the safety, health, economic vitality, and quality of
life in the Town of Framingham by providing accessible and efficient connections between residential, 
educational, commercial, recreational, civic, and retail destinations by improving multi-modal
environments throughout the Town’s urban, suburban, and rural neighborhoods. Complete Streets are
designed and operated to provide safety and accessibility for all users of Framingham’s roadways, trails, 
and transit systems, including pedestrian, bicyclists, transit riders, motorists, commercial vehicles, and
emergency vehicles and for people of all ages and of all abilities. The use of Complete Streets has been
shown to have a positive impact on public health concerns, including improvements in air quality, 
promotion of physical activity, and enhanced access to healthier food options. 
The purpose of Framingham’s Complete Streets Policy is to enhance existing, create new, and
strengthen connections between all transportation modes to accommodate all users through
implementation of physical elements. The Town of Framingham will formalize the plan, design, 
operation, and maintenance of streets so that they are safe for all users of all ages and abilities. This
Policy shall direct decision-makers to consistently plan, design, and construct streets to accommodate all
anticipated users including, but not limited to pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, emergency vehicles, and
freight and commercial vehicles. In short, all transportation and development projects shall incorporate a
Complete Streets philosophy that expands transportation choices for all users. 
References
1. Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) Project Development & Design Guide
(latest edition) 
2. National Association of City Transportation Officials Urban Bikeway Design Guide (latest
edition) 
3. National Association of City Transportation Officials Urban Street Guide (latest edition) 
1 
Page 2
4. Institute of Transportation Engineer’s (ITE) Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A
Context Sensitive Approach (latest edition) 
5. Institute of Transportation Engineer’s (ITE) Street and Highway Design Manual, (latest edition) 
6. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), A Policy on
The Geometric Design of Highways and Streets (latest edition) 
7. Town of Framingham Master Land Use Plan (2014) 
8. Town of Framingham Open Space and Recreation Plan (2013) 
9. Board of Selectmen Policy on Traffic Calming Measures (2013) 
10. Town of Framingham Department of Public Works Construction Standards, (latest edition) 
11. Other resources may be consulted 
Special Terms
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this policy, shall have the meanings defined in this
section unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
"Complete Streets" is the planning, scoping, design, implementation, operation, and maintenance of
roads in order to reasonably address the safety and accessibility needs of users of all ages and abilities. 
Complete Streets considers the needs of motorists, pedestrians, transit users and vehicles, bicyclists, and
commercial and emergency vehicles moving along and across roads, intersections, and crossings in a
manner that is sensitive to the local context and recognizes that the needs vary in urban, suburban, and
rural neighborhoods. 
“Complete Streets Infrastructure” means physical street features that contribute to a safe, convenient, or
comfortable travel experience for users, including but not limited to features such as: sidewalks; shared
use paths; bicycle lanes; automobile lanes; paved shoulders; street trees and landscaping; planting strips; 
curbs; accessible curb ramps; bulb outs; crosswalks; refuge islands; pedestrian and traffic signals, 
including countdown and accessible signals; signage; street furniture; bicycle parking facilities; public
transportation stops and facilities; transit priority signalization; traffic calming devices such as rotary
circles, traffic bumps, and surface treatments such as paving blocks, textured asphalt, and concrete; 
narrow vehicle lanes; raised medians; and dedicated transit lanes. Other Complete Streets elements
include: street and sidewalk lighting; sidewalks and pedestrian safety improvements such as median
refuges or crosswalk improvements; bicycle accommodations including bicycle storage, bicycle routes, 
shared-use lanes, wide travel lanes as appropriate; boulevard landscaping; and reduction in the number
of travel lanes or modification of on-street parking. 
“Street” means any right of way, public or private, including arterials, connectors, alleys, ways, lanes, 
and roadways by any other designation, as well as bridges, tunnels, and any other portions of the
transportation network. 
Policy Description
The Town of Framingham Master Land Use Plan recommends the Town adopt a Complete Streets
Policy. The Town believes that all surface road systems should provide safe and adequate access so that
cars, trucks, transit, bicyclists, and pedestrians of all ages and abilities are safely accommodated in the
transportation system to reach any destination throughout all of the Town’s neighborhoods. The Town 
2 
Page 3
recognizes that all projects (new, maintenance, or reconstruction) are potential opportunities to apply
Complete Streets design principles. The Town will, to the maximum extent practical, design, construct, 
maintain, and operate all streets to provide for a comprehensive and integrated street network of
facilities for people of all ages and abilities. 
The Framingham Open Space and Recreation Plan sets an objective to create and complete corridors for
non-motorized passage that serve as greenways and provide access to recreation facilities, place of work, 
school, public transportation connections, and other points of interest in town. 
In order to meet the goals and objectives of the Master Land Use Plan and the Open Space and
Recreation Plan and honor the Town’s commitment to Complete Streets, the Town shall: 
1. Recognize that Complete Streets may be achieved through single elements incorporated into a
particular project or incrementally through a series of smaller improvements or maintenance
activities over time. 
2. Integrate Compete Streets planning into all types of projects, when practical, including new
construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, and repair or other changes of transportation facilities
on streets and additional projects under Town review. 
3. Incorporate Complete Streets elements into public transportation projects in order to provide
appropriate accommodation for bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users and person of all abilities, 
while promoting safe operation for all users, in comprehensive and connected networks in a
manner consistent with, and supportive of, the surrounding neighborhood. 
4. Approach every newly designed transportation project as an opportunity to improve the streets
and the transportation network for all users. 
5. Follow the aforementioned references, which provide guidance on basic design controls and
achievement of Complete Streets. 
At a minimum, the following shall be considered: 
a. In urbanized areas, continuous sidewalks should be provided on both sides of a roadway, 
minimizing the number of pedestrian crossings required. 
b. On the streets with sidewalks on one side, the sidewalk should be provided on the side
that minimizes the number of pedestrian crossings. 
c. Pedestrian requirements must be fully considered in the design of intersections, including
taking into consideration the following concerns: crossings and pedestrian curb cut ramp
locations; minimizing curb radius at corners; walking speed; pedestrian flow capacity; 
traffic control; yielding; and delays. 
d. All new and reconstructed sidewalks must be accessible to and usable by persons with
disabilities in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the
Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (MAAB).
e. Along roadway segments, greater separation of motor vehicle and non-motorized users
should be considered by implementing cycle tracks, buffered or conventional bicycle
lanes, bicycle boxes, shoulders, or buffered sidewalks. 
3 
Page 4
f. Where motorized and non-motorized users cannot be separated, driver attentiveness
should be improved and traffic calming should be prioritized to implement a low-speed
shared street [not to exceed 30 mph or the posted speed] compatible with bicycle and
pedestrian speeds on non-federal aid eligible roads. 
6. Incorporate, when applicable and practical, bicycle, pedestrian, and transit facilities, in street
reconstruction and rehabilitation projects, except in the following circumstances to be approved
by the Town Engineer in consultation with the Department of Public Works, Highway Division.:
a. Facilities or areas where bicycles or pedestrians are prohibited by law from using the
facility. 
b. The cost of establishing bikeways or walkways as part of the project would be
disproportionate in cost or to anticipated future use (not the current use).
c. The existing right of way is constrained in a manner that inhibits simple addition of
transit, bicycle, or pedestrian improvements. In this case, the Town shall consider
alternatives such as lane reduction, lane narrowing, on-street parking relocation or
reduction, shoulders, signage, traffic calming, pavement markings, or enforcement. 
d. Where such facilities would constitute a threat to public safety in the determination of the
Town Engineer in consultation with the Department of Public Works, Highway Division. 
7. Make an effort to (1) evaluate the effect of the proposed project on safe travel by all users, and
(2) identify measures to mitigate any adverse impacts on such travel that are identified in all
initial planning and design studies, health impact assessments, environmental reviews, and other
project reviews for projects requiring funding or approval by the Town. 
8. The design of new or reconstructed facilities should anticipate and support likely future demand
for bicycling, walking and transit facilities. 
9. A multi-disciplinary group comprised of Town staff will be organized to review Complete
Streets opportunities, completed projects, and other topics regarding Complete Streets on a
quarterly basis. 
10. The Town, in working with community stakeholders, will produce a Bicycle and Pedestrian Plan
in order to prioritize locations throughout Town for Complete Streets infrastructure. 
11. Success of this policy will be evaluated by the number of new miles of Complete Streets
infrastructure created. Complete Streets amenities that cannot be measured in miles, such as
signs, bicycle racks, crosswalks, etc…, will be measured based on the quantity of each type of
amenity. 
4 
