City of Framingham
Yvonne M. Spicer, Mayor
FY2020 Budget Message 
Page 2
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
Ph: 508-532-5400
Fax: 508-532-5409
www.framinghamma.gov 
May 2, 2019
The Honorable City Council
City of Framingham
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
Dear Councilors, 
I am pleased to present the Fiscal Year 2020 (FY20) budget for the City of Framingham. The budget was
prepared over the last several months in consultation with the Chief Financial Officer, Chief Operating
Officer and Division Heads. As we developed this budget, we looked through the lens of the original five
promises I made to the City: 
1. Smooth Transition to City form of Government
2. Excellence in Education 
3. Invigorating our Economy through Planned Growth and Balanced Development 
4. Preservation of Assets, Resources, and Quality of Life
5. Investing in our People
The fiscal management of the budget is the cornerstone of our success as a municipality. This budget
reflects our on-going efforts though the focus of the five promises, strategic thinking and deliberate
decision making to balancing revenue while preserving Framingham services. 
Proposed General Fund, otherwise known as the operating budget, is $296,404,258 million, which is an 
increase of $11.6 million or 4% over the FY19 budget. 
In the FY20 budget, you will see that we are holding the Framingham municipal costs at a 2.2% increase, 
representing $1.4 million. The City will continue to support our schools in the same excellent manner in
which it has historically. The City is proposing a budget of $137,873,104 – a 3.65% increase or roughly
$4.86 million over FY19. 
The schools operating budget accounts for 47% of General Fund budget. This operating budget inclusive
of salaries and day-to-day school operations. The schools’ budget is not inclusive of benefits and
retirement costs for non-teachers, school debt service and state assessments. When those are added, the
school department’s budget accounts for 60.2% of the General Fund. 
Pursuant to the City’s Charter Article VI, Sections 3 and 4: Submission of Budget and The Budget, 
included is the FY20 Operating Budget. Go [URL: "https://www.framinghamma.gov/2210/Budget-Central-Financial-Reports"] here for the full budget. 
2
Page 3
Highlights of the FY20 Budget: 
o Cost of recycling has doubled
o 20.45 full-time employees (FTE)s were requested by municipal staff. We are adding 5
FTEs and we eliminated 3.6 FTEs. In FY20, we will hire 1.4 FTEs. 
o Utility Enterprise Budget (water and sewer) is increasing 3.4%, which is down from last
year’s increase of 5.5%.
o We are recommending that we go to a 2.5 levy which will increase taxes $159 a year. 
o Planned Efficiencies: 
  The budget for Community and Economic Development Division, the Planning
Board, and the Conservation Commission is being reorganized under a new
division called Planning and Community Development. This provides resources to
streamline the planning and permitting processes while reducing staff by one FTE. 
  Centralizing the maintenance, renovation, construction management of
Framingham facilities will begin in FY20. This effort will provide better oversite
as to how Framingham maintains and manages facilities and ultimately allow the
City to take advantage of its buying power. 
  The merger of the Edgell Grove Cemetery with the existing Cemetery operation in
the Park and Recreation Division as required by the Charter will occur in FY20. 
We anticipate streamlined services and lower costs as Edgell Grove is able to take
advantage of the City’s buying power for goods and services. 
  The City will institute centralized funding and payment of copiers. The new
contract which will begin in September 2019 (FY20) will save more than $2,400
per month. 
As I indicated in my State of the City speech, Framingham’s financial footing is solid. We continue to
implement many financial best practices, such as creating and properly funding reserves; addressing our
pension and other post-employment benefits liabilities; creating financial forecasts; and developing and
implementing long-range capital investment plans. 
Both our property value and the income of our residents has increased substantially. City-wide taxable
property value is certified by the state at $9.79 billion, representing growth in value of $734 million or
8.5%. $121 million of that increase is from new development within the city. 
We will close fiscal year 2019 with a modest positive balance, remaining within the voted budget. Our
local revenue is stable, and we continue to advocate for state aid and have benefited greatly from the
stewardship of our legislative delegation. 
While we are moving in the right direction with regards to diversity and inclusion, we still have miles to
go. I have included a request for a Director for Diversity and Inclusion again this year. The role of
Director for Diversity and Inclusion will lead on issues of equitable practices throughout the City of
Framingham, providing cohesiveness and serving as a channel for all divisions and a resource for the
school department to prioritize inclusivity and diversity. 
In the last year, we’ve carefully managed the City’s budget, treating the City as a business by monitoring
expenses, spending and staffing with surgical precision. We instituted FramStat one year ago – a data
3
Page 4
system to manage staffing, programs and services. Clusters of Division Heads, organized around
functional expertise, meet with the Mayor’s office every week to present and answer questions about
what their divisions are accomplishing with their assigned staff and within their budgets. An invaluable
benefit of FramStat is that we are increasing collaboration among the teams which, in turn, has a positive, 
cumulative impact on efficiency. 
As with every budget, we are meeting challenges and taking advantage of opportunities to maintain
balance between Framingham’s ability to deliver municipal services and manage our costs and thus
moderate taxes for residents. 
In the next fiscal year, we create a long-term strategy for municipal buildings. The City also will begin to
address funding fund Storm Water compliance. As well, we are looking to the future by investing our
free cash with a long-term view, such as setting aside funds for investment in City assets, paying down
liabilities, and maintaining a stabilization fund to help keep Framingham recession proof as much as
possible. 
We continually explore opportunities to gain efficiencies, such as implementing technologies to better
serve residents and looking hard at our current and future staffing to help best meet the needs of the City. 
In our FY20 budget, all of the services that our residents rely on will remain as before because of
efficiency and focus. We are a work in progress, but I’m proud of what we’ve done to maintain balance! 
Finally, I would like to express my appreciation to our employees. Without their contributions and daily
commitment, we would be unable to achieve success in providing for Framingham residents. The
financial position of the City represents an organizational culture of innovation and a team that
challenges itself to deliver excellent services at a cost that is affordable to the residents of our City. 
Sincerely, 
Dr. Yvonne M. Spicer, Mayor
The FY20 budget summary that is provided in the following pages are part of a comprehensive package that includes a
number of detailed separate files for (1) department budgets, that includes prior year spending data (2) employee salary/wage
data by department, (3) summary position data to show position counts by department (4) the FY20 Budget Order submitted
to the City Council. All of this material is submitted to the City Council electronically and is posted on the City’s website. 
4
Page 5
FY20 Revenue Details
General Fund Revenue
The General Fund is the primary operating fund for City revenues and expenditures. The estimate used
for the FY20 operating budget is $296,405,004. This is an increase of $11.42 million or 4%. The State
Aid amounts are based on the House budget. Local receipts are estimated largely based on the last three
years’ experience in actual revenue. Enterprise Indirect, the overhead charged against the Utility
Enterprise Fund is a 4% increase over FY18. Free Cash is used to fund the Capital Stabilization Fund, 
Stabilization Fund, OPEB Trust contribution and a portion of the increase in the Pension Fund
appropriation. Finally, this estimate relies on a 2.5% base tax levy increase and $3.27 million in new
taxes from development. There is no free cash allocated to offset the levy. The use of free cash in this
manner creates instability in basic revenue and inconsistency in tax bills to residents. There is no 
revenue from marijuana businesses included in this revenue. The mitigation funds, capped at 3% of
business revenue, and the 3% sales tax will not be substantial until the retail businesses are underway. 
The breakdown of the General Fund Revenue amount is illustrated in the pie chart below: 
FY20 Proposed Revenue $3,422,238 ,  $4,702,209 ,
1%  2%
$25,639,338 ;
9% 
$35,000 ,
0%
$63,337,073 ,
21% 
$199,269,147 ,
67%
Property Taxes
Enterprise Indirect Transfer 
State Aid
Certified Free Cash 
Local Receipts
Miscellaneous
Historically, the City was very dependent on property taxes as a source of revenue. In 2009 the state
created local meals taxes and increased the local room tax to bring some relief to the reliance on property
taxes. This was helpful in that it generates about $1.5 million in additional revenue. Our State legislators, 
led by Senator Spilka, corrected the inequity that existed with Framingham and Chapter 70 target aid. 
As a result of that work, chapter 70 aid has increased $22 million or 79% since FY13, allowing us to
5
Page 6
reduce reliance on property taxes as seen in the graph below. However, now that we have reached the
Chapter 70 education aid target, we cannot expect large incremental increases in aid, as reflected in the
pattern of the orange bar in the graph below for years FY17 through FY20. 
80 
74.8
70 
Revenue History by % of Total
67.4  67  67.1  67.1  67.2
60
50
40
30
20 
14.9
10  7.9 
19.4  20.4  19.8
9  7.8  8.3 
21.4 
21.4
8  8.6
0 
FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14 FY15 FY16 FY17 FY18
Property Taxes State Aid Local Receipts Indirect Free Cash 
FY19 FY20
For FY20, state aid is increasing 3.6%. Some state aid sources are declining, like Charter School reimbursements
and School Building Authority reimbursements. Total Education aid is increasing $2.7 million or 5.7%. State aid
is not actually distributed as the amount listed on state Cherry Sheets. There are state assessments; charges for
services related to state aid, such as Charter School Tuition and School Choice Tuition that amount to millions of
dollars of deductions from state aid. The City gets the net revenue of state aid minus state assessments. 
Local Receipts is the category of General Fund revenue that includes motor vehicle excise tax, room and meals
taxes, building permits, user fees, rental income, interest and penalties on late tax payments, fines, payments in lieu
of taxes, ice time at Loring Arena and cable access revenue from the three cable companies. In FY20, local
receipts are increasing 7.3%. This significant growth is due to the addition of two new revenue sources. Solar net
meter credit revenue is received from the sale of our solar net metering credits that we receive from the solar
installation on the roof of Shoppers World ($475,396). The second new source is revenue associated with Edgell
Grove Cemetery ($265,000), which will go to fund the operations of the Cemetery now merged within the Park
and Recreation Division. While some of the individual revenue types that fall under local receipts change at
different rates (excise and other taxes 3% and licenses and permits 4%) the total increase is $1.7 million. 
The next largest category of revenue is called Enterprise Indirect. This is the overhead charged against the Utility
Enterprise Fund for services and management time performed by General Fund staff and costs funded in the
General Fund that also cover the Water and Sewer Departments. These include items like unemployment
insurance, workers’ compensation costs, property and liability insurance and Medicare tax. Health insurance is
funded directly out of the utility fund department budgets. The total revenue for FY20 is $3.4 million, an increase
6
Page 7
of 3% or $100,000. Note that this is charged against the Utility Enterprise Fund. It is included in the budget detail
for the Water and Sewer Departments, but not included in the appropriation amount in the Appropriation Schedule. 
The final major revenue category is free cash. The free cash policy is provided in the back section of this
document. The total amount of free cash used as a revenue source for the FY20 budget is $4,702,209. This budget
recommendation continues to build up the Capital Stabilization Fund in advance of the needs of the Long Range
Building Plan - $1.9 million is appropriated in this budget. In FY19 the Mayor proposed a deposit into this reserve
of $2.2 million; however that was diverted by the City Council to offset the increase in the tax levy for FY19. The
transfer to the regular Stabilization Fund is $448,209, which is enough to keep the Stabilization Fund at 5% of the
total budget as required by current policy. The City created an OPEB Trust Fund to begin the process of funding
the $314 million liability related to the costs of retiree health care. The balance of this trust fund is currently $6.1
million. The FY20 recommended addition to the OPEB Trust is $250,000. The FY20 Retirement appropriation is
funded by $1.1 million of free cash, as described in the Retirement section below. $1.1 million of free cash is used
as a general revenue source. 
Miscellaneous revenue is from parking receipts and the consumer protection fund. They total $35,000. 
FY20 General Fund Expenditure Details
General Fund expenditures increase $11.6 million or 4% from FY19. The largest dollar increase by far is for the
School Department – the General Fund recommendation is $137,873,104. This is an increase of $4,855,155
million or 3.65% from the FY19 budget. The funding recommendation for the School Department provides ample
resources for stable school operations and educational improvement. The pie chart below illustrates the distribution
of spending resources across major categories. 
FY20 Recommended Budget
Municipal Departments (Total)
Framingham School District
Keefe Technical Assessmnt 
2% 
0%
1% 
3%
5%
6% 
23%
Group Health Insurance
Other Insurances  11%
Retirement & OPEB Trust
Debt Service & Abatement Interest 
3%
Stabilization/Reserves
EDIC/Traffic Commission 
47%
Non Appropriations
Note: in this pie chart, the Municipal Departments total includes the Mayor’s Office, City Council and the addition of
Edgell Grove Cemetery and Net Metering Credit payments. 
7
Page 8
Budget Requests versus Budget Recommendations
Overall City Department budgets are increasing 3.2% or $2.06 million; however, that includes the merger of the
Edgell Grove Cemetery ($273,700) and funding the payment for net metering credits ($372,317 in the CFO’s
budget). Once your remove these two items, the combined City Department increase is 2.2% or $1,420,155. 
Like the School Department, City Departments requested additional resources, both in terms of personnel, 
operating dollars and equipment. In total, City Departments requested 20.45 new positions. The FY20 includes
five (5 FTEs) of those requested positions. We eliminate 3.6 positions in an effort to streamline organizations. 
This offsets all but 1.4 positions added to departments. There are a number of city-wide issues that need
addressing, as specified in the list below and in the Mayor’s letter. The list of requested positions, explanation of
the need and recommendation are listed below: 
1. Mandated storm water legal/regulatory compliance (MS4 Permit) - the new federal mandate that requires
municipalities to identify, clean and repair structures that flow into rivers, streams, lakes, reservoirs and other
bodies of water. The city has 8,500 catch basins that now need to be cleaned every year. In additional to
buildings and parking lots, roads, wetlands, etc. owned by the City, we will be required to mitigate the water
runoff from individual private properties, both commercial and residential. This is an enormous undertaking, 
one that every municipality has to deal with. The directing departments for stormwater compliance are DPW
Engineering and Highway. The funding request for FY20 compliance is $1.8 million which includes 10 new
positions ranging from engineers to heavy equipment operators. The FY20 budget funds one Heavy
Equipment Operator and the Operations Manager only. This will NOT make the City compliant with the MS4
permit; it is but a baby step towards addressing the problem. However, we need to look holistically at how to
fund this unfunded mandate. DPW is partnering with a number of Metrowest communities to develop the best
solutions. The remaining positions and added operating costs are not recommended in this budget as there are
not enough revenue to cover the cost. 
2. City-wide Diversity and Inclusion – a Director of Diversity and Inclusion is added to the Mayor’s office (1
FTE). Engagement of our diverse Framingham population is vital. Our city is poised for excellence, and we
should be doing everything possible to be inclusive and encouraging. It is imperative that Framingham has a
full-time leadership position to support this work. The Director will focus on diversity in all its forms-racial, 
linguistic, socio-economic and geographical. Everyone in Framingham should feel they have a voice. The
addition of a Diversity and Inclusion Director is the right hire at the right time for our City. 
3. Public Health Intervention for the Opioid Crisis – the Department of Public Health requested an addition
community intervention staff person to focus on this issue. The recommendation is fund this position with
marijuana tax revenue once the funds materialize. 
4. Increasing public safety access in both the Police and Fire Departments by adding dispatchers to handle the
increasing volume of complicated medical calls. The Fire Department requested one day shift dispatcher. The
Police Department requested three dispatchers to cover all shifts. The FY20 recommendation is to fund one
dispatcher in Police, where the call initiates. The remaining dispatchers would be funded from marijuana
revenue. 
5. Additional Administrative Assistant for the City Clerk – the volume of certified birth certificates has increased
significantly due to the identification requirement of the Real ID driver’s license. The City Clerk’s office also
provides staff support to the City Council and back up to the City Council Executive Assistant. This is a new
responsibility. The request is not recommended in the FY20 budget as there is not enough revenue to cover
the additional cost. 
8
Page 9
6. The Council on Aging requested adding a Customer Service staff person. This position was reclassified last
year into the Assistant Director at the request of the Department. This addition is not recommended in the
FY20 budget, as the focus is to add only the highest priority positions and limit the increase in total staff. 
7. The Accounting Department requested an additional FTE to process School payroll. There are currently only
two FTEs that process more than $100 million in School payroll annually. The School is implementing a new
time collection software that will increase the amount of review of payroll records prior to processing. 
Additionally, school pay cycles and check schedules have become so convoluted that the level of work has
increased. There are five different pay cycles, different start dates for the school year depending upon the
employee group and hundreds of stipends and allowances and reimbursements to process on a weekly, bi
weekly and other cycle basis. This request is not recommended for FY20 as there is not enough revenue
available to fund the added cost. 
8. The City Council is requesting to increase the City Auditor to full time from part time (+ 0.45 FTE). This is
not recommended for FY20. 
There are a number of important changes to City Department budgets. 
  The reorganization of the Community and Economic Development Division, the Planning Board, and the
Conservation Commission into the new Planning and Community Development Division is funded in this
budget. The formal reorganization plan must be filed as a separate order to be deliberated and approved
by the City Council, but the funding structure associated with the reorganization is included in this budget. 
  The Economic Development Industrial Corporation is recommended for FY20 funding for $141,000 in a
separate appropriation. The purpose of doing a separate appropriation is to allow the funds to be timed
with the work plan and not expire at the end of the fiscal year. Activities in the EDIC work plan have
frequently taken longer than a 12 month period. We have found that this funding structure works well and
supports the economic development timetable of the EDIC. 
  Phase one of centralizing the maintenance, renovation, construction management and long range planning
City buildings is recommended for FY20. The Facilities Management and Capital Projects Division will
re-assume the custodial, maintenance and capital project management of the two City Libraries. The 1.6
FTEs currently funded in the Library budget will transfer to Facilities Management. We are adding one
staff person to the Facilities Management and Capital Projects Division for contract compliance for both
maintenance contracts and construction contracts. Finally, the Facilities Management Division will be
overseeing all maintenance work and cleaning services for the Loring Arena. The newly renovated Arena
has many new mechanical, ADA and code compliant systems and equipment that require specialized
attention. Finally, included with this budget is a new policy that requires any and all requests for building
services – mechanical, electrical, structural and custodial – be approved by the Director of Facilities
Management. Modeled after the existing Technology policy, which has been working successfully for
decades, the implementation of this policy will begin with the new fiscal year. The policy will ensure that
any work performed on City buildings will comply with all state building codes and follow best practices
for maintenance, repair and cleaning. In the future, management of all City-owned buildings will
centralize directly under the Facilities Management and Capital Projects Division, including DPW
buildings and Park and Recreation buildings. The services and programs provided within those buildings
will still be conducted by the Departments to which they are assigned. 
  The Charter requires the Edgell Grove Cemetery operations be moved into the Executive branch as a new
division. After meetings with the Trustees of Edgell Grove Cemetery, it made sense to merge Edgell
Grove with the existing Cemetery Department within the Park and Recreation Division. The Edgell Grove
Trustees would function similarly to the Library Trustees and the Park staff will work with the existing
Edgell Grove staff to operate all four city cemeteries. 
9
Page 10
  Restructure of Solar Net Metering Credit incentive from a cost reduction mechanism to a revenue
producing mechanism. The city entered into a solar net metering agreement in 2016 with Altus Energy
which installed a 1.67mW facility on top of the western building at Shoppers World. The solar facility
generates credits that are used to pay our electric bill. We buy the credits from Altus at a 20% discount
and the credits reduce the electric bill by 100%. We use the savings to pay for the credits and reduce the
overall cost of electricity in the city budget. It took almost two years to get the facility connected to the
grid. Now connected, Eversource invoked a policy to pay the City cash for credits instead of giving us the
credits to pay the bill. In this budget we add the revenue, $475,396 in the local receipts revenue category. 
The expense of $372,317 is accounted for in an energy line in the CFO’s budget in order to be easily
identified. This is a new expense and it throws off the comparison of energy spending from FY19 to FY20. 
The FY20 budget for energy spending is decreasing by almost $300,000. The net result of incorporating
solar net metering is an increase in revenue of $103,000 to fund overall energy costs. 
  Centralize funding and payment of City Department copiers. The Facilities Management and Technology
staff have worked with state contracted copier vendors to re-bid the expiring contract for
copy/print/fax/scan services across the multiple buildings which house city services. The entire equipment
plan has been streamlined and assessed for quantity and capacity. The new contract will begin in
September 2019 (FY20). The new plan will save more than $2,300 per month and will be paid centrally
from the Purchasing budget. Monies previously budgeted in multiple department have been combined into
the Purchasing budget (and reduced).
Overall operating costs for City Departments total $13.9 million, increasing by 5.5% or $912,349. This is driven
primarily by the cost of trash disposal, recycling costs, technology maintenance, cemetery maintenance and
funding an extra election cycle. Energy costs are decreasing 0.6%.
Small Capital, is the category of spending for the purchase of replacement small equipment, items that do not have
a useful life of five years or items we simply choose to pay directly as part of the operating budget. Each year this
budget category starts from zero (i.e. zero-based budget); each requested is evaluated for need and either
recommended or deferred. There is one exception to this methodology: there is a five year lease/purchase of a
substantial technology upgrade that was authorized at the 2016 Annual Town Meeting. The fourth payment of
$250,000 is included in the Technology Department small capital budget. This will be included in the FY21
budget and then eliminated. The City Departmental total in this category is $867,221, which is 3% less than FY19. 
The pie chart below depicts City Department budgets spending categories by percentage. 
10
Page 11
FY20 City Depts by
Spending Category
Salaries
Operating
Energy
Small Capital 
1,592,029 , 2%  867,221 , 1%
13,928,628 , 21% 
50,580,002 , 76%
Note: this breakdown includes Mayor’s Office, City Council, Edgell Grove Cemetery and Net Metering Credits Payments
Departmental Staffing
There is significant movement of positions and FTEs in the budget. Overall, not including Education
Departments, the net change in full time equivalent positions (FTEs) is 1.4 FTEs higher than FY19. Personnel
spending for City Departments total $50.58 million, increasing almost $1.4 million or 2.8%. As you can see from
the pie chart on the previous page, personnel costs are the largest part of the combined City Department budget at
76%.
Included in this budget package is an FTE chart that lists the number of FTEs by Department, with notes as to new
positions, eliminated positions and transfers of positions to other departments. We are eliminating four positions
from various departments, which involves laying off three employees. The net effect is a reduction of 3.6 FTEs. 
Five new positions are added as described on the previous page. 
This budget plan includes a detailed schedule of all employees by department, listing all positions, their salaries
and differentials (if applicable), step dates and amounts, programs and funding sources. This file is called the
Employee Schedule and is posted with FY20 budget material. 
All but two of the City collective bargaining units are in the midst or about to begin negotiations. No funds have
been included in individual budgets for negotiations. A salary reserve has been set aside with funding for a 1% 
cost of living adjustment for FY20 for all expired contracts. 
Classification Plan
This budget package also includes supporting material for the Classification Plan and salary schedules included in
the Budget Order submitted to the City Council. The Classification Plan has been updated for FY20, listing all the
non-bargaining/non-union position titles, senior management classified titles and the Division Head classified titles 
that are included in this budget. The corresponding salary schedules for the Classification Plan are also included. 
11
Page 12
Group Health and Other Insurances
In FY15, City employees migrated to the state run Group Insurance Commission for health insurance coverage. 
This change reset the pattern of health insurance spending for Framingham. Savings over the three year period
(FY15-17) were $24 million. Rates for FY20 expect to increase overall 3.5%.  For FY20 the City negotiated with
the Public Employee Committee (PEC) to provide different dental plans. Delta Dental will be the new carrier, 
providing better coverage for less cost. Since the employees pay 85% of the premium and the City pays 15%, a
good portion of those savings go in the employee’s pocket, but it lowers the cost for the City as well. The Plan is
also fully insured, versus the previous self-insured program, thus reducing risk for both parties as well. Based on
enrollment in the health plans and assuming modest staff turnover the appropriation is increasing 3.3% or $1
million. 
Retirement Fund Appropriation
The City of Framingham is a member of the Framingham Retirement System (FRS).  The FRS includes employees
of the Framingham housing Authority (FHA) and the Metro West Regional Transit Authority (MWRTA). The
appropriation included in the General Fund budget covers only employer share for the City of Framingham
employees, NOT the FHA or MWRTA employees. Further, only “non-teaching” School Department positions are
included in this system. Framingham School District teachers are included in the Massachusetts Teachers
Retirement System or MTRS. The state funds the employer share of MTRS, Framingham, as an employer does
not contribute funds. Employees in both systems contribute a substantial portion of their income as the employee
contribution. For employees hired after 1996, they are contributing essentially 11% of their compensation toward
their retirement. Actuarially, this is fully funding the retirement benefit. The unfunded liability often referred to in
reports and in the news is a result of lower contributions from the employees that were hired before 1984 who
contribute 7% or less toward their retirement. The pension benefit eligibility was substantially changed in April of
2012. It increased the retirement age for vested members from 55 to 60 years of age. The average pension in the
Framingham Retirement System is $28,000. 
Every two years the Retirement Board is required to update the actuarial study the analyses the assets and
liabilities of the fund. The result of that actuarial study is an updated appropriation schedule that sets the funding
requirements that will eliminate the unfunded liability. Last year we included the impact of updated mortality
tables and a reduced rate of return as recommended by both PERAC, the state agency that oversees all public
retirement funds and PRIM, the investment management Agency that invests the Framingham Retirement Fund. 
This year we are adjusting the rate of return downward again, from 7.5% to 7.35%.  The PRIM benchmark for
investment return is 7.25%, but the Framingham rate of return is with the benchmark range recommended by
PERAC. 
The appropriation schedule adopted by the Framingham Retirement Board maintains the elimination of the
unfunded pension liability by 2030. The new schedule also includes a larger payment in FY20 which will limit the
future year increases to 5.2%; the intention is to reduce the incremental impact on the budget in future years when
we have less free cash to invest in one time initiatives such as this. The goal of closing out our pension liability is
closer than ever. In 2030 (just ten budgets away), the last allocation will be made-this frees up $19 million
annually in cash that can be redirected to closing the OPEB liability ($12 million is recommended) helping to pay
for citizens services and managing the tax burden. 
The increase in funding from FY19 is $1,100,545 (7.1%); again, an accelerated payment with a long term view to
reduce the incremental increase over the next nine fiscal years. $1.1 million of free cash is allocated to fund this
investment. 
Debt Service 
12
Page 13
The debt service amount included in the FY20 operating budget is based on the required debt service from issued
debt and a modest amount for short term borrowing related to prior year, on-going capital projects. There is a
modest increase in the cost of principal and interest on bonds of $170,000. Funding for short term borrowing
funding is decreased $150,000 compared to FY19; the borrowing plan will require fewer short term BAN pay
downs than in prior cycles. 
Interest on abatements, which has been included in the debt service spending category until FY19, has been
lowered $11,000 to $287,000. This change is based on current appeals and our caseload at the Appellate Tax
Board. The Chief Assessor and contracted assessing attorney have focused on pushing Framingham cases quickly
through the ATB which limits delay and the incursion of interest on these appeals. 
Non –Appropriation Items
These budget items require no vote for appropriation but have always been included in the budget
documentation and are part of the budget bottom line. These items include tax title – the costs to process
tax foreclosure cases in land court. The state assessments – which include a transportation assessment
for the MBTA and MWRTA; and charter school, school choice, and special education assessments based
on the number of children attending these schools outside of our school district. These amounts are
estimates at this point, based on the House budget. But they could, and have, increased substantially with
the Senate budget. The amounts we are funding in this budget are the House amounts. The
transportation assessments include MBTA (decrease of $124,883) and the MWRTA (increase of
$168,584) with a total increase of $43,751 or 2.8%. Special Education assessments increase $47,256, 
which is 410% more than FY19. Tuition assessments consist of two types: school choice sending tuition
which is increasing $228,804 or 50%; charter school sending tuition is modest this year, increasing less
than $10,000. Finally, the tax overlay, the amount set aside to offset the cost of tax abatements is
included in this budget category. This item is reduced from FY19 by $173,000 to $1,900,000. 
Depositing Free Cash to Reserves and Funding Liabilities 
Free cash is the ending balance of available money that is certified by the state Department of Revenue. 
Free cash is considered non-recurring, meaning it is not consistently generated every year. In
Framingham the free cash balance has ranged from $1.2 million to $16.6 million. The Department of
Revenue guidance for balances of free cash states municipalities should maintain a balance of 5-10% of
total budget value in free cash. In the case of Framingham’s budget, that balance would range from
$14.4 million to $28.7 million. At the end of FY17 certified free cash was $14.4 million, right on the
bottom end of the scale. At the end of FY18 certified free cash was $10.25 million, below the threshold. 
In prior fiscal year, following our policy, we use free cash to fund one time capital projects or to deposit
into reserves. Last year the City Council chose instead to redirect free cash to offset the tax levy, a
recurring revenue source. All told in the budget $7 million was used. The budget balance, in the last
eight years a solid positive balance, in FY18 was only $2.5 million, hence the decline in the balance of
free cash from $14.4 million to $10.25 million. In this budget we recommend, again, that free cash
primarily be used to fund reserves or one-time costs. We use $1.1 million to fund an accelerated
payment toward closing the unfunded liability in pensions. We deposit $1.9 million into the Capital
Stabilization Fund to help offset the cost of substantial capital needs for City buildings. 
The City, again following solid (and long existing) financial policy, deposits $448,209 into the regular
Stabilization Fund. This is often referred to as the “Rainy Day Fund”.  In FY09, when we adopted the
local room and meals tax, the additional revenue was dedicated to the Stabilization Fund until it reached
13
Page 14
the 5% of total budget policy level. That happened in FY14, and those dedicated revenues were released
as general revenue to fund the operating budget. The amount recommended since then has been amount
needed to keep the fund at 5% of total budget, which is the policy level. The current balance of the
Stabilization Fund is $16.1 million. The Department of Revenue benchmark for a Stabilization fund is
5% to 10% of total budget. This would be $14.8 million to $29.6 million. We are currently on the low
end of that scale. The national Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) recommends two
months’ worth of expense as the benchmark for a stabilization fund. In Framingham’s case that would
be $48 million. The chart below lists all the City’s Stabilization Funds. Even if you add them all
together, the GFOA benchmark is not met. 
Stabilization Fund
Capital Stabilization 
City of Framingham Stabilization Funds
Balance as of  DOR Benchmark Range GFOA* 
March 31, 2019 5% - 10%**  Benchmark Notes:
Fund is at bottom of DOR range, nowhere
$16,156,136 $14,813,163 $29,626,326 $49,377,210 near GFOA benchmark $8 million was apprprpated for the Fuller
School project in October 2018; we have not
started expending from that appropriation
$10,446,699  yet
OPEB Trust
Open Space Stabilization 
$6,125,631
$147,933 
OPEB liability is $431,539,005
Spent $250,000 in FY16 to acquire
woodlands adjacent to Wittenborg Woods
Total "formal" Reserves $32,876,399
* GFOA is the national Government Finance Officers Association; CFO and Asst CFO are members of MA Chapter
** DOR has benchmarks for regular Stabilization Funds only. 
The ending balance sheet for FY19 should show a modest balance, but we do not expect department turn
backs to be as generous as prior years. We stripped all of the budgets during the year for the cost
increase in recycling, which doubled. We still have to transfer funds to close the snow removal deficit of
approximately $500,000. We also had two prior year wage settlements with large retroactive payments
that swallowed up whatever turnover savings would have been generated. Conclusion: we do not expect
to replenish free cash. 
Even though we are falling below the recommended level of free cash, we are placing it into reserves; it
is not being spent. Banks and investors view building reserves and paying down liabilities as positive, 
prudent financial management. We have received positive ratings and comments from our credit rating
agency for following a solid financial management plan; we should not change the plan. 
14
Page 15
FY20 Enterprise Fund Revenue
Revenue in the Enterprise Fund is generated by fees for certain services and rates paid by residents and
businesses for metered water and sewer usage. The revenue raised from regular usage ratepayers is
generally the total budget, plus a small amount of depreciation, less non-rate revenue (I/I fees, flat sewer
fees, metered pass through sewer revenue from Ashland, private fire services fees charges for sprinkler
systems, final meter read fees, etc.). That remaining amount of money needed to fund the budget is
divided by estimated usage for the next year to determine the rates. In previous fiscal years the
administration has recommended and the Board of Selectmen have voted to use some of the balance of
the Enterprise Fund, call retained earnings, as an additional revenue source to offset the revenue needed
to be raised by rates. We have recommended the use of retained earnings be used with a long term view
– do not use all the retained earnings to offset any rate increase in one year – but to keep the rates from
spiking over the long term. There is limited retained earnings available in FY20: $2.5 million. We
recommend the use $650,000 in retained earnings to limit the increase in water and sewer rates to 2.5%.
FY20 Utility Enterprise Fund Expenditures
FY20 Utility Fund Spending is increasing by 3.4% or $1.8 million. The Water Department total budget
is $24,154,922, an increase of $1.15 million or 5%. The Sewer Department total budget is $31,290,515, 
an increase of $694,679 or 2.3%. The pie charts below describe the component parts of each budget, both
by dollar amount and by percent of the total budget. The largest part of each budget is the MWRA
assessment. Debt service is for the water and sewer capital projects authorized in prior fiscal years. 
FY20 WATER DEPT
RECOMMENDATION
Total City Operations 
$1,776,388, 
7% 
$5,517,301, 
23%
MWRA Assessments
Debt Service
Indirect Overhead Charges 
$8,441,595, 
35% 
$8,419,638, 
35%
15
Page 16
FY20 WASTEWATER DEPT
RECOMMENDATION
Total City Operations
MWRA Assessments
Debt Service
Indirect Overhead
Charges 
$1,645,850, 5% 
$4,903,875, 
16%
$11,036,574, 
35% 
$13,704,216, 
44%
The largest increase is debt service ($896,298) which represents a major step in capital project
completion in FY17/18 construction seasons. The MWRA assessment is increasing 1.9% or $154,730. 
The indirect cost, overhead for services and costs paid by the General Fund, is increasing by 3%.
Personnel costs are increasing 1.1% or $36,297. This includes $12,000 for an electrical intern from
Keefe Tech. Total direct Departmental costs are increasing $46,346 or 0.8%.
In the Wastewater Department (aka Sewer), the largest increases are in the two largest budget
components: the MWRA Assessment and debt service. The MWRA Assessment is almost half of the
Wastewater budget Debt service is a larger portion of this budget due to the completion of the major
ACO required project: East Framingham Sewer Improvement Project (EFSIP) which totaled a little over
$40 million. We did receive $8 million in “debt forgiveness” from the State Clean Water Act Fund, but
it was still a large project that took several years and ran pipe from the northeast corner of the city to the
Arthur Street pump station in the southeast corner of the City. The FY20 increase in debt service is
$408,039. The MWRA assessment is increasing $156,472 or 1.15%. The direct Departmental costs are
increasing 1.7% or $82,231. This includes an increase to the part time salaries for an engineering intern. 
Indirect costs are increasing 3%, the same as the Water Department. 
16
Page 17
Debt Position Summary 
City of Framingham
Direct Debt Summary
As of June 30, 2018
General Obligation Bonds Outstanding: (1)
School (2)  $21,287,539
Water/Sewer (3)  $106,276,331
General Government (4)
MCWT (5) 
$48,971,130
$46,946,606
MWRA (6)  $6,005,977
Total Long-term Debt Outstanding:
Add:
Bonds Issued December 7, 2017
Short term debt issued December 7, 2017 (7)
Total Direct Debt 
$229,487,583
$32,480,000
$856,822
$262,824,405
(1) excludes lease and installment purchase obligations, overlapping debt, interim loan notes through the MCWT, 
unfunded pension liability and other post-employment liabilities (OPEB)
(2) $2,824.000 is not subject to the City's debt limit. $1,973.700 has been excluded from the limits of Proposition 2
1/2. The unpaid balance of state school construction grants payable over the life of outstanding school debt is
estimated at $3,817,966961. Said grant payments are applicable to both principal and interest and are subject to
annual appropriation by the state Legislature. 
(3) $91,813,885 not subject to the City's debt limit.
(4) $149,039 not subject ot the City's debt limit, does not reflect remaining grant payments from MSBA
(5) 
does not reflect the subsidy from
outside the City's debt limit. 
MCWT, which is applicable to both principal and interest. $7,292,570 is
(6) $6,006,977 is outside the City's debt limit.
(7) Renewal notes to be issued concurrent with bonds, payable December 6, 2019.
Framingham’s debt position went down by $2 million. 
17
Page 18
Financial Policies Applied in this Budget
Policy Name
Use of Certified
Free Cash
Use of Certified
Retained
Earnings
Stabilization
Fund
Capital
Stabilization
Fund 
Definitions
Free cash is the remaining, or
undesignated balance in the General
Fund. The General Fund is the
primary revenue fund for cities and
towns. 
Certified means the state Department
of Revenue has reviewed the City’s
balance sheet for the end of the fiscal
year and approved the free cash
balance. 
Retained earnings is the remaining, or
undesignated balance in an Enterprise
Fund. An enterprise fund is used by
many municipalities for specific
business functions that run on usage
fees like utilities. 
Certified means the state Department
of Revenue has reviewed the City’s
balance sheet for the end of the fiscal
year and approved the retained
earnings balance. 
A reserve for extraordinary fiscal
changes, to pay for costs of natural
disasters, and sudden decreases and
funding resources. Often called the
“rainy day” fund. 
A reserve for the purposes of providing
direct pay funds for a major capital
project. 
Detail/Actions
40% of certified free cash will stay in the General
fund balance. The remaining amount (net free
cash) is available for use. Free Cash may be
appropriated for the following uses in the General
Fund: 
Use 1: to maintain the Stabilization Fund at 5% 
of the annual operating budget. 
Use 2: transfer to the Capital Stabilization Fund
an amount not less than but not more than 30% of
net free cash
Use 3: transfer not more than 10% of net free
cash to the OPEB Trust fund
Use 4: transfer to the General Fund to support the
Pension Fund appropriation 
Use 5: appropriate to the annual Capital
Improvement Plan
Retained earnings may be appropriated for the
following uses: 
Use 1: Stabilize rate increases on an annual basis
and over the long term – make available
apportion of retained earnings to serve as an
alternative revenue source to usage revenue when
an annual increase of rates is excessive. 
“Excessive” is determined annually. The funds
are not to be used to eliminate a rate increase or
reduce rates from the prior fiscal year but to
mitigate spikes in rates. 
Use 2: to pay directly for a Utility Fund capital
project, or to pay a portion of a capital project as
an alternative to borrowing. 
The City policy requires the amount in the fund
equal at least 5% of total annual revenue each
year. The operating budget allocates a portion of
certified free cash to maintain that 5% balance in
the stabilization fund. 
A majority vote is required to appropriate money
into the Stabilization fund. A 2/3 vote is required
to withdraw funds from it. 
Initiated for the purposes of funding 20% of the
City cost of the Fuller School replacement project
and the future changes to the Memorial building. 
10-30% of net free cash is an annual stream of
revenue. Additional appropriations from other
revenue sources are allowed. A majority vote is
required to appropriate money into the Capital
Stabilization fund; a 2/3rd vote is required to
withdraw funds from it. 
18
Page 19
Debt Service as a
Percent of Total
budget
NEW POLICY: 
Capital Projects 
Building
Maintenance, 
repair, 
renovation and
general facility
upkeep 
Debt Service is the annual payment
from the operating budget to pay the
installments for the issued long term
and short term debt. Department of
Revenue allows up to 10% as a
reasonable practice. 
Requires any spending on building
maintenance, mechanical systems, 
electrical systems, HVAC systems, 
code compliance, renovation, repair be
reviewed and approved by the Director
of Capital Projects and Facilities
Maintenance or his/her designee. 
Modeled after the Technology Policy, 
all facility related spending must be
approved by the Director of CPFM. 
Limit the cost allocation and appropriation for
debt service to 5% of the total budget for the
current fiscal year. 
The draft policy is attached on the next page. It is
currently in draft form, to be reviewed, edited if
necessary, and approved to be issued and
effective July 1, 2019. 
19
