Energy 
Resiliency
Project Group
Cost  Project Group 
Budget
Request Title
$  140,000 Energy Resiliency / Microgrid
Feasbility Study
$140,000 
Descrption
The energy resiliency/microgrid feasibility study would enable the City to identify, 
explore, and plan for enhanced energy resiliency at municipal facilities. In addition to
identifying opportunities to expand conventional emergency generator backup
capabilities, this study would help the City determine how cutting-edge energy storage
and renewable energy technologies could be implemented to provide cost savings as
well as resiliency to climate change hazards. 
Justification
Energy resiliency was identified as a clear and major priority of the City's Municipal
Vulnerability Preparedness (MVP) planning process. Improving energy resiliency through
the investigation of renewable backup energy and exploration of potential microgrid
projects were identified as major priorities in the City's MVP Planning Report. Funding
to commit this planning process would enable the City to leverage potential grant
funding from the MVP program to explore the feasibility of improving energy resiliency
at critical facilities.
$  33,500 Signals Division HVAC Renovation Replacement of existing gas unit heater, thru-wall unit heaters, and window AC units
with an energy efficient heat pump system and high efficiency gas unit heater. 
HVAC equipment at the Signals Division has reached end-of-life and is very inefficient. In
their energy assessment of the facility, Horizon Energy Solutions (an Eversource-
approved municipal vendor) indicated that the efficiency of the unit heater was
approximately 65% and the efficiency of the thru-wall units could be as low as 50%.
Horizon projects that the proposed heat pump system would be 93 - 97% efficient in
steady state operation. Based on this efficiency improvement, this project is expected
to result in annual energy savings of $1,644 and 160 MMBtus, significantly improve
occupancy comfort, as well as remove reliability concerns associated with the existing
equipment.
$742,296 
$  70,000 Old Edgell Library AC Improvement While heating for the facility was largely addressed with the Ameresco energy efficiency With a broken condenser on the rooftop of the facility, work needs to be done to
upgrade, the facility relies on an aging air handler unit, cooling coils, and condensers to ensure that cooling will be available for the upcoming summer months. This is a priority
maintain building occupant comfort in the summer. The proposed project would project given that there is no supplementary cooling at the facility. This project will
replace the existing central cooling equipment that is inadequate or not properly provide adequate cooling while removing aging equipment (some almost 20 years old) 
functioning.  that is vulnerable to failure.
$  30,000 Cushing Memorial Chapel HVAC
Renovation 
The proposed project would implement an energy efficient heat pump system for the
Cushing Memorial Chapel, making redundant existing end-of-life cooling and heating
equipment at the facility. 
As part of a municipal initiative to curb rising natural gas consumption and improve
HVAC performance, this project would implement a heat pump system with cooling and
heating capabilities at the Cushing Memorial Chapel. In addition to reducing energy
costs by approximately 10% at the facility, the associated removal of the existing
equipment will result in reduced maintenance costs and staff time. On a per square foot
basis, the Chapel is one of the least efficient facilities in the Department. As the facility
is also rented out throughout the year, this project would better equip the facility to
handle cooling and heating during high occupancy events and gatherings.
HVAC 
Mechanical
Page 2
HVAC 
Mechanic  $742,296
Project Group
Cost  Project Group 
Budget
Request Title  Descrption
$  278,106 Framingham High School EC Motors The proposed project would result in the replacement of the motors in (68) exhaust
fans and (204) fan coil unit fans with more energy efficient, EC motors. 
Justification
As one of the largest municipal energy users, the implementation of this measure at
Framingham High School would have a significant impact on municipal energy
consumption. Having been reviewed by the utility on a preliminary basis, the project is
expected to result in a decrease of 100,300 kWh in electric use (with expanded
efficiency opportunities not requiring any additional equipment). In addition to energy
savings, the EC motors would be more reliable than their existing counterparts.
$76,101.00 
HVAC 
Operational
$  45,160 School Steam Trap Changeouts
$  220,530 Framingham High School AHU
Improvements 
This project involves the replacement of orifice steam traps at Walsh Middle School and With natural gas being the primary fuel source behind the City's increasing energy use, 
Stapleton Elementary School. As orifice steam traps are very inefficient types of steam maximizing the efficiency of school HVAC systems is an important step towards
traps in HVAC steam distribution systems, replacement of them with thermostatic reducing overall municipal energy use.
steam traps in expected to increase system performance, efficiency, and uniformity.
This project would result in the implementation of variable frequency drives (VFDs) for
each of the 16 supply fans and exhaust fans in roof top units (RTUs) and heat recovery
units (HRUs) across Framingham High School. 
Currently, RTUs and HRUs at the Framingham High School have constant volume fans
that run at their full output capacity whenever they run. The implementation of VFDs
will modulate their speed to save energy and reduce equipment wear. In a review of
proposed projects from B2Q's retrocommissioning report of the facility, Eversource
identified this as a worthwhile measure with annual savings of 113,671 kWh, 7,298
therms, and $27,566 in avoided energy costs.
$  65,000 Miscellaneous Facilities HVAC This project would result in the implementation of VFDs, energy management systems This project will result in cost savings across municipal facilities and improve facility
Improvements (EMS), and other HVAC upgrades at facilities such as the Village Hall, Academy Building, HVAC performance.
and Cushing Park Facilities.
$  25,585 Framingham High School This measure involves the changes to sequences of operation of various HVAC  Implementation of this project would enable Framingham High School to optimize the
Economizer Sequence Modification equipment serving Framingham High School to achieve greater energy savings and operation of existing equipment to maximize energy efficiency. In a review of proposed
improved HVAC performance.  projects from B2Q's retrocommissioning report of the facility, Eversource identified this
as a worthwhile measure with annual savings of 46,137 kWh and $8,528 in energy costs.
$  50,516 Barbieri Elementary School AHU
Improvements 
This project would involve the revision of the sequence of operations controlling
variable frequency drives (VFDs) in rooftop units (RTUs) as well as improve the
economizer sequence of operation across air handler units (AHUs). 
Similar to the economizer project proposed for Framingham High School, the
implementation of this project would enable Barbieri Elementary School to optimize the
operation of existing equipment to maximize energy efficiency. In a review of proposed
projects from B2Q's retrocommissioning report of the facility, Eversource identified this
as a worthwhile measure with annual savings of 78,589 kWh and $13,934 in annual
energy costs.
Page 3
Insulation 
&
Weatherization
Project Group
Cost  Project Group 
Budget
Request Title
$  30,000 Old Edgell Library Insulation
$60,000 
Descrption
This project would entail the insulation of the attic space above the main area of the
Old Edgell Library. This project was identified as an energy-saving measure through the
City's partnership with Eversource. 
Justification
Insulation of the attic space at Old Edgell Library would reduce a significant amount of
the heat loss and infiltration during the summer and winter months. In addition to
directly improving conditions for building occupants, insulation of the attic space will
reduce the load on the HVAC equipment in the facility.
$92,714 
$  30,000 Miscellaneous Facilities Insulation This project would involves the insulation and weatherization of CPFM and Parks
facilities across the municipality. 
This project will result in cost savings across facilities, improve energy resiliency, and
reduce energy costs.
$  92,714 CPFM, Parks, & DPW LED Lighting Removal of existing and outdated high-pressure sodium (HPS) and fluorescent lighting With an average 4.23 year payback, new LED lighting across the identified facilities will
Retrofits  across facilities of CPFM, DPW, and Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Affairs including: result in significant energy savings ($19,200.94 annually), improved lighting quality, 
Henry Street Garage (DPW), Cushing Parking Lot (Parks), Cushing Chapel Parking Lot reduced maintenance, and a reduction of 44 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent
(Parks), Loring Arena (Parks), Cushing Chapel (CPFM), Old Edgell Library (CPFM), and the emissions annually. This projects represents a collaborative effort between municipal
Academy Building (CPFM).  facilities to cut costs, save energy, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
LED 
Retrofits 
$  80,000 Loring Ice Arena Real Ice Treatment This project involves the implementation of a Real Ice Treatment System, reducing or Given the significant demand for electricity and natural gas as part of the re-icing
System  eliminating the need for the Parks Department to utilize hot water when resurfacing the process,the implementation of a water treatment system is an innovative way to
ice. In addition to improving the quality of the ice for skaters, this water treatment improve ice quality while reducing energy costs that ice arenas have begun to utilize. 
system is projected to result in significant energy savings.  With a projected 20-25% reduction in energy cost savings, this project will help curtail
rising energy consumption from the newly expanded facility. In addition, the project is
expected to reduce wear and tear on other equipment and reduce the number of
cleanings needed to maintain the high quality of the ice.
Miscellaneous 
$157,250  $  54,155 School Refrigeration Enhancements This project would result in the implementation of high-efficiency fan motors, anti- These projects are expected to result in savings of 82,114 kWh in energy use and
sweat heaters, and advanced controls to significantly improve the efficiency of  $13,959.47 of energy costs annually. This project is a major energy saving and cost-
refrigeration units at Barbieri Elementary School, Cameron Middle School, Framingham effective initiative that will assist the School Department in working towards its energy
High School, and Walsh Middle School.  reduction targets.
$  23,095 Framingham High School Kitchen This project would implement variable frequency drives (VFDs) to reduce unnecessary With projected annual energy cost savings of $3,868.35, this project will save energy by
Hood VFDs  energy use by the high schools kitchen hoods.  reducing the amount of conditioned air that is exhausted out of the building through
the kitchen hoods.This is a cost-effective project to assist in making Framingham High
School more energy efficient.
