City of Framingham, Massachusetts
Updated: June 17, 2021
~ _^..I~C,~~i~f~i {~  __ 
PERMIT ~  FRAMINGHAM
~~ 
Page 2
FRAMINGHAM
PLANNING BOARD
PROJECT REVIEW
GUIDELINES 
Plan
-
Build
-
Grow
City of Framingham, Massachusetts
Updated: June 17, 2021
Page 3
Planning Board’s Project Review Guidelines
Article 1: Central Business (CB) Zoning District Design Standards
Article 2: Landscape Design Guidelines 
Article 3: Site Plan Review Plan Requirements
Article 4: Lighting Requirements
Article 5: Shoppers World Sign Requirements
Article 6: Land Disturbance and Stormwater Management Document Submittal Requirements
Article 7: Special Permit Application Submittal Requirements
Article 8: Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
1 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 4
Article 1: Central Business (CB) Zoning District Design Standards
2 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d P r o j e c t  R e v i e w G u i d e l i n e s
Page 5
FRAMINGHAM CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES - 2015 
Town of Framingham
Planning Board
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
Page 6
Page 7
Table of Contents
1. Introduction.......................................4
2. Purpose..............................................5
3. Building Scale....................................6
4. Facades.............................................10
5. Windows..........................................11
6. Entrances.........................................13
7. Parking............................................14
8. External Materials...........................15
9. Awnings and Canopies....................16
10. Roof Form......................................17
11. Service Areas.................................18 
12. Sidewalks.......................................20
13. Public Realm.................................21
Landscaping
Trees
Bicycle Parking
Lighting 
3
Page 8
Introduction and Purpose
1. Introduction
In the Spring of 2014, the Town of Framingham and the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation contracted with the
Metropolitan Area Planning Council to bring together a team of
experts in planning, economics, and engineering to recommend
action steps the Town could take to implement its vision of
developing a revitalized downtown central business district
(“CB”).  This work built on previous planning efforts dating back
to 2008. Among the key takeaways from these efforts were to
update zoning and associated design standards to support new
development within the CB. 
Urban design has an enormous potential to enhance the quality of
life in a downtown environment. In conjunction with a proper mix
of uses and a safe and comfortable pedestrian environment, strong
urban design can help achieve a successful neighborhood where
people are able to live, shop, work, and play.
These Design Standards are adopted by the Planning Board of the
Town of Framingham pursuant to section VI.F.6., Central Business
(CB) Zoning District Design Standards of the Zoning Bylaw of the
Town of Framingham. They complement the Zoning Bylaw and
establish the site design guidelines for development with the CB. 
This document is organized into subject headings based on the
characteristics of site and design guidelines. The sections begin
with Guiding Principles followed by Guidelines. The Guiding
Principles identify the Town’s goals and aspirations for the CB
and are intended to provide guidance to the project’s planning
and design. The Guidelines include specific design criteria
for property owners, developers, architects, reviewers and
members of the public to consider. Although the Standards in
this document are non-binding, in many cases they correspond to
the Design Standards outlined within the Zoning Bylaw. Images
and diagrams supplement the text to clarify the principles and
standards.
4
Page 9
2. Purpose
The purpose and intent of these Design Guidelines is to help
promote pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use development that is
compatible with a transit-oriented downtown through:
»»  Promoting general and specialty retail, office, and
other commercial uses in a compact downtown area
complemented by a variety of residential environments that
promote the use of transit;
»»  Preserving the area as the Town’s financial, civic, cultural, 
and government center;
»»  Promoting a livable urban downtown environment with a
multitude of activities and pedestrian presence;
»»  Preventing the location of auto-oriented uses which detract
from a high level of pedestrian activity;
»»  Promoting pedestrian flow by preserving unbroken block
facades; and,
»»  Encouraging improved visual quality of commercial, 
residential and mixed-use development which respects and
complements the existing urban building pattern. 
These guidelines are written to promote through physical design
the Town’s goals and objectives. 
Introduction and Purpose
5
Page 10
3. Building Scale
Guiding Principles
Scale in architecture is a measure of the relative size of a building
or building component in relation to its surroundings. The
guidelines as they relate to the building’s scale are intended to
ensure buildings fit into the existing character of the CB and reflect
community preferences. In addition, the guidelines consider the
market realities to allow for financially feasible projects.
The perceived scale of any proposed building is a function of:
»»  The overall size of the proposed building relative to existing
building sizes.
»»  The visual relationship of the new building’s facade
elements relative to the visual relationship of building
facade elements of surrounding, existing buildings. 
While height is one consideration, buildings need not be a uniform
height to be properly scaled. Other components of a building’s
facade could be in harmony to achieve a consistent scale. For
example, because a strong linear retail frontage is critical to
activating the CB, specified ground level ceiling heights are
provided that are conducive to retail uses. 
Appropriate infill. Although the height differs, the scale of the new building (red) 
is in harmony with the existing buildings. In particular, the ground floor facade
modules, the rhythm of windows, and the proportion are consistent across the
buildings. 
Inappropriate infill. This infill building (red) is out of scale with the existing
buildings. The height and massing are drastically different, as are the side setbacks, 
first floor height, and rhythm of windows.
6
Page 11
3. Building Scale
Guidelines
»»  As the diagram to the left illustrates, 
heights of new buildings need not be
uniform with existing buildings. The
height should, however, reflect those
of adjacent buildings through aligning
facade elements (e.g. cornices), or
through the use of stepbacks to
reinforce the scale, massing, and
proportions of existing structures.
»»  Building heights may range from three
stories (35’) to six stories (70’).
»»  Buildings of contemporary architecture
are appropriate if the scale, 
proportion, and rhythm fit into the
context of surrounding area. High
quality contemporary architecture
is preferable to ersatz historical
buildings. 
Examples of three, four, and five story buildings that would be appropriate models for development in the CBD.
Although the height would not be
appropriate for Framingham, this
building illustrates a successful
example where a stepback allows the
development to be in proper scale
with its surroundings, despite the
differing height. 
Example of appropriately scaled and proportioned contemporary
architecture that uses high quality materials and architectural
elements. 
7
Page 12
3. Building Scale
Guidelines
»»  New buildings should have clearly
expressed base, middle and top areas. 
Having these defined areas add visual
interest and help to avoid monotony.
»»  Retail uses on the ground floor
encourage an active streetscape. In
order to accommodate these uses
ground level ceiling heights along
primary roadways (Concord Street, 
Union Avenue and Hollis Street) 
should be a minimum of 14’. 
These examples all contain clearly expressed base, middle, and top areas, as well as ground level retail.
8
Page 13
3. Building Scale
9
Page 14
4. Facades
Guiding Principles
As the face of the building, the facade should
enhance the visual character of the Downtown. 
The facade elements of buildings in the CB
should provide visual appeal, avoid monotony, 
reduce the appearance of bulk, and provide
a visual relationship to adjacent buildings. 
Where possible, existing buildings of historic
significance should be preserved and restored.
Guidelines
»»  Buildings more than 50’ in width
should be broken into bays to reflect
historic building rhythm of Downtown
Framingham. 
»»  Flat facades should be avoided through
the use of balconies, changing materials, 
or architectural detailing to provide
visual appeal and to break down building
scale.
»»  Blank wall surfaces greater than 20’ are
strongly discouraged when visible from
the street. 
»»  Sides of buildings with frontage on a
street should include windows and doors. 
This is an example of the type of facade that should be
avoided: long monotonous walls with small windows and
little architectural detailing. 
The building on the left is broken up into
distinct sections through the creation of bays to
avoid the monotony that can occur with a long, 
undifferentiated building.
This building successfully uses balconies
and other architectural elements to provide
visual interest.
10
Page 15
5. Windows
Guiding Principles
Windows should provide an inviting
atmosphere and relieve blank, uninteresting
surfaces. Regularly spaced windows can
provide symmetry and visually connect
adjacent buildings. Fenestration (arrangement
of windows on the wall) should be
architecturally related to the style, materials, 
colors, and details of the building. 
Guidelines
»»  Facades along primary Downtown
streets (Concord Street, Union Street
and Hollis Street) should incorporate
no less than 60% transparent glazing on
the ground floor to maximize visibility
of street level uses. 
»»  Facades along secondary streets
should incorporate no less than 40% 
transparent glazing on the ground
floor. 
»»  No portion of the facade should be
constructed of highly reflective glass
that prevents pedestrian visibility of
interior ground floor activities. 
Windows comprise the majority of the ground level
storefront, creating a welcoming atmosphere. The windows of these storefronts invite browsing and
encourage pedestrians to use the public space.
This street is lined on both sides with ground floor
retail. The clear, large windows of the storefronts add
to the visual interest and character of the streetscape. 
These reflective windows, which create a visual
barrier akin to a blank wall, should be avoided.
11
Page 16
5. Windows
Guidelines
»»  Upper floor windows should not be
larger than ground floor windows.
»»  Wherever possible, window styles
should be compatible with the historic
style of adjacent structures. 
»»  In general, window and door openings
should be proportioned so that verticals
dominate horizontals. 
12 
Although this does not need to be adhered
to as an inflexible rule, one method for
determining the proper proportion of
windows is the Golden Section. This is
one of the oldest systems of determining
an “ideal” proportion, which is a rectangle
with a width to length ratio of about 5:8, 
formed when the diagonal of a square is
dropped as an arc. This proportion is still
frequently used today in western art and
architecture.
Windows that are proportioned to be
wider than they are tall do not fit into the
character of the CB. 
Page 17
Guiding Principles
Entrances should be placed to enhance
the pedestrian environment and minimize
conflicts with vehicles. As one of the most
important parts of the facade, the main
entrance should be easily identifiable.
Guidelines
»»  Primary building entrances should be
located on public sidewalks/streets, 
and on corners wherever possible to
emphasize the pedestrian environment. 
»»  Doorways to upper floors should
be separate from ground level retail
entrances.
»»  Doors should not extend beyond
the exterior facade into pedestrian
pathways. 
»»  Garage entrances should be sited
in locations (e.g., side streets) that
minimize the impacts of vehicle
movement on pedestrian activity. 
»»  Audible signage should be installed
informing pedestrians when vehicles
are exiting the structure. 
Entrances located
in rear of complex
Main Street lacks
entrances to retail 
6. Entrances
The entrance to this garage is located on
a secondary street to minimize potential
conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. 
Note that although it is the rear of the
building, the streetscape includes wide
sidewalks, street trees and pedestrian scale
lighting.
At this shopping complex pedestrian entrances
are located in the rear rather than along Main
Street. Because this encourages driving and
forces pedestrians along Main Street to walk
out of their way this design should be avoided.
13
Page 18
7. Parking
Guiding Principles
Parking should not detract from the pedestrian
environment. Parking should be treated as
a secondary function of the building with
which it is associated. Surface parking along
main roads or in front of buildings does not
encourage pedestrian activity. In addition, 
wide and frequent curb cuts increase the risk
of conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians.
Guidelines
»»  Below-grade or structured parking
should be encouraged wherever
feasible. 
»»  To encourage an active, pedestrian
environment, surface vehicle parking
shall be located behind or to the side of
buildings.
»»  Frequency and widths of curb cuts
should be minimized to improve safety
for pedestrians.
»»  Electric vehicle (EV) charging stations
are encouraged.
14 
Inappropriate location for parking
Appropriate location for parking
Page 19
Guiding Principles
Building materials should reflect the character
of Downtown Framingham.
Guidelines
»»  Predominant wall materials permitted
within the CB district are brick, stone, 
and pre-cast concrete.
»»  Generally, brick material should consist
of red or earth tones.
»»  On secondary streets fiber board and
wood siding are also appropriate
materials in addition to the preferred
ones on primary streets.
»»  Aluminum and vinyl siding are
prohibited. 
»»  Simulated or prefabricated brick and
stone are prohibited. 
8. External Materials
These photographs are examples of suitable building
materials. Regardless of the type chosen, materials
should be durable and high quality.
Vinyl/aluminum siding and prefabricated brick and
stone do not reflect the historic character of the CBD
and thus are prohibited. 
15
Page 20
9. Awnings and Canopies
Guiding Principles
Awnings and canopies are encouraged as a
way to enliven the ground floor and to provide
shelter for ground floor outdoor uses such as
dining. Awnings can improve the comfort of
pedestrians with shade and protection from
weather. In addition, awnings can increase
the success of retail establishments by making
pedestrians feel as if they are already in the
store.
Guidelines
»»  Awnings should fit the shape and scale
of the window or door, should be made
of canvas or a canvas-like material, and
should be designed to be compatible
with building signage and design. 
»»  Awnings should break at the vertical
divisions of the structure (i.e., the break
between the display windows and the
entrance).
»»  The color and pattern of awnings
affect the entire building and therefore
should be carefully selected. 
»»  A facade with minimal architectural
detailing can be enhanced with
bright colors and patterns, while
a more decorated facade may be
complemented with a plain, subtle
shade. 
»»  The shape of awnings should
be designed to fit the building’s
architecture and relate to other
awnings that exist along the street.
16
Page 21
Guiding Principles
As with other aspects of the physical form of
the building, the roof form should add visual
interest and fit into the context of the CBD.
Guidelines
»»  Roof forms and lines should
complement adjacent buildings. 
»»  Variations in height are encouraged
with architectural elements including
cornices and parapets to create
interesting and varied rooflines. 
»»  Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be
screened and designed as a component
of the overall roof design. It shall not
appear to be an add-on element. 
»»  Rooftop screening and mechanicals
will be designed to accommodate
soundproofing. 
10. Roof Form
Example of cornice on historic building.  Example of cornice on contemporary building.
Example of a adjacent buildings with varied roofline, 
cornices, and architectural detailing. 
Example of rooftop mechanicals “designed as a
component of the roof design”. 
17
Page 22
11. Service Areas, Utilities, and Equipment
Guiding Principles
Service areas, utilities, and equipment should not
detract from the building design nor the surrounding
environment. Areas around the building or on the
building used for these purposes must be screened
appropriately with natural or fabricated material
consistent with the guidelines below.
Guidelines
»»  Service and loading areas and mechanical
equipment and utilities shall be located on
the side or rear of a building and sufficiently
screened using architectural forms, fencing
and /or landscaping so as to not be visible
from streets and public open spaces.
»»  Service areas, utilities, and equipment will be
designed to accommodate soundproofing.
»»  Chain linked fencing shall not be permitted
for screening.
18 
Brick walls and vegetation can be
used to screen service areas and
equipment around buildings.
Chain link fence screening does
not reflect the historic character
of the CBD and thus is prohibited.
Page 23
Building Elements Summary Diagram
19
Page 24
12. Sidewalks
Guiding Principles
The public realm, the sidewalks and the
elements located within them, should foster
comfort, safety, and accessibility for all
pedestrians. 
Outdoor dining and sidewalk displays are
one of the most impactful contributions
to enhancing street life, and thus space
should be included for these elements where
appropriate.
Guidelines (Sidewalks)
»»  Sidewalks shall provide adequate space
for all users, street furniture, trees/
plantings, and bicycle parking.
»»  Where possible, include small setbacks
to accommodate plantings and/or
outdoor restaurant seating. 
20
Page 25
Guidelines (Landscaping)
»»  Thoughtfully designed landscaping
appropriate to the context of the
building and the surrounding
streetscape is highly desirable. These
features can define spaces and make for
pleasant pedestrian experiences.
»»  Plantings in sturdy containers can
define areas for sidewalk seating.
»»  Window boxes can enliven a building’s
facade. 
»»  Plantings in the interstitial space
between buildings can make the area
more attractive and welcoming. 
13. Public Realm
21
Page 26
13. Public Realm
Guidelines (Trees)
In addition to aesthetic qualities and
commercial appeal of trees, they also reduce
heating and cooling costs, reduce heat
reflected from paved areas, help prevent soil
erosion, and increase property value.
»»  Deciduous street trees should be
planted in sidewalks at a maximum
spacing of forty linear feet. 
»»  All plantings shall be native species. 
Invasive plant species are prohibited. 
»»  Street trees should be installed in metal
grates at least 16 square feet in area to
allow for infiltration of rain water.
»»  Street trees should be a minimum of 3” 
caliper measured at chest level.
»»  Where feasible, the practice of
continuous trench planting should be
incorporated.
22
Page 27
Guidelines (Bicycle Parking)
»»  Bicycle parking should be provided
for all new developments, and shall
be located as close as possible to the
building entrance(s). Any property
required to have bicycle parking may
establish a shared bicycle parking
facility with any other property owner
within the same block.
»»  Bicycle racks should support an upright
bicycle by its frame horizontally in two
or more places and be installed on a
permanent foundation (e.g., concrete
pad) to ensure stability.
»»  Racks should be designed to prevent
the bicycle from tipping over and
support a variety of bicycle sizes and
frame shapes.
»»  Racks should include space to secure
the frame and one or both wheels to the
rack with a cable, chain, or u-lock. The
diameter of locking pole should be no
more than 1.5”. 
13. Public Realm
The inverted “U” bicycle rack
is one of the best choices for a
bicycle rack.
Artistic types of bicycle racks are
allowed and encouraged if they
meet the Guidelines criteria.
23
Page 28
13. Public Realm
Guidelines (Lighting)
The exterior lighting scheme is important to
the success of a vibrant Downtown. 
»»  Energy efficient lighting is encouraged.
»»  Select pedestrian-scaled light fixtures
appropriate to building type and
location. Avoid the use of floodlighting, 
wall packs, and tall light posts intended
for lighting large areas.
»»  If the sidewalk includes street trees, 
streetlights should be located between
the trees so that the tree canopy
does not interfere with illumination
coverage.
»»  Full cut-off lighting focuses the
illumination downward toward the
street, improving pedestrian visibility
and reducing light pollution.
»»  Thirty-foot standard “cobra head” 
design lamps are not appropriate for
the CB because of aesthetics, glare, and
auto-oriented illumination.
24 
Examples of pedestrian scale lighting with clean, modern designs
Page 29
Article 2: Landscape Design Guidelines
Article 2.1 Purpose 
Landscape Design Guidelines (LDG) are provided to Applicants to ensure compliance with Board
recommended plantings and best practices to be employed for landscape plantings, site design
and all integral components of landscaping relative to site design of projects. The Planning
Board seeks to promote proper development of all integrated aspects of unified site design
including effective storm water management as well as the use of landscape buffers and
screens in an effort to improve functionality, aesthetic appeal and overall, the preservation of
site ecology. 
Article 2.2 Recommended Guidelines for Projects 
2.2.1 Landscape design should be suitable to the existing site topography, drainage, water
table depth, and/or soil type. 
2.2.2 Applicants are encouraged to exercise creativity by using diversity in planting choices
in order to avoid establishing a mono-culture among projects. 
2.2.3 Landscaped areas should be designed in conjunction with traffic engineering studies
to promote maximum unimpeded site circulation while enhancing site aesthetics. 
Elements should integrate safe pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle movement onto and
within the project site. 
2.2.4 Landscape design should provide effective buffers and screens. 
2.2.5 Landscape designs with a permanent irrigation system shall be shown on final as-built
plans. 
2.2.6 Landscape design should be functional, aesthetically pleasing, provides definition to
the streetscape, complement building design, and enhance other miscellaneous site
amenities. 
2.2.7 Landscape materials should be durable and chosen for long-term success of the
project. Native, salt, and/or drought tolerant species are highly desirable, for all
projects in Framingham. 
Article 2.3 Invasive and Restricted Landscape Plantings 
2.3.1 Invasive plant species are prohibited as part of landscape design. For the most current
list of invasive plants please refer to Massachusetts Department of Conservation and
Recreation (DCR). The following invasive species are prohibited: 
•  Acer plantanoides - Norway Maple 
•  Acer pseudoplatanus – Sycamore maple
•  Ailanthus altissima – Tree of heaven
•  Phellodendron amurense – Amur corktree
•  Robinia pseudoacacia – Black locust
28 | Framingham PlanningBoard Project Review Guidelines 
Page 30
•  Acer ginnala – Amur maple
•  Syringa reticulata- Japanese tree lilac 
2.3.2 Trees and plants with limited use restrictions are as follows: 
•  Thuja – Arborvitae shall only be permitted as a screen around dumpsters and
other appropriate places on-site as approved by the Planning Board. 
•  Nut, fruit, seed, and sap producing trees are discouraged in high traffic and
pedestrian areas. These trees are encouraged in areas away from pedestrians
and motorized vehicles: 
o Carya ovate – Shagbark hickory
o Fagus grandifolia – American beech 
o Platanus occidentalis – American sycamore
o Quercus alba – White oak
o Quercus macrocarpa – Bur oak 
Article 2.4 Landscape Plantings Design 
Applicants are encouraged to work with a horticulturist and/or landscape architect who is
licensed and/or registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to assist in the selection of
appropriate plantings. Appendix A herein provides a list of plantings most commonly used and
approved by the Planning Board. Applicants should consider plantings that are site appropriate
to ensure the best success for their survival. The Planning Board’s planting list is not an
inclusive list, and other species may be considered. 
Article 2.5 Zoning and Plan Format Requirements 
2.5.1 Sections IV.B. IV.K.8, and VI.F of the Zoning Ordinance should be referenced for
landscaping requirements. 
2.5.2 Landscape plan sheets shall contain a landscape schedule as provided in Appendix B. 
2.5.3 The Planning Board reserves the right to disapprove a planting that is deemed
inappropriate for specific sites. 
Article 2.6 Landscape Design 
2.6.1 Tree spacing
1. Trees should be an adequate and appropriate distance from the street curb, 
dependent upon the species and required area necessary for optimal growth. 
2. Trees should be planted within an appropriate distance from streetlights, 
hydrant, poles, transformers, telephone box, manhole, driveway approaches, 
and other manmade structures. 
3. In general, large trees and shrubs should not be planted under or within the area
of any utility without prior consultation with the Department of Public Works
and the utility company. Appropriate trees near power lines, small spaces, and
light fixtures can be found in Appendix A, list Small Trees. 
2.6.2 Crown Clearance 
29 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 31
1. Street trees should be selected that provide an appropriate clearance and have
limited understory growth to avoid interference with roadways and utilities. 
2.6.3 Mulch
1. The use of mulch is encouraged around the bases of trees, shrubs, and areas
where grass or sod is not practical. Mulch should be used to prevent weed
growth, retain moisture to the plants, protect against soil erosion and nutrient
loss, maintain a more uniform soil temperature, and improve the appearance of
the planting beds. 
2. Avoid the overloading of mulch known as “mulch volcanoes,” which prevents air
movement and increases disease susceptibility. 
3. Mulch should not be installed over site improvements (i.e. underground utility
boxes).
2.6.4 Grasses and Groundcover
1. Ornamental grasses should be incorporated into landscape design where
appropriate. 
2. Landscape areas that are difficult to maintain grass or sod should incorporate
groundcover (Xeriascaping) into project design. 
2.6.5 Buffering, Screening, and Berms
1. Landscape buffers and screens in combination with fencing, berms, or plantings
should be used to reduce possible negative impacts of light and noise levels, and
air pollution. 
2. The installation of landscape buffers and screens should be employed when a
nonresidential project is adjacent to existing or proposed residential uses. 
3. Berms may be used to enhance landscape buffers and screenings while providing
greater visibility for ornamental and specimen plantings. Plant selections for
berms must be located to promote good plant health in addition to providing
sufficient room for growth. 
2.6.6 Parking and Walkways
1. Parking islands are required to be vegetated, preferably with groundcover and
shrubs to discourage pedestrians and bicyclist from moving through them. If
pedestrian and bicycle access through the islands is desired a pathway
constructed of pavers shall be installed. 
2. Parking islands and walkways should be defined by vertical curbing constructed
of durable granite or precast concrete that will withstand snowplowing, site
maintenance, and traffic conditions. 
3. Parking islands should be located in areas that do not conflict with other site
improvements and/or activities. 
30 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 32
4. Parking islands should be of sufficient size to ensure landscape survival. 
5. Walkways should be constructed with aggregate or precast concrete, brick, or
alternative material that enhances site design, color contrast, and durable. 
6. Landscape design should enhance accessibility and not conflict with it. 
2.6.7 Screening of Accessory Structures
1. Transformers, trash enclosures, other accessory structures should be screened
with appropriate landscape plantings. Appropriate trees near power lines, small
spaces, and light fixtures can be found in Appendix A, list Buffering Trees and
Shrubs. 
2.6.8 Boulders and Fieldstone 
1. Landscape design may incorporate boulders, fieldstone, and stonewalls or other
hardscape features. 
2.6.9 Retaining Walls 
1. Retaining walls should be constructed out of durable material; cement concrete
and non-decorative block should be avoided. 
2. Wall height is measured from grade level in front of the wall at a given location, 
to the grade level behind the wall at the same cross section. 
3. Gabions should not be used. 
4. Terracing of retaining walls may be required. A terraced retaining wall should be
setback from the lower wall at least two times the height of the unbalanced fill
retained by the lower wall. The walls shall be considered as separate walls. If a
successive wall is setback from a lower wall less than two times the height of the
unbalanced fill retained by the lower wall, the walls shall be considered as a
single wall. 
2.6.10 Stormwater Drainage and Resource Areas
1. Drainage Basin
1. Rip-rap
•  Rip-rap should be used in areas to control erosion where slopes are
severe. 
•  Rip-rap should be placed by hand and not by machine. 
•  Prior to the placement of rip-rap stone, infiltration fabric should be
placed on exposed soils. 
•  Above a rip-rap slope native trees and shrubs should be planted to buffer
and protect the top of the slope. 
•  Rip-rap should be of appropriate size and color to compliment site
design. 
•  Gabions should be avoided. 
31 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 33
2. Stormwater filtration system
1. Oil water separators and stormwater separators should be incorporated into site
design for the separation of solids from liquids during weather event. 
2. All new development and redevelopment project are subject to optimization of
phosphorus removal per Structural BMP specifications Vol. 2, Ch. 2 for the
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook
3. Swales and Vegetated Filter Strips
1. Swales and vegetated filter strips should be incorporated into the site design
to collect run-off from the site. 
2. Swales and vegetated filter strips should be used as snow storage and snow
melt treatment areas. 
2.6.11 Low Impact Development Techniques
1. Where feasible site design should incorporate Low Impact Development (LID) 
Techniques (i.e. bio-retention cells, vegetated swales, filter strips, disconnected
impervious areas, permeable pavers, curb cuts, open channels, submerged
gravel wet areas, etc.)
Article 2.7 Landscape Maintenance
2.7.1. Landscape Maintenance Plan
1. Developers and property owners must provide a landscape management plan
with the application submittal. 
2. Areas where Low Impact Development (LID) Techniques have been incorporated
into the site, the developer should provide a landscape maintenance plan
specific to each feature. 
2.7.2. General Maintenance Requirement
1. Vegetation should be maintained in a healthy, vigorous growing condition, free
from disease and pests. 
2. Natural organic fertilizers or “bridge” fertilizers shall be used. 
3. Mulch volcanoes are not allowed. 
4. Tree topping or pruning of the leaders is prohibited. 
2.7.3. Irrigation
1. Irrigation plans shall be required with landscape plans. 
2. All automatic lawn-watering systems should be equipped with a timing device in
addition to a moisture-sensing device that will prevent the system from starting
automatically when not needed. 
32 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 34
3. All automatic lawn-watering systems should be installed with an approved
backflow prevention device. Said device will be inspected initially and
periodically thereafter as part of the landscape maintenance plan. 
Article 2.8 As-Built Plan and Certification Requirements 
Final As-Built-Plans shall be submitted at the end of construction prior to the issuance of the
final occupancy and use permit. 
33 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 35
Appendix A: Framingham Preferred Planting List
Tall Trees – Tall trees may be used for street tree under the appropriate condition: 
Ginkgo biloba - Ginkgo (male only)  Acer campestre - Hedge maple 
Gledistsia triacanthos var. inermis (thornless, fruitless Acer rubrum – Red maple* 
species only) – Honey locust  Acer rubrum ‘armstrong’ - Armstrong maple 
Liriodendron tulipfera - Tulip tree/tulip popular Acer saccharum – Sugar maple* 
Plantanus x acerifolia - London planetree  Zelkova serrata ‘Village Green’ – Japanese zelkova ‘village
Tilia tomentosa - Silver linden  green’ 
Tilia cordata - Little-leaf linden  Liquidambar styraciflua ‘Slender Silhouette’ - Columnar
Ulmus americana - American elm (cultivars also encouraged sweetgum 
include ‘Homestead,’ ‘Princeton,’ Valley Forge’  Oxydendrum arboretum - Sourwood
Small Trees – Small trees may be utilized under overhead wires as street trees where appropriate. Small trees may be
utilized throughout the site. 
Betula alleghaniensis – Yellow birch  Cornus kousa - Kousa dogwood
Betula populifolia – Gray birch  Crataegus phaenopyrum- Washington hawthorn 
Betula occidentalis – River birch  Magnolia virginiana - Sweet bay magnolia
Ilex opaca – American holly  Magnolia grandiflora – Bull bay magnolia
Amelanchier sp. - Serviceberry  Prunus serotina – Black cherry
Cercis Canadensis - Eastern redbud  Prunus x. autumnalis/sargentii/yoshino – Cherry species
Cornus florida – Flowering dogwood
Buffering and Park Trees – Buffering and park trees shall be utilized away from pedestrian and vehicle parking areas where
appropriate. 
Picea pungens – Colorado spruce  Tsuga Canadensis – Canadian hemlock
Quercus coccinea – Scarlet oak  Abies balsamaea – balsam fir
Quercus palustris – Pin oak  Abies concolor – Concolor fir
Fagus grandifolia - American beech  Abies fraseri – Fraser fir
Metasequoia glyptostroboides - Dawn redwood Abies grandis – Grand fir
Platanus occidentalis - American sycamore Chamaecyparis thyoides – Atlantic white cedar
Quercus macrocarpa - Bur oak  Corylus Americana – American hazelnut
Picea glauca – White spruce
Shrubs 
Taxus canadensis – Canada yew  Chamaecyparis obtusa – Hinoki cypress
Viburnum lentago – Nannyberry  Hypericum frondosum – golden St. John’s wort 
Viburnum trilobum – American cranberry  Hypericum prolificum – shrubby St. John’s wort 
Ceanothus americanus – New Jersey Tea  Ilex opaca – American Holly
Cephalanthus occidentalis – Buttonbush Itea virginica – Sweet spire
Ilex glabra – Inkberry shrub  Juniperus communis – Pasture juniper
Ilex verticillata – Winterberry  Juniperus horizontalis – Creeping juniper 
Amelanchier Canadensis – Serviceberry Amelanchier arborea – Downy serviceberry
Cercis Canadensis – Eastern redbud  Amelanchier laevis – Alleghany serviceberry
Sambucus Canadensis – Elderberry  Cornus species – Dogwood species
Aronia melanocarpa – Black chokeberry Clethra alnifolia – Sweet pepperbush
Magnolia liliflora ‘Nigra’ x stellate ‘Rosea” – Ann Magnolia Physocarpus opulifolius – Eastern ninebark
Rhododendron – Rhododendron Rhus aromatic – Fragrant sumac
Comptonia peregrina – Sweet fern  Rosa virginiana – Virginia rose
Cornus racemosa – Gray dogwood  Viburnum acerifolium – Maple leaf viburnum
Myrica pensylvanica – Bayberry  Viburnum prunifolium – Blackhaw viburnum
Aronia species – Chokeberry  Spiraea Salicifolia – Spirea
34 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 36
Appendix B: Landscape Schedule
35 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 37
36 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d P r o j e c t  R e v i e w G u i d e l i n e s 
Page 38
Article 3: Site Plan Review Plan Requirements
Section 3.1 Site Plan Review requirements 
3.1.1 Applications for both major and minor site plan review shall submit plan sets with a
cover sheet containing the following information. 
1. Address(es) of the proposed project; 
2. Identification of parcel by the Assessors’ Parcel ID; 
3. Project Title; 
4. Prepared by/Prepared for; 
5. Professional Engineer and/or Land Surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts stamp and signature; 
6. Registered Architect stamp and signature; 
7. Zoning Table showing the existing, required, and proposed dimensions in
accordance with Section IV. E, Dimensional Regulations; 
8. Parking Table, showing the existing number of parking spaces, required number
of parking spaces, and the proposed number of parking spaces. This Table shall
include the dimensions of the proposed parking spaces, number and dimensions
of the handicap accessible spaces, and number and dimensions of loading
spaces; 
9. Maximum seating capacity, number of employees, or sleeping units if applicable; 
10. Color architectural renderings; and
11. Locus Map to allow adequate consideration of the surrounding neighborhood, a
plan of adjacent properties shall be presented at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet or at the same scale as the proposed site plan if practical. This
plan shall show the general characteristics of all lands within 300 feet of the
proposed site or such other distance as may be reasonably required, including
structures, parking areas, driveways, pedestrian ways, and natural
characteristics. Any structures or significant change in topography within 50 feet
of the lot line shall be located precisely on said plan. 
3.1.2 Applicants for both major and minor Site Plan Review shall include the following
information on all plan sheets:
1. Address(es) of the project, identification of parcel by Parcel ID, and Project
Title; 
37 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 39
2. Plan sets shall be accurately drawn to a scale of one inch equals 20 feet to
one inch equals 60 feet, where practical and appropriate to the size of the
proposal; 
3. Planning Board Signature Block at approximately the same location on each
page of the submitted plans; 
4. North arrow and scale of drawings; 
5. Date of plan and revision dates; 
6. Location of pedestrian areas, walkways, flow patterns and access points, and
provisions for handicapped parking and access, and bicycle accommodations; 
and
7. Locations and dimensions, including total ground coverage, of all driveways, 
maneuvering spaces and aisles, parking stalls and loading facilities, and
proposed circulation of traffic. 
3.1.3 Applicants for major Site Plan Review shall include the following sheets within a
plan set shall include the following sheet where applicable: 
1. Existing Conditions site plan, showing the locations of all infrastructure on- 
and off- site, including sidewalks and roadways which are public and private, 
square feet and dimensional of all existing buildings on-site, existing off-street
parking areas with dimensions of landscaping area; 
2. A landscape plan at the same scale as the site plan, showing the limits of
work, existing tree lines, and all proposed landscape features and
improvements including planting areas with size and type of stock for each
shrub or tree. 
3. A photometric plan showing both the intensity of illumination expressed in
foot-candles at ground level to the property’s boundaries and the location, 
orientation, height, wattage, type, style, and color of outdoor luminaire(s) for
all existing and proposed lighting. Photometric plan and details should be
designed in accordance the Article 22: Site Plan Review Lighting
Requirements, in the Planning Board’s Rules and Regulations, herein. 
4. Dimensions of proposed buildings and structures, including gross floor area, 
floor area ratio, total lot coverage of building, and breakdown of indoor and
outdoor floor area as to proposed use. Area dimensions to include Lot
Coverage of Building, Paved Surface Coverage, and Landscaped Open Space
and Other Open Space, with percentages of these items to be provided and to
total 100 percent of the lot area. 
5. Parking Plan showing the drive aisle widths, turning radius, stall heights and
widths, locations of pedestrian and bicycle amenities, and landscaping. 
Applicants for minor site plan review shall include the sheets within a plan set forth in
38 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 40
subsection 21.1.3 above where applicable, except the plans set forth in subsection 21.1.3.3
need not be submitted for minor site plan review. 
Section 3.2 Request for Waivers from Submittal Items
3.2.1 During the first public hearing the Planning Board shall review the list of requested
waivers. At such time the Planning Board shall make a determination as to which
waivers shall be granted and what information will be required. During the public
hearing process the Planning Board may require additional information that had been
waived if it becomes apparent that such information is relevant to completing the
application. 
Section 3.3 As-built Plans
3.3.1 The Applicant shall submit a final set of “As-built” plans that reflect final
constructed conditions prior to the issuance of an Occupancy and Use Permit
granted by the Department of Inspectional Services (Building Department).
3.3.2 The Planning Board may retain a Peer Review consultant at the cost of the
Applicant to inspect the site to ensure compliance with the approved and/or
modified site plan prior to signing off on the Occupancy and Use Permit. 
Section 3.4 Modification to an Approved Site Plan 
An Applicant may seek modification from the Planning Board through an abbreviated review
once a project has been approved and granted an Occupancy and Use Permit from the
Department of Inspectional Services (Building Department).
3.4.1 Application Submittal for a Site Plan Review Modification 
1. Form A – Cover Letter
2. Form G - Request for Modification 
3. Certificate of Ownership
4. Summary of Modifications: a summary listing the proposed modifications, 
reasons for modifications, and benefit to the site plan. 
5. Any modifications that alters the stormwater management or erosion control
systems appropriate documentation relevant to said modification shall be
submitted in accordance with Article 6: Land Disturbance and Stormwater
Management Document Submittal Requirements, herein. 
3.4.2 Modification to an Approved Site Plan Review Plan Submittal (where applicable) 
1. Redline version of the approved site plan (signed by the Planning Board or As-
built approved for final occupancy by the Planning Board). All proposed
modifications should be highlighted showing the existing vs. the proposed
modification. 
2. Clean version of the site plan showing the site as it will be constructed of the
site. Submittal of only sheets being modified shall be required, unless the
proposed modification affects other plan sheets. 
39 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 41
3. The applicant shall submit one full paper copy and one electronic copy of the
site plans upon approval of the modification or portion of the modification
that was approved. 
40 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 42
Article 4: Site Plan Review Lighting Requirements 
Section 4.1
All projects reviewed by the Planning Board require the following outdoor lighting
requirements. Outdoor lighting shall meet the most current International Energy Conservation
Code (IECC) standards, as well as comply with the Outdoor Lighting Code 
Handbook published by the International Dark-Sky Association in compliance with the American
Disabilities Act (ADA) and Architectural Access Board (AAB). All lighting shall require full review
by the Planning Board regardless of whether lighting is attached to buildings, poles, structures, 
or is self-supported, located within hardscape and/or landscaped areas, or near the entrance of
buildings, sales and non-sales canopies, outdoor sales areas, building facades, and/or within
pedestrian ways, to ensure adequate lighting for the use and location is provided. Lighting
requirements set forth, herein shall apply to all luminaires for any lot undergoing new
development, and/or a modification or expansion under a site plan review permit. 
Section 4.2
A Photometric Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board as part of a Site Plan Review
Application package for new or redevelopment projects. The Photometric Plan shall include the
location, height, shield type, and lumen rating for all of the existing and/or proposed outdoor
luminaires. 
Section 4.3 Luminaire Design Standards 
4.3.1 Lighting shall be designed not to exceed the light levels necessary for the use and
location. Lighting shall be designed to provide a safe and adequately illuminated
outdoor area. 
4.3.2 Installation of energy efficient outdoor light fixtures is required. 
4.3.3 All luminaires must be fully shielded to decrease levels of light trespass onto adjacent
properties, roadways, or environmentally sensitive areas. 
4.3.4 Existing luminaires which cause light trespass and glare shall be removed during the
construction phase of the project and replaced with new compliant lighting. All
luminaries shall be fully shielded so that all direct light cast in the direction of abutting
lots or adjacent streets is cut off at an angle no more than a cone angle of 45 degrees
measured from a vertical line directly below the luminaire and shall not exceed the
lumen value specified above. The cut-off may be accomplished by the luminaire
photometric properties, or by a supplementary external shielding. 
4.3.5 Strobes, searchlights, flashing lights, and laser illumination, are prohibited. 
Section 4.4 Sites shall be designed to comply with the maximum permitted light levels, as
stated herein. 
4.4.1 Parking Lots, Sidewalks, and Bikeways – 1.5 Lumens, per square foot of the area. 
4.4.2 Building Entrance Areas – 5 Lumen, per linear foot of the width of all doors
41 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 43
4.4.3 Building Canopies –5 Lumen, per square foot of the ceiling area of a walkway canopy
4.4.4 Retail Sales Canopies – 10 Lumen, per square foot of the ceiling area of a service
station; 5 lumen per square foot of the ceiling area of retail sales canopies 
4.4.5 Retail Sales Frontage and Outdoor Sales Areas: The Planning Board, at its discretion, 
will determine the appropriate light levels on a case by case basis. 
Section 4.5 The Planning Board prohibits light trespass from a site for both new and existing
lighting. The Applicant shall have a Lumen of zero at all lot lines. 
Section 4.6 Each site shall be designed to decrease light levels after the closure of the site. 
4.6.1 Exterior Site Lights shall be turned off one hour after the last person leaves the
building, and shall remain off one hour prior to the opening of the building. Lighting
may be replaced by security lighting if the site necessitates such lighting. 
4.6.2 Exterior Spot Lights shall be controlled by motion detectors or infrared sensors and
shall be activated for no more than 10 minutes of “on-time” and shall be exempt from
the hours-of-operation restriction. The motion detector shall be adjusted so that
normal movement of vehicles, pedestrians, or traffic along a street or way shall not
cause activation. 
4.6.3 Flood lights, spot lights, and other site lighting may not be used as a substitute for
security of the building or property. 
Section 4.7 The following lights shall be exempt from Article 22 set forth herein. 
4.7.1 Temporary holiday lights, which shall not exceed 12 weeks in one calendar year. 
4.7.2 Emergency lighting required by the Framingham Fire, Police, and/or other official or
utility emergency personnel. Such lighting shall minimize any detrimental effects of
glare onto passing vehicles, abutting residential properties, and/or pedestrians. 
4.7.3 Temporary lighting used on construction sites. Such lighting shall minimize any
detrimental effects of glare onto passing vehicles, abutting residential properties, 
and/or pedestrians. 
4.7.4 Lighting associated with signage. Lighting associated with signage shall fall 
under the jurisdiction of the Building Department. 
Section 4.8 Enforcement of Article 22 herein shall be by the Building Commissioner. 
42 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 44
Article 5: Shoppers World Sign Requirements
Section 5.1 Application 
5.1.1 The Planning Board shall review all Shoppers World signage permits at a posted public
open meeting. Any request that varies from the Shoppers World Sign Package, as
shown in the Planning Board Rules & Regulations shall require a public hearing for
such waiver. 
5.1.2 Applicants shall file a completed Shoppers World Sign Application package with the
Sign Officer located in the Building Department. Once the Sign Officer deems the
Application complete, the Sign Officer shall submit the Application to the Planning
Board for review and recommendation. 
5.1.3 The Planning Board shall conduct a review of all Shoppers World Sign Applications
during a publicly posted open meeting. 
5.1.4 The Planning Board shall make a determination for appropriate action on each Sign
Application. Once a determination by the Planning Board has been made, the Planning
Board Office shall send the determination to the Sign Officer. 
5.1.5 The Sign Officer shall review and oversee implementation and construction of the
approved Shoppers World Sign as determined by the Planning Board. 
5.1.6 Any modifications to the approved Shoppers World Sign shall require a determination
from the Planning Board for the requested modification at a publicly posted open
meeting. 
5.1.7 Any ordinary maintenance and minor repairs that do not involve the installation, 
replacement, alteration, reconstruction, relocation, new identification, or expansion
of a sign shall not require review by the Planning Board, but may need approval from
the Building Department. 
Section 5.2 Identification of the Buildings within Shoppers World
5.2.1 Shoppers World is comprised of three sections that include the western lot, the
central ring, and the southeastern lot. Each building or unit has been given a letter for
identification purposes. The letter associated with the building will be followed by a
number if a building is subdivided for additional tenants. 
5.2.2 The Western Lot is comprised of three free standing buildings. Letters associated with
the three free standing buildings include: W, X, and Y. 
43 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 45
5.2.3 The Central Ring is comprised of several buildings that are joined by common walls, in
addition to several free standing buildings. A majority of Shoppers World’s commercial
activity occurs within the Central Ring. Letters associated with the Central Ring
buildings include: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, J/K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, and V. 
5.2.4 The Southeastern Lot is comprised of three free standing buildings. Letters associated
with the Southeastern Lot include: AA, BB, and CC. One of the three free standing
buildings (CC) is located within the Town of Natick. 
5.2.5 Building Z is located within Shoppers World, but does not fall under the jurisdiction of
the Shoppers World Sign Requirements. 
Figure A. Shoppers World Building Assignment
44 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 46
Table 1. Shoppers World Building Identification and Building Area 
Building
Identification
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
J/K
L
M
N
O
P 
Building Area
(square feet) 
18,300
45,000
40,000
39,884
36,108
6,071
Logan Express
Parking Facility
27,089
24,560
8,500
50,081
60,834
40,159 
Building
Identification
Q
R
S
T
U
V (V.1, V.2, and V.3) 
W (W.1 and W.2) 
X
Y
Z
AA
BB
CC (in Natick) 
Building Area
(square feet) 
43,629
98,107
29,963
6,300
9,200
6,002
102,555
4,815
225
122,661
9,500
21,000
7,530
Section 5.3 Ground Mounted Sign Regulations for 19 Flutie Pass 
The property at 19 Flutie Pass (known as the Southeastern Lot), shall include three ground
mounted signs in Framingham, and one ground mounted tenant identification sign located in
the Town of Natick. The ground mounted tenant identification sign shall remain under the
jurisdiction of the Town of Natick. At no point shall there be four ground mounted signs
associated with the Southeastern Lot located within the City of Framingham. 
All ground mounted signs for the Southeastern Lot and Shoppers World shall be constructed of
the same materials to create and identify a unique, cohesive retail center. Four signs are
illustrated and shown within this Section of the Shoppers World Sign Requirements. These
illustrations shall remain as the approved signage until such time that any modification is
requested by the owner or owner’s designee of Shoppers World. 
.3.1 The Southeastern Lot shall be allowed three free-standing signs in Framingham, which
shall include the following (Figure B Southeastern Lot Ground Mounted Sign Locations, 
Figures C-E Southeastern Lot Sign Details):
1. (Sign Location C – Figure C) one monument sign at the entrance to the
Southeastern Lot, not to exceed 120 sf and 12 feet in height, including panels for
businesses located within the Southeastern Lot; 
45 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 47
2. (Sign Location E - Figures D and E) one monument sign located on Shoppers
World Drive for wayfinding purposes containing a 2 feet tall 250 sf wall with up
to four panels of 16 sf to identify businesses located within the Southeastern Lot; 
and 
3. (Sign Location F – Figure F) one monument sign for wayfinding purposes
containing a 2 feet tall 55.5 sf stone wall with an 8.5 sf panel. Vertical
measurements of freestanding signs shall include the sign bases and berms. 
Figure B. Southeastern Lot Ground Mounted Sign Locations
46 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 48
Figure C. Sign Location: C. Ground mounted tenant identification sign. 
Figure D. Sign Location: E. Ground Mounted Tenant Identification Half Wall Sign 
47 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 49
Figure E: Sign Location: E. Sign Location Ground Mounted Tenant Identification detail 
Figure F: Sign Location: F. Ground Mounted Curved Half Wall: Vehicular Directional 
Section 5.4 Individual Tenant Identification Sign Regulations for Shoppers World 
5.4.1 The size of primary signs for each store or business at Shoppers World shall not exceed
250 sf for businesses with a gross floor area greater than 20,000sf, 200 sf for
48 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 50
businesses with between 15,000 sf to 20,000 sf , and 150 sf for businesses with a
gross floor area less than 15,000 sf. Signs shall not be subject to shape or dimensional
limits as to height/length/width, but shall be subject to square footage requirements. 
•  Signage in existence on January 1, 2016 shall be considered pre-existing. 
5.4.2 Every tenant in Shoppers World shall be entitled to two wall signs and each tenant
within a corner building shall be entitled to three wall signs, each subject to the size
limitation of primary signs. A tenant may only display one wall sign per side of the
respective building. Tenants located within a building that has been subdivided shall
only be permitted two wall signs regardless if the store or business is located within a
corner building. Signs for subdivided units shall be determined by the size of the
subdivided unit and shall not exceed 200 sf. 
•  Buildings B, C, F, K/J, M, N, O, P, S, T, U, V, X, AA, and BB may opt to have three
wall signs if the building is utilized by one tenant. 
5.4.3 Blade signs (also known as projection signs or under canopy signs) shall be located
within the front walkway of each store or business front to allow pedestrians to
identify businesses from shopping center sidewalks. Blade signs shall not exceed 24” 
in height and 36” in length and shall not contain any text with logos or specialized
fonts and will be in keeping with the specified colors of Shoppers World. Blade signs
shall not be installed less than 15 feet above the sidewalk. Furthermore, blade signs
shall be installed perpendicularly with the store or business front. 
5.4.4 Temporary sale or lease signs and temporary signs of commercial and/or retail
businesses may be permitted by Planning Board review only. The hanging of
temporary signage shall not exceed 45 days. 
Section 5.5 Sign Regulations for Ground Mounted Shoppers World Identification 
5.5.1 Shoppers World shall be allowed four freestanding signs (locations shown in Figure F: 
Shoppers World ground mounted sign locations). Two freestanding Shoppers World
ground mounted signs may be either pylon or monument and shall be no more than
200 sf and shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Two freestanding Shoppers World
ground mounted signs shall be monument signs and shall be no more than 250 sf in
sign face area, with height not exceeding 5 feet. Vertical measurements shall include
the bases and berms, which may be designed as part of the signs. Figures G – J
illustrate the freestanding Shoppers World ground mounted signs that comply with
these regulations. 
49 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 51
Figure G. Shoppers World Ground Mounted Sign Locations
50 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 52
Figure H. Shoppers World and Southeastern Lot Ground Mounted Sign Details
Figure I. Shoppers World Ground Mounted Signage - Monument
51 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 53
Figure J. Shoppers World Ground Mounted – half wall 
Section 5.6 Shoppers World Sign Illumination 
New lighting installed within Shoppers World shall meet current Building Energy Code for
energy efficiency provisions. In addition, lighting shall not blind vehicles or pedestrians, nor
shall lighting flicker, flash, strobe, or change shades/hues. Types of light sources that are
strongly encouraged include light emitting diodes (LEDs) or fluorescent lights. The use of neon
or incandescent lighting is strongly discouraged. 
Section 5.7 Colors and Design of Tenant Signage
5.7.1 Color of signs shall match the trade mark or logo of the tenant. 
5.7.2 The primary sign located over the storefront entrance shall consist of the tenant’s
name. 
5.7.3 Primary signs located on the side/rear of the building may be either the tenant’s logo
or name. 
5.7.4 Wall signage may be installed with individual letters internally or externally
illuminated, as an insert where the letters are stamped onto the background material, 
applied by paint or flush with the background (these types of signage would require
external illumination, or push-through cuts in the background material.)
Section 5.8 Window Signage 
52 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 54
5.8.1 Signage within the windows shall not cover more than 40 percent of the tenant’s total
window area. 
5.8.2 Window signage may be frosted on the glass or etched into the glass. Such frosting or
etching shall be consistent with the tenant’s branding package. 
5.8.3 Window signage may have a background color that is consistent with the tenant’s
branding and corporate colors. 
5.8.4 Window signage shall not be self-illuminated. 
5.8.5 Window signage shall not be located within 10 feet of the main entrance of the
storefront, with the exception of the Blade Sign. 
5.8.6 Special sale signs shall not be posted within tenant windows for a period greater than
15 days. 
Section 5.9 Banner/Flag Mounted Signage installed by BRE DDR 
5.9.1 Banner/flag mounted signs that are tall and narrow that promotes Shoppers World
and/or events within Shoppers World including during holiday seasons are
encouraged to create a pedestrian environment. 
5.9.2 Banner/flag mounted signs shall be located perpendicularly on corners of buildings, 
light poles, structural columns, etc. 
5.9.3 Banner/flag mounted signs shall not exceed 20 sf and shall only be installed a
minimum of 15 feet above finished grade. Mounting fixtures shall not protrude more
than 6 inches off the structure from which the banner is affixed to. Banner signs shall
not be located closer than 20 feet to any other sign. 
5.9.4 Banners/flag mounted signs shall only be installed and removed by the property
owner or property owner’s designee. 
Section 5.10 Banners/Flag Mounted Signage Installed by Tenants
Temporary banners and/or flag mounted signage installed by the tenants of Shoppers World
may be permitted by Planning Board review only. The temporary banners and/or flag mounted
signage shall not exceed 60 days. 
Section 5.11 Items not considered signs
5.11.1 The following types of signs shall not be considered signs under the Shoppers World 
Master Permit and shall be allowed: 
1.  way finding business signs not exceeding 16 sf in area each for guiding and
directing traffic and parking including panels on walls or monument signs
which do not exceed 2 feet in height; 
2.  artwork, including murals; 
3.  trademarks or logos that do not exceed 16 sf; and 
4.  interior or exterior signs not visible from public or private roadways. 
53 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 55
Article 6: Land Disturbance and Stormwater Management Document Submittal Requirements
Applicants are subject to the SECTION V.F. Land Disturbance and Stormwater Management of
the Framingham Zoning Ordinances as well as the requirements of the Planning Board’s Special
Permit Form E-4. Applicants shall be required to submit the following documents for review by
the Technical Review Team (TRT) and the Planning Board: a Land Disturbance and Stormwater
Management (LDSM) Development Impact Report; a LDSM Site Plan; Completed documentation
for a Checklist for Stormwater Report subject to the MASSDEP format (The checklist is NOT a
substitute for the Stormwater Report (which should provide more substantive and detailed
information) but is offered here as a tool to help the applicant organize their Stormwater
Management documentation for their Report and for the reviewer to assess this information in
a consistent format and a Long-Term Operation and Maintenance Plan. Waivers from the
requirements of Section V.F.3 are subject to SECTION V.F. Land Disturbance and Stormwater
Management. 
These items are all required as part of the Planning Board’s Form E-4. A LDSM Application shall
include the following: 
Section 6.1 LDSM Development Impact Report shall include a Stormwater Runoff Analysis that
includes, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
6.1.1 Stormwater runoff calculations in accordance with the most recent, best available
science on storm intensity sources. Data may be based on Cornell/Northeast Regional
Climate Center data. Applicants shall refer to the Department of Public Works (DPW) 
Stormwater Management Engineer for the most current data source to be used for the
project prior to the development of stormwater runoff calculations. 
6.1.2 Pre- and post-construction stormwater runoff and infiltration rates. 
6.1.3 Pre- and post-construction design calculations using generally accepted analytical tools
to show the effects of the project. 
6.1.4 Applicants shall prepare a construction LDSM Plan for all procedure to be installed on-
site pursuant to Best Management Practices (BMPs) described in Vol 3 of the
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook
(http://www.mass.gov/eea/agencies/massdep/water/regulations/massachusetts-
stormwater-handbook.html) and shall describe Low Impact Development (LID) 
techniques to mitigate the impacts of stormwater, erosion, sedimentation, and other
land disturbance effects caused by the project. The LDSM Plan shall contain a series of
sections that include a plan for erosion, land disturbance, and stormwater
management for the different phases of the project, and shall contain a description of
long-term maintenance once the project is complete and taken over by the landowner
or the homeowner trust. LDSM Plan information shall include, but shall not be limited
to, the following: 
54 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 56
1. Construction and Maintenance Procedure: Such section shall include a checklist
for the project management to ensure all BMPs are properly managed and shall
identify the party responsible for such management. 
2. All stormwater and erosion control management shall be checked prior to the
start and finish of each work day. 
3. The Applicant shall check all stormwater features prior to and at the end of each
construction day. In the event that a multiple day storm event (classified as ½”
of precipitation per day or greater) occurs, the project manager (for the
applicant, the applicant’s designee, a peer review hired by the City, and/or
Environmental Monitor, etc.) shall inspect the stormwater features to ensure
that they are functioning properly and have not exceeded their capacity. Any
repairs, adjustments or deficiencies shall be made immediately. 
4. Daily compliance with Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).
5. The Applicant shall provide appropriate erosion control and covering methods
such as silt fences and straw wattles around the stock piles, tarps covering over
the stock piles in case of a storm event, in addition to the temporary dust control
requirements. 
6.1.5 An applicant shall provide a completed Checklist for Stormwater Report completed by a
Registered Professional Engineer’s and certified as part of the LDSM Application of the
Framingham Planning Board
Section 6.2 Land Disturbance and Stormwater Management Site Plan
All Land Disturbance and Stormwater Management Site Plans are subject to the requirements of
Planning Board’s Special Permit Form E-4. Any information that is not applicable to the project
should be noted within the plan notes and/or provided in a narrative and included within the
LDSM Development Impact Report. 
6.2.1 General Information 
1. Address and Assessor’s Identification Number for the property. 
2. Names, address, email addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner(s) and
applicants. 
3. Company name, address, and telephone numbers of the firm(s) who prepared the
plan. 
4. Title, date of plans, dates of all revisions, north arrow, scale, names of the direct
abutters, and legend. 
5. Locus map showing the location of the project. 
6. Plans must be stamped and certified by a qualified Professional Engineer
registered in Massachusetts. 
7. Existing and proposed topography provided on the site plans
55 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 57
8. Detail sheet providing the proposed construction details for the Site. 
9. Certified benchmark shown on plans, in addition to source and data related to the
utilized benchmark. 
6.2.2 Locations and descriptions of natural features
1. All wetlands and wetland resource areas as defined in M.G.L. c. 131, Section 40; 
the Framingham Wetlands Protection Bylaw, Article V, Section 18 of the General
Ordinances; all drainage patterns; and all watershed boundaries. 
2. Delineation of all potential and certified vernal pools, streams, ponds, and
wetlands within 125feet of the project site/limit of work. 
3. Delineation of the 30-foot no-cut/no alteration zone, 100-foot state wetlands
buffer, the 125-foot local wetlands buffer, the 125-foot potential and certified
vernal pool no-cut/no alteration zone, and the inner and outer riparian zones that
include the 100’ and 200’ riverfront areas. 
4. Watercourses and water bodies, wetland resource areas and all floodplain
information, including the 100-year flood elevation based upon the most recent
Flood Insurance Rate Map, or as calculated by a professional engineer for areas
not assessed on these maps. 
5. Existing vegetation including tree lines, canopy layer, shrub layer, and ground
cover, and trees with a caliper twelve inches or larger, noting specimen trees and
forest communities. 
6. Habitats mapped by the Massachusetts Natural Heritage & Endangered Species
Program (NHESP) as Endangered, Threatened or of Special Concern, Estimated
Habitats of Rare Wildlife and Certified Vernal Pools, and Priority Habitats of Rare
Species within five hundred feet of any construction activity. 
6.2.3 BMPs and LIDs installed on site
1. Location of each BMP and LID. 
2. Plan detail for each different type of BMP and LID used on site. 
6.2.4 Landscape
1. Compliance with Findings and Conditions of Approval listed in Section V.F.4
2. A landscape plan for each BMP and LID to be used on the site. 
3. Location, description, and implementation schedule of temporary and permanent
seeding, vegetative controls, and other stabilization measures. 
4. A narrative documenting the existing species and quantities of native and
specimen trees and/or other vegetation to be removed or relocated within the
project area that meet or exceed 8” caliper. 
56 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 58
5. If applicable, include a statement prepared by a certified arborist for the proposed
relocation of any existing native and specimen tree explaining how said tree is to
be relocated and maintained. 
6. A narrative documenting the existing trees that are proposed to be removed as
part of the project. Accompanied by a list of species that will replace all trees
greater than 8” caliper in accordance with Section V.F.3.c. Tree Removal. Such list
of proposed replacement trees shall include native species, identified by the Latin
name, common name, and the quantity. 
6.2.5 Structures, Manmade Features, and Easements
1. Roadways that directly abut the property shall be shown on the map. Information
shall include the name of the roadway noting if the road is public or private, the
width of the roadway, location of the drainage system, grades of the roadway and
public right-of-way onto the property, the locations of the existing and proposed
driveway(s), existing and proposed curb cuts, type of curbing, and sidewalks. 
2. The size and location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, utilities, 
roads, driveways, parking areas, and areas of cut and fill on the site, and the
location of all structures on abutting properties within 100 feet of the property
lines of the parcel. 
3. A list of properties within 300 feet of the property boundaries that utilize private
wells. If shallow wells, the depth shall be documented in such list. 
4. Property lines, easements and/or other legal rights or restrictions benefitting and
burdening the subject property within the property lines. 
5. Surveyed property lines showing distances and monument locations, all existing
and proposed easements, rights-of-way and other encumbrances, the size of the
entire parcel, and the delineation and number of square feet of the land area to
be disturbed. 
6. Location and description of industrial discharges, including stormwater discharges
from dedicated asphalt plants and dedicated concrete plants, which are covered
by this permit. 
6.2.6 Topography
1. Boundaries of existing and proposed topography within the property boundaries. 
Contours shall be spaces at a 2-foot interval, using (National Geodetic Vertical
Datum 1929) NGVD29, or the most recent version thereof. 
2. Specification of the NGVD used for the plans shall be located in the plan notes. 
3. Identification of Moderate Slopes as defined in Section IV.E.3.e, as well as the 30’ 
Moderate Slope buffer. 
6.2.7 Soil and Fill 
57 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 59
1. Plan note including the existing soil types, type of fill to be used, and volume and
nature of imported soil materials. 
2. Location of soil types on site and locations of fill. 
6.2.8 Construction Phase Grading Plan Sheet
1. Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major grading
activities. 
2. Location and details of erosion and sediment control measures, including both
operation and maintenance for structural and non-structural measures, interim
grading, and material stockpiling areas. 
3. Path and mechanism to divert uncontaminated water around disturbed areas, to
the maximum extent practicable. 
4. Throughout the duration of construction, a gravel apron of at least fifteen feet
wide and at least twenty-five feet long is required at any site access from a paved
public way to prevent unstable material from being transported onto the roadway
by vehicle tires. 
Section 6.3 Long-Term Operation & Management LDSM Plan 
Applicants shall prepare a Long-Term Operations and Management LDSM Plan for all features
installed on-site pursuant to BMPs and LID techniques to mitigate the impacts of stormwater, 
erosion, sedimentation, and other land disturbance effects caused by the project. This document
shall contain a plan for erosion, land disturbance, and stormwater management for the long-term
operation and management of the project post-construction. Furthermore, this document shall
contain a description of long-term maintenance once the project is complete and taken over by
the owner. 
6.3.1 Land Owner and/or Trust Procedure
Such section shall inform the owners of the land or homeowners trust what BMPs and
LID techniques have been installed, proper management of such BMPs and LID
techniques, and the Long Term LDSM Plan for the project. The Long Term LDSM Plan
shall be recorded with the Registry of Deeds or filed with the Registry District of the
Land Court, as applicable, prior to the first deed of any lot so that successors in title may
know how to properly management the features installed on-site. 
Section 6.4 Land Disturbance and Stormwater Management Performance Bonds
6.4.1 Construction Maintenance Bond
1. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the Applicant shall provide a
Construction Performance Bond in accordance with Section V.F.5.b of the
Framingham Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
58 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 60
2. The Planning Board shall hold such Construction Maintenance Bond until the
project is complete and a Use and Occupancy Permit has been granted by the
Department of Inspectional Services (Building Department).
3. Such Construction Maintenance Bond shall be held in a project account set-up
specifically for the project.
4. The Planning Board and/or the Department of Public Works may utilize the funds
to repair and/or maintain any stormwater management, erosion control
equipment and/or techniques installed if the Applicant fails to remedy an issue
within 24 hours; or if the Applicant fails to install such required equipment or
techniques; or if the Applicant has abandoned the project, fails to maintain such
equipment and techniques, and/or installed features are failing.
6.4.2 Landscape Performance Bond
1. Prior to the issuance of a Use and Occupancy Permit issued by the Department of
Inspectional Services (Building Department), the Applicant shall provide a Land
Disturbance and Stormwater Management (LDSM) Performance Bond in
accordance with Section V.F.5.e of the Framingham Zoning Ordinance.
2. The Planning Board shall hold the LDSM Performance Bond for a total of five years,
and release a percentage of the LDSM Performance Bond in accordance with the
submittal of annual maintenance reporting to the Planning Board and Department
of Public Works. Said funds shall be returned to the depositor of the LDSM
Performance Bond, unless documentation is provided to the Planning Board Office
from the depositor of the funds that another party has taken over the funding
source.
3. The Planning Board and/or the Department of Public Works may utilize the funds
to repair and/or maintain any stormwater management, erosion control
equipment and/or techniques installed if the Applicant/landowner/homeowner
trust fails to remedy an issue within 24 hours; or if  the
Applicant/landowner/homeowner trust fails to install such required equipment or
techniques; or if the Applicant/landowner/homeowner trust has abandoned the
project, fails to maintain such equipment and techniques, and/or installed
features are failing; or if the City is required to clean and maintain such
stormwater management and/or erosion control systems.
Section 6.5 Request for Waivers from Submittal Items
6.5.1 During the first public hearing the Planning Board shall review the list of requested
waivers. At such time the Planning Board shall make a determination as to which
waivers shall be granted and which information will be required. During the public
hearing process the Planning Board can require additional information that was
waived if it becomes relevant during the public hearing process. 
Section 6.6 Modification to an Approved Special Permit for Land Disturbance and Stormwater
Management
Once a project has been approved and granted an Occupancy and Use Permit from the
59 | F r a m i n g h a m P l a n n i n g B o a r d P r o j e c t  R e v i e w G u i d e l i n e s
Page 61
Department of Inspectional Services (Building Department). An Applicant may seek
modification from the Planning Board through an abbreviated review. 
6.6.1 Application Submittal for Land Disturbance and Stormwater Management Project
1. Form A - Cover Letter 
2. Form G - Request for Modification 
3. Certificate of Ownership
4. Summary of Modifications: a summary listing the proposed modifications, 
reasons for modifications, and benefit to the site plan if granted modifications. 
5. Update Stormwater Calculations if current stormwater system is affected by
changes, subject to Board. 
6.6.2 Modification to an Approved Land Disturbance and Stormwater Management Plan
Submittal 
1. A redline version of the approved site plan (signed by the Planning Board or As-
built approved for final occupancy by the Planning Board). All proposed
modifications should be highlighted showing the existing vs. the proposed
modification. 
2. Clean site plan showing the site as it will be constructed. Only sheets being
affected by the modification should be submitted, unless the modification
affects other plan sheets. 
3. Upon approval, approval with modification, or acceptance of a portion of the
proposed modifications, the Applicant shall submit one full paper copy of the
site plans and one electronic copy of the site plans. 
Section 6.7 Occupancy Permitted
a. Prior to the issuance of an Occupancy Permit or Final Project Approval, As Built plans are
required and shall be submitted per Section VI.B of this Zoning Ordinance to Inspectional
Services, Department of Public Works, Planning Board, and Conservation Commission. A
certificate of Occupancy or Project Approval shall not be issued until the aforementioned
departments review and approve the As Built drawings/documents. 
Article 7: Special Permit Application Submittal Requirements
Section 7.1 Documentation Submittal (Special Permit for Land Disturbance and Stormwater
Management shall file under the appropriate form and follow the submittal requirements
outlined in Article 6, herein.)
7.1.1 Special Permit Application 
1. Cover Letter
2. Special Permit Application that is applicable to the special permit(s) that are
being applied for. 
7.1.2 Special Permit Site Plans (projects that only require a special permit from the Planning
Board) 
60 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 62
1. Address(es) of the proposed project; 
2. Identification of parcel by the Assessor Parcel ID; 
3. Prepared by/Prepared for; 
4. Professional Engineer and/or Land Surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts stamp and signature; 
5. Registered Architect stamp and signature, if applicable; 
6. Zoning Table showing the existing, required, and proposed dimensions in
accordance with Section IV. E, Dimensional Regulations; 
7. Zoning Table/Information showing the proposed use, permits required in
accordance with Section II.B, Table of Use; 
8. Parking Table, showing the existing number of parking spaces, required number
of parking spaces, and the proposed number of parking spaces. This Table shall
include the dimensions of the proposed parking spaces, number and dimensions
of the handicap accessible spaces, and number and dimensions of loading
spaces; 
9. Maximum seating capacity, number of employees, or sleeping units if applicable; 
10. Plan sets shall be accurately drawn to a scale of one inch equals 20 feet to one
inch equals 60 feet, where practical and appropriate to the size of the proposal; 
11. Planning Board Signature Block at approximately the same location on each page
of the submitted plans; 
12. North arrow and scale of drawings; 
13. Date of plan and revision dates; 
7.1.3 Special Permit Analysis 
1. A summary of the special permits in compliance with the appropriate section of
the Framingham Zoning Ordinance. The summary shall provide an overview of
the special permits being sought, how the project has been designed to comply
with the specific special permit requirements, and how the special permit if
granted will benefit both the project and the neighborhood. 
Section 7.2 Request for Waivers from Submittal Items
7.2.1 During the first public hearing the Planning Board shall review the list of requested
waivers. At such time the Planning Board shall make a determination as to which
waivers shall be granted and which information will be required. During the public
hearing process the Planning Board can require additional information that was
waived if it becomes relevant during the public hearing process. 
Section 7.3 Modification to an Approved Special Permit 
Once a project has been approved and granted an Occupancy and Use Permit from the
Department of Inspectional Services (Building Department). An Applicant may seek
modification from the Planning Board through an abbreviated review. 
7.3.1 Application Submittal for a Special Permit Project
61 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 63
1. Form A - Cover Letter 
2. Form G - Request for Modification 
3. Certificate of Ownership
4. Summary of Modifications: a summary listing the proposed modifications, 
reasons for modifications, and benefit to the site plan if granted modifications. 
7.3.2 Modification to an Approved Special Permit Plan Submittal, where applicable 
1. A redline version of the approved site plan (signed by the Planning Board or As-
built approved for final occupancy by the Planning Board). All proposed
modifications should be highlighted showing the existing vs. the proposed
modification. 
2. Clean site plan showing the site as it will be constructed. Only sheets being
affected by the modification should be submitted, unless the modification
affects other plan sheets. 
3. Upon approval, approval with modification, or acceptance of a portion of the
proposed modifications, the Applicant shall submit one full paper copy of the
site plans and one electronic copy of the site plans. 
Article 8: Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
62 | Framingham Planning Board Project Review Guidelines 
Page 64
FRAMINGHAM
NOBSCOT VILLAGE DESIGN GUIDELINES
Cover Image: Village Green at Pinehills in Plymouth MA 
Framingham Planning Board
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
Page 65
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 66
Table of Contents 
1.  Introduction
2.  Sites
•  Multi-modal circulation
•  Plazas and open space
•  Landscape and materials
•  Furnishings and lighting
•  Service areas and utilities
3.  Buildings
•  Massing and character
•  Facades and materials
•  Entrances and windows
•  Awnings and canopies
•  Roof form and utilities
4.  Signs
•  Site and building signs
5.  References and resources
6.  Definition of terms 
4
6
6
8
10
12
14
16
16
18
20
22
23
24
24
26
27 
3
Page 67
1. Introduction
Photographs of the current context in Nobscot
4 
The Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
(NVDG) document has been compiled
to recognize the importance of the input
provided by the Nobscot community through
public meetings, conversations, and previous
studies. This document articulates the design
preferences expressed by the Nobscot
community as a future redevelopment guide
for the community.
The purpose of the NVDG is to provide
developers with clear guidelines and
expectations specific to Nobscot Village prior
to filing an application for a permit. The
intent of these NVDG is to encourage new
investment that will provide a strong sense
of community while ensuring that enhanced
walkability and connectivity are emphasized.
In 2017, Framingham worked with the
Metropolitan Area Planning Council (MAPC) 
to define design guidelines for Nobscot
Village based on the public input, previous
studies and recently completed reports. 
These design characteristics are expected
to enhance the quality of life in the
neighborhood. A safe and comfortable
pedestrian environment comprised of a mix
of uses along with strong village design
can help achieve a vibrant and successful
neighborhood center where people are able
to live, shop, gather, work, and play. 
The NVDG are planned to be adopted
by the Framingham Planning Board and
incorporated into the Planning Board Rules
and Regulations. The NVDG will be used
in conjunction with the Zoning Ordinances
as a companion document that establishes
the site and building design guidelines for
redevelopment in Nobscot Village.
The NVDG are organized into subject
headings based on the characteristics of site
and building design guidelines. The sections
begin with guiding principles followed
by specific design guidelines. The guiding
principles identify the community’s goals
and aspirations for Nobscot Village and
are intended to provide guidance for the
project’s planning and design. 
The specific design guidelines include
measurable design criteria for property
owners, developers, architects, reviewers
and members of the public to consider
when determining the appropriateness of a
particular design for Nobscot Village. 
The following vision, goal, and
recommendation statements were articulated
through the community-based Nobscot
Economic Development Action Plan in 2015.
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 68
Nobscot Community Vision Statement
Nobscot Village is a vital and historic
commercial center that serves the surrounding
residential neighborhoods with community, 
service, and recreational amenities that
reinforce livability and quality of life.
Nobscot Community Goals
• Transform underperforming properties
• Align uses and services to local needs
• Connect recreational resources
• Aggressively expand walkability
Nobscot Recommendations
• Focus on improving the character of
primary street frontages
• Reduce the visual impact of parking
• Create consistent district features
• Enhance walkability/bikability
• Improve vehicular circulation
• Strengthen open spaces/links
• Reinforce attractive, safe, and active
pedestrian realm
• Strengthen quaint walkable character
of a commercial neighborhood center
• Provide a protective buffers and
transitions to surrounding residential uses
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
The NVDG are written to promote
incremental progress toward the vision
statement, goals, and recommendations by
the following:
• Promoting retail, service, and
other commercial uses in a compact
area complemented by a variety
of residential uses that promote
neighborhood walkability
• Preserving and strengthening the
neighborhood center as a focus of
activity providing services and amenities
within a village context
• Integrating auto-oriented uses into a
pedestrian-oriented center which is safe, 
comfortable and attractive for walking
• Encouraging improved visual quality
of commercial, residential and mixed-
use development that strengthens the
existing neighborhood center
• Creating, incorporating and supporting
new community space and amenities 
The Nobscot Design Guidelines (NVDG) apply to the area highlighted
in the aerial photograph. This is the same area within the boundary
of the existing B-2 Community Business zoning district. 
5
Page 69
2. Sites
Multi-modal circulation
Every investment in Nobscot Village
should improve the character and sense of
place while strengthening the pedestrian
environment and walkability. The site
principles and guidelines are intended
to enhance attractiveness and retain
long term property values by promoting
multiple ways to get around.
Principles
• Site design and layout should place
buildings to provide definition to public
street frontages and to define blocks and
streets internal to a large development site
• Site design and layout should create new
circulation connections both internal to the
site and connecting to adjacent streets, 
access ways, trails, and sidewalks
• Site design and layout should correspond
to the surrounding context including
adjacent properties, open spaces, trail
connections, streets, corners, and other
unique characteristics. Where the context
is inconsistent with the guidelines, a new
pattern should be established to conform
with the design guidelines
• Site design and layout should position
parking to be concealed by buildings, 
streetscape, and open spaces. Parking
should not be the primary and most visible
feature of the site plan
6 
A site design and layout that responds to a corner site with the
orientation of the building and a small defined entry plaza 
A large property where the site layout defined an internal street that
included on-street parking, generous sidewalks, and buildings that are
positioned to frame and define the street frontage
A simple diagram depicting a site layout where the building defines
street frontage, new connections are created, and parking is concealed
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 70
Guidelines
• On a large property, multiple types
of parking including on-street parking
on internal access ways, should be
integrated to reduce large parking lots
• Pedestrian circulation should provide
continuous connections between public
sidewalks, parking areas, building entries, 
and open spaces
• Pedestrian and bicycle circulation should
connect to local recreational assets that
may be adjacent to the site including
Nobscot Park, Aqueduct, and Rail Trails
• Vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle access
should be provided to connect to adjacent
properties and allow for convenient
circulation between adjacent properties
• Parking should be placed to rear and side
of buildings, not in front of buildings, and
should not detract from or disrupt the
continuity of the pedestrian environment
• Parking areas near building or site entry
plazas should be designed to support
flexible use and events by integrating
alternative paving materials
• Parking entry drives and curb cuts should
be minimized, combined, and shared
across multiple properties when possible
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
Alternative paving patterns and pervious pavers should be used
creatively to improve the quality of parking areas, reduce negative
visual impact of parking, and increase the potential for the flexible use
Continuous pedestrian circulation that provides connections between
public sidewalks and building entries while providing attractive and
high quality landscape, amenity and paving features 
Simple and maintained pedestrian and bike connections to surrounding
amenities would enhance connectivity within the district 
7
Page 71
2. Sites
Plazas and open space
All redevelopment investments should
expand and strengthen the neighborhood
network of publicly accessible plazas
and open spaces. These areas should be
integrated with the site design adding
flexibility, character, and amenity.
Principles
• Reinforce a pedestrian-friendly environment
that is attractive and walkable
• Integrate modest landscaped plazas and
open spaces into the overall site design
and layout focusing activity near building
entries and public street frontages
• Strengthen and complement a consistent
street character with expanded plazas
and open space areas that extend
streetscape and landscape components
• Design and integrate amenities into plazas
and open spaces to support active use of
the spaces for sitting, eating, or other uses
• Modest plazas and open spaces should be
integrated into site plans and connected
to the public realm in a way that promotes
public access and use
• Plazas and open spaces should integrate
with a network of pedestrian walkways
internal to the site connecting destinations
8 
Benches and other forms of seating provide amenity and invite active
use of modest plazas and open spaces 
Site design and building orientation may create opportunities for
modest plazas and open space integrated with an attractive landscape
frontage that connects to the public sidewalk
Modest plazas are an opportunity for interesting community amenities
that draw people together in the neighborhood center
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 72
Guidelines
• Modest plazas should be used to expand
sidewalks in strategic locations to
accommodate dining, outdoor displays, or
seating
• Sidewalks should provide a generous and
attractive pedestrian environment that is
an integral part of each street and access
way providing connections to each building
entry, open space, and parking areas
• Plaza and open space activities should
not reduce the minimum clear width of the
sidewalk to allow for proper circulation
• Sidewalk layout and design should
integrate with the ground floor design of
adjacent building frontage
• Plazas and open spaces should be
considered as locations highly suitable
for the integration of modest public art
installations
• Plazas, open spaces, and the amenities
within them should be viewed as
opportunities to strengthen community
identity and create recognizable features
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
A site layout could integrate a modest plaza placed at the building
frontage as an expansion of the sidewalk and placed at the edge of
the rear of a property adjacent to another open space resource 
A strong relationship between building interior and exterior with
the expansion of a modest plaza to support outdoor seating and
additional landscaping
A site design feature should leverage an orientation to an adjacent
open space or street frontage to create a community feature 
9
Page 73
2. Sites
Landscape and materials
Site investments should include high
quality landscape and materials that
will be long-lasting and attractive. Site
materials should improve the character, 
elevate the quality, and extend the legacy
and longevity of Nobscot Village.
Principles
• High quality landscape should enhance a
sense of attractive and welcoming places
• Landscape should be used to define
outdoor spaces, plazas, and seating areas
• Landscape should be generous and
integrated into the design of the street
frontages, plazas, building and parking
• Landscape and materials on private
property should be coordinated with
the existing landscape features and
streetscape design of adjacent properties
and street frontages
• The landscape design should be
appropriate to the surrounding context, 
preserve native and hybrid plantings, 
integrate with existing planting patterns, 
and preserve older growth native trees
• Site materials should be selected for
quality, durability, ease of maintenance, 
and resilience to winter and other severe
weather conditions
10 
Building entry plazas should be used as an opportunity to increase
shade tree cover and use distinctive materials to enhance the site
character
Parking areas should include the generous provision of landscape areas
that can be integrated with stormwater management and contributions
to the districts tree canopy 
Granite pavers with engraved historic markings are one approach to
highlighting the history or significant events of Nobscot
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 74
Guidelines
• The palette of site materials should improve
the character of Nobscot and reference
the historic character of a New England
village center featuring natural materials
such as quarried stone and brick
• Materials should be used creatively to
highlight design features and history of the
site
• Site materials should include granite curbs, 
concrete sidewalks, and accents with brick, 
or pavers to provide visual interest and
design patterns to reduce large expanses
of concrete or asphalt
• Sidewalk finishes should be continuous at
street crossings and curb cuts to visually
reinforce pedestrian use and right-of-way. 
Finishes in roadways should be coordinated
and designed for durability and ease of
maintenance
• Sidewalk materials should integrate
accents, or other design features to
reinforce circulation or highlight crossings, 
such as brick inlay accents or other
changes in material or color 
• Building design should integrate landscape
with unique approaches encouraged on
building facades with window boxes, 
trellises, green walls, and plantings at the
perimeter of the building foundation
• Plantings in sturdy containers should be
used to define areas for sidewalk seating
areas
• All trees and plantings should be species
native to Eastern Massachusetts, or a
named cultivar of a native species, 
or hybrid of a native species, low
maintenance, long-lived, hardy, sturdy, and
salt tolerant
• Landscaping and shade trees should be
integrated into the parking design
• Parking should be screened with both low
landscape features (shrubs, hedges) and
shade trees. Areas exposed to street
frontage, at the side of a building, should
be additionally screened with a fence or
decorative wall
• Trees should be an integral part of the site
and landscape design 
• Trees should be generously integrated into
the site plan to provide aesthetic value, 
commercial appeal, reduce heating and
cooling costs, reduce heat reflected from
paved surfaces, prevent soil erosion, and
increase property values
• Trees should be positioned to provide
shade and reduce the solar absorption of
hard top surfaces, such as parking lots, to
reduce the heat island effect
• Integrate a full range of streetscape
elements in the design including streets, 
sidewalks, bike lanes, crosswalks, 
landscape, street trees, benches, bike
racks, trash receptacles, signs, lighting, on-
street parking, and public art
• Provide landscape buffers adjacent to
existing residential streets, such as Whiting
Road, Montgomery Drive, Windsor Drive
South, and Donovan Drive with berms, 
generous plantings including trees, 
preserve existing trees in buffers
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines  11
Page 75
2. Sites
Furnishings and lighting
Site furnishings and lighting should be
functional, attractive, of a high quality, 
and consistent with or complementary
to the publicly provided furnishing and
lighting fixtures.
Principles
• All site furnishings should be coordinated
and consistent in terms of style, materials, 
and finish and should include benches, light
fixtures, bike racks, trash receptacles, and
other items that may be needed
• Encourage bicycling by providing
convenient and visible locations for bicycle
parking integrated with site plans located
near building entries and plazas
• Shared bicycle facilities are encouraged
across multiple tenants or building entries
• Lighting should be used as an important
feature to strengthen the vibrant
neighborhood center providing general
ambient light and highlights for building, 
landscape, and site features
• Lighting should reinforce the safety, 
comfort, and scale of the pedestrian
environment. It should be used purposefully
and with restraint to avoid glare, eliminate
spill and impacts to neighboring properties, 
and light pollution in the night sky
12 
Examples of the appropriate bicycle racks integrated into the
surrounding site design and layout 
Furnishings such as benches and trash receptacles should be coordinated
and complementary to other public amenities in the district
Plazas should be considered for alternative approaches to furnishings
to enhance the sense of place and visual interest
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 76
Guidelines
• Bike racks should be of a type that allow
bikes to be securely supported in an
upright position at two or more secure
points that prevent bicycle tipping, 
accommodating a variety of bike shapes
• Bike racks should be located and installed
with adequate clearances around them to
allow for maneuvering and securing bikes
• Bike storage rooms may be integrated with
ground floor uses to encourage bicycle use
by tenants and visitors of the building
• Lighting design should minimize larger scale
flood lighting fixtures, pedestrian-scaled
light fixtures are encouraged and should
focus illumination downward with full cut-
off fixtures that are dark sky compliant
• Locations of light fixtures should be
coordinated with street trees, street
furniture, utilities, and other amenities
• Ornamental light fixtures are encouraged, 
more utilitarian “cobra head” type light
fixtures are discouraged
• Light fixtures with poles should allow the
opportunity for banners to be attached to
the light pole
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
Benches should be integrated and coordinated with the landscape
A variety of coordinated and traditionally styled light fixtures
Site furnishings coordinated along internal access ways to provide
consistency and avoid conflicts 
Consistent street lights internal to a site design with potential banners
Simple pedestrian-scaled light bollards can enhance pedestrian safety
and evening character of the site 
13
Page 77
2. Sites
Service areas and utilities
Service areas (including parking), utilities, 
and equipment should not detract from
the attractiveness of the district nor
disrupt the pedestrian environment. 
These functional requirements should be
integrated into the site design and layout
to minimize impact.
Principles
• Service areas, utilities, and equipment
should not detract from the building and
site design nor the surrounding context
• Locate loading and service areas to the
rear of the site and to the side or rear of
buildings on the site or remotely in the rear
of parking areas
• Loading and service areas should be
located to provide a convenient and non-
disruptive location for service vehicles
including trash pick-up and truck deliveries
• A defined area for service and loading
should be provided and delineated with
landscape and screening
• Conceal loading, service areas, and utilities
from adjacent public streets and abutting
properties
14 
Existing tree lines and landscape buffers should be used to screen
development and support functions from nearby residential properties 
Service and loading areas should be used as an opportunity to further
define the site and reinforce a sense of place
Screening for service areas should be used to visually conceal the
function from streets and adjacent properties
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 78
Guidelines
• Service and loading areas should be
designed to be as compact as possible
• Service and loading areas should be
designed to be concealed when not in
use and should be minimized through the
location and design of screening elements
• Service, loading areas, and utilities
that emit sound should incorporate
soundproofing in the design
• The design of screening should be
integrated with the surrounding landscape
and should complement the building design
and external materials
• Chain link fencing is strongly discouraged
as a boundary or screening material
• Utilities including power generation or
sustainability features should be integrated
with the site layout and design to use
the site as efficiently and attractively as
possible
• Utilities should be placed on the rooftops
of buildings and screened from view, also
refer to “roof form” design guidelines
• Utilities should be placed underground
where possible
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
Screening should be considered as an opportunity for architectural and
landscape expression used to reinforce design themes and enhance the
sense of place and community 
Sustainability features such as rain gardens and bioswales should be
integrated with the site design and layout
Site layout and design should thoughtfully integrate sustainable
features to optimize orientation and function while allowing efficient
use of the site 
15
Page 79
3. Buildings
Massing and character
The design of the building form and
architectural features should be respectful
to the surrounding residential context, 
to reduce the impression of large scale
structures, and to reinforce the sense of a
modest pedestrian-oriented village. 
Principles
• All aspects of a building design should
reinforce the sense of community and
strengthen the perception of Nobscot as a
village center with an identity and sense of
place
• Large buildings should be divided and
defined as smaller and distinct parts that
are part of an overall composition
• Building massing and character should be
designed to promote interest and a sense
of vitality and activity in the center
• Building massing and character should
develop a traditional approach to the
building form that enhances the sense of
place of the Nobscot village center
• Building massing, orientation and design
should define a clear relationship to
its surroundings to respond to adjacent
structures, frame street frontages, define
open spaces, and shape community
amenities
16 
Building massing with a retail base that is differentiated from a
residential top integrated into a complementary design 
Design of the building massing to frame street frontages and small
plazas while reinforcing a modest pedestrian scale
Variation in building massing, height, roof form, balconies and
materials reduces the visual impact of a larger building
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 80
Guidelines
• Building massing should frame and
emphasize amenities such as plazas and
open spaces and conceal parking and
service areas
• The ground floor should be taller than the
upper floors with a minimum height of 12’
• The addition of a lower level porch, awning
or covered entry area can be used to
reduce the overall scale of the building
• The use of upper level stepbacks to
reduce the perception of building height is
encouraged - upper level should step back
from the front facade a minimum of 5’
• Reduce scale of large buildings by
breaking building massing into the
appearance of several smaller connected
building forms with distinct roof lines, 
varying building heights, and variation in
building materials
• Building massing and character should
define a clear base, middle, and top
to add visual interest and a traditional
approach to the building form
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
Building massing that responds to the context of a corner site using
form and materials to highlight the corner of the building 
Building massing designed to break down the scale of a large building
by stepping back a portion of the facade and adding a covered porch
Variation in the height, roof form and massing add visual interest and
reduce the scale of the building while integrating multiple tenants 
17
Page 81
3. Buildings
Facades and materials
All building facades and materials should
enhance the character of Nobscot and
strengthen its New England village
heritage. The primary building facades
should be oriented to the street and
secondary facades should relate to the
surrounding context. All facades should
promote a pedestrian-scaled environment.
Principles
• The design of the building facade should
be used to reduce the overall scale and
bulk of large buildings and use details and
materials to reinforce a human-scale
• The design of the building facades
should use details and features to add
visual interest and to avoid unnecessary
repetition and monotony
• The composition of the building facade and
use of materials should define a distinct
ground floor that reinforces pedestrian
activity and visually anchors the building
• The palette of building materials should
reflect the traditional character and history
of Nobscot with preference for natural
materials such as brick, stone and wood
• High quality building materials should
be selected for durability, ease of
maintenance, and sustainability
18 
A facade with strong detailing that features storefronts, windows, and
eave lines while defining a distinct base, middle and top 
An updated interpretation of traditional facade elements and materials
Facades should use different materials or detailing to define a distinct
ground level and upper level integrated with the roof form
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 82
Guidelines
• The facade design and material selections
should define a base, middle, and top that
helps to reduce the overall building scale
• The facade design and features should
be used to break-down large building
masses with vertical or horizontal divisions
and avoid blank featureless areas, break
facades greater than 50’ in length into
multiple distinct bays with the building form
• The facade design should use a variety
of materials and textures to reinforce
building form and to avoid blank surfaces
and monotony; no blank surface should be
more than 20’ in length
• Facades should feature simple architectural
detailing that place a visual emphasis at
entries, windows, eaves, cornice, and roofs
• Provide a sign band and other design
features to distinguish and anchor the
ground floor to create a distinction from
the levels above
• Provide a distinct eave and cornice line
where the upper level meets the roof
• Facade design and details should derive
inspiration from traditional forms, but
interpret and update in a creative fashion
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
• Balconies should be integrated with the
facade design and used to interrupt flat
facades and provide visual variation and
depth
• Materials should be used creatively to
highlight design features of the building
and differentiate between building masses
and architectural features
• Building materials should be natural
materials and include red or earth tone
brick materials, stone, wood clapboard
siding, wood shingles, wood trim, and glass
• Complementary building materials and
colors should be composed to highlight
traditional details including trim to frame
doors, windows, structural bays, eaves, and
cornices
• Complementary building materials should
be used to distinguish the ground floor from
the upper floors with a distinctive detail at
the top of the ground level that highlights
this transition
• Aluminum siding, vinyl siding, plywood, 
concrete, stucco, and metal cladding
systems, and prefabricated brick are
materials that are discouraged 
Natural materials such as brick, wood siding, and stone are preferred
for building facades
An example of many of traditional details and ornamental features
of that add visual interest to the facade and interrupt large surfaces
19
Page 83
3. Buildings
Entrances and windows
Entrances and windows are the most
visible human-scaled features of the
building. Entries should be integrated
with the building design to highlight the
location as a central feature that is easily
identified and welcoming. Windows and
associated glass applications such as side
lites and clerestory windows should be
used to highlight activity and provide
visual interest. Ground floor windows
add vitality and enhance an attractive
place to walk and gather.
Principles
• Create identifiable building entries that
assist with orientation and direction
• Architectural design and detail should both
anchor and highlight building entries
• Coordinate building entries for multiple
uses into an integrated design
• The placement, design, and type of
windows should reinforce a differentiation
of a facade base, middle, and top
• Window placement should be used
strategically to create visual interest and
balance integrating with the design of the
overall building form and facades
• Window placement and style should
complement the architectural style of the
building
20 
A highlighted building entry integrated into a ground floor storefront
with smaller and vertically oriented upper level windows
The entries and windows are integral to a balanced design of the
facade that strengthens a sense of human scale 
A variety of windows and doors integrated into the facade design to
add a sense of scale and vitality while organizing multiple entries
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 84
Guidelines
• The ground floor should include larger
and more frequent windows, including
storefronts, compared to the size and
frequency of upper floor windows
• Primary facades that face Water Street, 
Edgell Road, and Edmands Road should
contain a minimum of 60% ground floor
glazing with clear glass
• Secondary facades that face any other
street, open space, or parking area should
contain a minimum of 40% ground floor
glazing with clear glass
• The interior building program should be
arranged to place active uses on the
ground level next to transparent glazing
• Windows should be proportioned with the
vertical dimension greater than horizontal
• Building entry doors should not extend
beyond the building facade unless
additional clearance is provided
• Garage entries should be minimized and
placed on secondary building facades
• Building entries for residential and
commercial uses should be separate but
coordinated with the overall design
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
A high percentage of transparency on the ground floor with a
welcoming and recessed entry door
Entries and windows integrated into an overall design that differentiates
a base, middle, and top of the building 
A generous and transparent ground floor storefront that integrates
an upper level entry into a coordinated design that is welcoming and
attractive 
21
Page 85
3. Buildings
Awnings and canopies
Awnings and canopies should be
integrated with the overall building
design to reinforce building facade
patterns while adding interest, depth, and
protection for windows and doors.
Principles
• Awnings and canopies are encouraged to
enhance building facades above window
and door locations
• Awnings and canopies should be designed
to provide functional benefits of shading
windows, protection of building entries, 
and sheltering outdoor spaces
• Awnings and canopies should be integrated
with the architectural design of the building
• Awnings and canopies should be integrated
and coordinated with building signs, 
building lights, or architectural features to
avoid any conflicts
• All awnings across multiple tenants must be
coordinated and designed to be cohesive
and balanced, but are not required to be
the same 
Guidelines
• Awnings should be used in a coordinated
fashion over ground floor or upper floor
windows
• Awnings and canopies over building entries
should be large enough to provide cover
from the weather in front of the door
• Awning shape and scale should fit the
window or door opening for which it is
designed
• Awnings should respect the structural bays
of the building and should not overlap
vertical structural building elements or
other building facade features
• Awnings should be made of a durable
canvas or similar material
• Canopies should be made of glass, wood, 
or metal and coordinate with other
building materials
• Seasonal sun and shade patterns should
be studied for placement and depth of
awnings 
Canvas awnings placed to protect the building entries and to coordinate
with the architecture and signage
A simple canvas awning adding visual interest at a building entry, 
coordinated with building lighting and outdoor furnishings
Building canopies integrated with the architecture to provide protection
for entries and windows while reducing the visual scale of the building
22  Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 86
A building’s roof form is an important
part of the building character and a
major contributor to district character. A
building’s roof form should be designed
to reduce the overall scale of the structure
and strengthen the attractiveness of the
building design.
Principles
• Roof form should add visual interest to the
context and character of Nobscot through
the use of sloped and pitched roof forms
with dormers, gables, or other articulation
of the roof form
• The design of the roof form and variations
in that form should be used to reduce
the overall scale of the building and to
differentiate between several buildings or
building masses in a larger redevelopment
• The top floor of occupied space should
be designed and integrated with the roof
form to increase usable building area
while reducing perception of building
height and scale
• Roof design and form should be used
to conceal utilities and integrate them
with the overall building form and
architectural design
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
Guidelines
• Roof form should correspond to and
complement adjacent buildings and context
through height, orientation, stepbacks or
other design features
• Pitched roofs with variations are
encouraged, including gable ends, 
dormers, and shed roofs, oriented to the
primary street frontage to add visual
interest and reinforce a “village” character
• Large roof surfaces should be interrupted
by roof features or changes in roof form
to reduce the perception of large scale
buildings. The design should also vary roof
features to avoid repetitious patterns
• Dormers should be used to lower roof lines
while maintaining usable floor area
• Height variations with architectural
elements including cornices and parapets
are encouraged to create interesting and
varied rooflines
• Rooftop mechanical equipment should be
integrated into the roof form and design to
visually conceal, screen and minimize noise
emitted by mechanical equipment 
Roof form and utilities
Gable ends are oriented to the street and varied in size to avoid
repetition and reduce the overall scale of the roof and building
Large gable dormers add occupied interior space, reduce the scale of
the building and more visual interest than the flat roof in the foreground
Utilities, vents, and other functional needs of the building should be
integrated with the roof form and overall style of the building 
23
Page 87
4. Signs
Site and building signs
Signs should be integrated with the
overall site and building design to
provide orientation and information while
integrating with the overall character and
context of the site and building. Signs
should not dominate views of site and
buildings.
Principles
• Signage should be integrated with the
building and site design to provide
wayfinding, orientation and interest
• Multiple systems of signs (traffic, 
wayfinding, tenant) should be coordinated
and managed to be integrated with the
overall site and building design
• Public art should be considered as a
valuable part of communication in the
district and be used to celebrate the
history and heritage of Nobscot
• Signage should be used to reinforce a
community feel and pedestrian scale
• Signs should be viewed as a cost effective
approach to elevating the design and
quality of the district, particular care and
attention should be given to sign design, 
layout, font selection, and branding Signs for multiple tenants are integrated into a consistent location on
the building facade and coordinated with first floor sign band 
A simple painted sign that adds to the character and visual interest of a
blank building facade and that is integrated with lighting
An example of a classic wood carved sign that can be integrated with
the building facade while not visually dominating the building
24  Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 88
Guidelines
• Buildings with multiple tenants should
encourage consistent sign types and sign
positions on the building, although the signs
may differ in layout, color, and size
• Pedestrian-oriented sign types that
reinforce a pedestrian-scale and that are
oriented to the sidewalk are encouraged, 
for example blade signs in which the sign
is mounted perpendicular to the building
facade
• Restrained public art, for example in the
form of bronze sculpture or simple water
features, should be used to enhance and
provide interest to streetscape and small
plaza spaces
• Signage should avoid unnecessary
distraction or competition among signs
• District signs should feature the district
name of “Nobscot Village” 
Signs should be viewed as part of a larger branding strategy to
reinforce the character and identity of Nobscot Village
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
Public art should be integrated with building facades and signage to
reinforce the identity of Nobscot and share community heritage 
A well designed sign can elevate the perception of the design and
quality of the building and attractiveness of the site and district 
25
Page 89
5. References and resources
The following references and resources
are available for review when considering
project design and approvals for
investments in Nobscot. These references
and resources include regulatory
documents and previous planning
documents related to efforts in Nobscot
Village and Framingham. 
Regulations
Framingham Zoning By-Law (May 2017)
www.framinghamma.gov/DocumentCenter/Home/View/24878
Framingham Zoning Map (2015)
www.framinghamma.gov/DocumentCenter/View/18879
Rules & Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land in Framingham (2017)
www.framinghamma.gov/DocumentCenter/Home/View/211
Planning Board’s Project Review Guidelines
www.framinghamma.gov/DocumentCenter/Home/View/24895
Framingham Planning Board Rules &
Regulations
www.framinghamma.gov/DocumentCenter/Home/View/24894
Framingham Policy on Complete Street
(2015)
www.framinghamma.gov/DocumentCenter/Home/View/17514
Framingham General Ordinances
www.framinghamma.gov/242/City-Ordinances 
Planning Studies
Nobscot web page
www.framinghamma.gov/1869/Nobscot-Village
Nobscot Plaza Presentation (2017)
www.framinghamma.gov/DocumentCenter/View/25403
Nobscot Community Meeting Presentation
(2016)
www.framinghamma.gov/DocumentCenter/View/25483
Framingham Village Commercial Centers
Saxonville and Nobscot: Economic
Development Action Plan (2015)
www.framinghamma.gov/DocumentCenter/View/20726
Framingham Master Land Use Plan
www.framinghamma.gov/DocumentCenter/View/17814
26  Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 90
Terms that may be unique to the
discussion of design characteristics
are defined in this section to offer
further explanation to assist in the clear
communication intended through the
NVDG. The definitions here have been
reviewed relative to other definitions
which may be found in the Zoning
Ordinance to avoid duplication, 
additional terms are defined in the
ordinance.
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
Building facade - the elevation or face of a
structure. Typically, a structure is composed of
four primary elevations with at least one that
faces a street.
Building form - the shape or configuration
of a building, similar to “building massing” 
defined below.
Building massing (or masses) - the overall
size, shape, and form of a structure, including
the geometry of the floor plan, height of the
structure, and form of the roof.
Building scale - the proportion of a structure’s
overall mass and bulk in relationship to the
context of other structures in the immediate
surrounding area.
Circulation - any form of movement that occurs
on a property (people walking, cars driving, 
bicyclists riding) and the routes that are
designed to support this movement (roadways, 
sidewalks, trails, etc.)
Connections - a term used in relationship
to circulation, the path that links two points
or destinations on a property together. For
example, the a sidewalk internal to the site
may provide a connection for pedestrians
moving from the public street-adjacent
sidewalk to the front door of the building. 
6. Definition of terms
Context - the existing built and natural
environment within the general area of a
proposed development site and building.
Cornice - the horizontal decorative feature at
the top of an exterior building wall integrating
the edge of the roof with the transition to
the wall. The cornice may relate to other
architectural details or molding features such
as the eave, fascia, frieze board, soffit, or
cornice return.
Curb cuts - a break in the continuous line of
the curb along a street to accommodate a
vehicular driveway and pedestrian ramps
graded down from the sidewalk level to the
adjoining street level.
Dormer - a window that projects from a
sloping roof. The dormer may vary in the
number of windows included and the style
of roof and roof transition, but should be
consistent with the overall style of the building.
Eave - the edge of the roof which overhangs
the top of the face of the exterior building
wall.
Gable - the part of a vertical wall that
encloses the end of a pitched roof. The gable
is typically triangular. 
27
Page 91
6. Definition of terms
Glazing - the portion of a building elevation
or wall assembly that is made of glass.
Links - a term used in relationship to circulation
focusing on the connection between two points
or destinations.
Livability - refers to the aspects of a
place that increase the suitability, comfort, 
convenience and health of a .
Multi-modal circulation - any form of
movement that occurs on a property and
the routes that are designed to support this
movement. The mode is the type of travel
(driving, biking, walking, transit, or other) and
multi-modal is a term that highlights providing
for all types of travel.
Pedestrian environment - all the elements of
publicly and privately owned facilities that
are used by people walking. This may include
sidewalks, crosswalks, plazas, open spaces, 
trails, paths, and building entry areas. 
Placemaking - a multi-faceted approach to
the design and management of public space
to strengthen attractiveness and promote
community and quality of life.
Protective buffer - providing distance between
new development and existing abutting
residential uses for the preservation of existing
trees, planting of new trees, landscape
features, berms, or fences intended to provide
screening and reduce the visual impact of new
development on existing neighbors.
Public realm - all the elements of publicly
owned and accessible facilities that include
streets, sidewalks, pathways, parks, open
spaces, and civic or municipal facilities.
Quality of life - the standard of health, 
comfort, and happiness experienced by an
individual or group.
Roof form - the shape of the roof of a
building, including the slope of the roof and
roof features such as gables, hips, dormers, 
eaves, or other elements. 
Scale - the relative size of any component of
a site or building, including lighting, signs, or
other architectural elements, such as doors, 
windows, or decorative features.
Sense of place - the characteristics of a
geographic location that make it special
or unique, particularly the characteristics
that foster a sense of attachment, meaning, 
community, and authenticity.
Stepback - a setback that is part of the
building design, typically located at the upper
floors of the building, in which the floor above
a certain height are stepped back from the
vertical plane of the front building facade.
Street frontage - the portion of a property
that is adjacent to the street, the location of a
property that is critical for considerations of
placemaking and walkability in a district.
Streetscape - all features and components of
the street environment including the roadway, 
lane markings, curbs, sidewalks, landscape, 
traffic signals, signs, and lights.
28  Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
Page 92
Transparency - allowing visibility of interior
activity from the exterior of a building, 
typically focused on the ground level and
achieved with clear glass.
Transitions - recognizing a change in scale
from the redeveloped property to the abutting
properties through the sensitive design of the
site and landscape buffers and the building
massing and roof form.
Walkability - a measure of how friendly an
area is to walking and all of the components
that contribute to a comfortable and safe
pedestrian environment.
Wayfinding - components of the built
environment that aid in the orientation and
navigation of a building, site, or district.
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines 
6. Definition of terms
29
Page 93
Framingham Nobscot Village Design Guidelines
