Page 1
Global Vantage
January 23, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  Pyongyang and Beijing conﬁrm North Korean Leader Kim Jong Il’s Jan. 10-18 “secret” 
visit to China. 
 Kim’s China Trip: Rifts and Economics Lessons
•  The Japanese stock market suffers a major dip, triggered in part by a corporate scandal,
which spills over into other regional markets. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Wednesday, Jan. 18, 2006
•  The United States and South Korea agree on a new strategic agenda, which includes
the concept of “strategic ﬂexibility” for U.S. forces in Korea. 
•  Taiwanese President Chen Shui-bian nominates Su Tseng-chang as prime minister after
the resignation of Frank Hsieh. 
•  China announces a 6 percent increase in public disturbances in 2005, and Premier
Wen Jiabao notes that a key factor was land requisition for construction projects. 
 China: Channeling Dissent in Beijing
 China: Social Unrest in the Spotlight
Upcoming
•  U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick will visit Japan on Jan. 22-23. 
He will visit China on Jan. 24-25 to test Beijing’s willingness to be what he calls
a “responsible stakeholder.”
 China’s Obsession with the Zoellick Speech
•  Large-scale demonstrations called for by Mongolia’s Democratic Union are set for Jan. 24.
•  Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi will press his domestic agenda in the recently
opened Diet session — including controversial constitutional changes.
•  Washington and Beijing will work out details of a visit by Chinese President Hu Jintao
to Washington, potentially occurring in February. 
•  Dialogue on the resumption of six-party talks regarding North Korea’s nuclear activities
will increase as Beijing sets a Feb. 6 target date.
•  Saudi King Abdullah will hold talks with top Chinese ofﬁcials during a three-day visit
to Beijing, which follows talks between China and the Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries. 
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
January 23, 2006
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Russia’s Gazprom again cuts gas deliveries to Europe — this time because record-low
temperatures have led to rising demand at home. 
 Russia: Winter’s Chilling Effects on EU’s Attitude Toward Gazprom
•  Russia and Ukraine continue taking over each other’s Crimean outposts. Escalation likely
will continue until Ukraine’s March parliamentary elections. 
 Geopolitical Diary January 17, 2006
•  Georgia announces an unscheduled troop draft the same day that Russia agrees to withdraw
peacekeepers from the secessionist Abkhazia. 
 Georgia: An Unscheduled Draft and Russian Withdrawal
•  Gazprom head Alexei Miller and Uzbek President Islam Karimov discuss Gazprom’s taking
over Uzbek natural gas in return for security guarantees. 
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=260448"] Europe, meet the Turkmenbashi
•  Russia, a signiﬁcant negotiator the Iran nuclear debate, continues to offer to enrich Iran’s
uranium and hopes Tehran will avoid a U.N. Security Council referral.
 Geopolitical Diary January 16, 2006
Upcoming
•  Russian Minister of Defense Sergei Ivanov will visit Armenia on Jan. 25 with a delegation
of ofﬁcials. He has just visited Azerbaijan. 
•  Armenian and Azerbaijani presidents will set a date to meet in Paris to discuss the
Nagorno-Karabakh conﬂict. 
•  Further developments are expected in the negotiations between Gazprom and Uzbekistan
over development of natural gas ﬁelds. 
•  Russia will continue to be a key negotiator between Iran and the West.
•  Attacks against lines supplying Georgia and Armenia with Russian natural gas, and another
one against an electricity transmission line, cause Georgia to turn to Iran, Azerbaijan and Tur
key for winter energy needs.
Middle East
Highlights 
•  Several Israeli leaders announce that the Jewish state would be willing to negotiate
with Hamas if the Islamist movement renounced the use of violence and disarmed. 
•  Israeli Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz accuses Iran and Syria of being behind the Jan. 19
suicide bombing in Tel Aviv, which wounded some two dozen people.
 Israel: Suicide Bombing in Tel Aviv
•  Final results of Iraq’s Dec. 15 election are released, showing the Shiite Islamist Alliance
with 128 of 275 seats,10 seats short of a majority. 
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
January 23, 2006
•  Iraq’s top Shiite politician Abdel Aziz al-Hakim says Sunni participation in a new government
by itself would not be sufﬁcient to defuse the insurgency. 
 Iraq: Election Day
•  An audiotaped communiqué from al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden, his ﬁrst since 2004, 
is broadcast by Qatar-based Arabic language satellite channel Al Jazeera.
 Geopolitical Diary: Friday, Jan. 20, 2006
 Osama bin Laden Tape: Taking Credit for Others’ Work
•  Iran’s top nuclear ofﬁcial Ali Larijani says Tehran is open to compromise on its controversial
nuclear program and is ready to negotiate objective guarantees. 
•  Iran threatens to create a global oil crisis if sanctions are imposed on its nuclear program
by the U.N. Security Council (UNSC).
•  While pushing for a consensus on sending Iran to the UNSC, the United States, Britain, 
Germany and France say the move does not mean an automatic referral. 
•  Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal calls on Iran to keep its promise not to
develop nuclear weapons. 
 Iran’s Redeﬁned Strategy
•  In a lengthy speech to the nation, Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf addresses
several contentious domestic issues but does not mention a U.S. airstrike in the northwestern
tribal region. 
•  U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice responds to criticism of the airstrike in Pakistani
territory, saying the United States will try to address all concerns. 
 Pakistan: Musharraf Speaks Out
 Pakistan: Musharraf’s Growing List of Tribulations
•  Hezbollah leader Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah calls for Saudi Arabia, Egypt and the Arab
League to resolve Lebanon’s domestic tensions, which he says could have “dangerous
repercussions.”
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=260881"] Iran’s Hezbollah Connection
Upcoming
•  Hamas will make major gains in the Palestinian parliamentary election scheduled for
Jan. 25 and could end up with almost as many seats as the ruling Fatah party. 
•  Saudi King Abdullah will be in Beijing on Jan. 22 and in New Delhi on Jan. 25. 
•  Negotiations will continue toward a coalition government in Baghdad as insurgent
violence surges.
•  Pakistani Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz will meet with U.S. ofﬁcials including
President George W. Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice
and Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. 
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
January 23, 2006
Europe
Highlights
•  German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Russian President Vladimir Putin meet to feel out
the borders of their new — and quickly evolving — relationship. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Monday, Jan. 16, 2006
 Germany: Scrutiny for Schroeder, Leeway for Merkel
•  Austria, the new EU president, presents its proposals for energy diversiﬁcation and EU-wide
taxes. Some will work, some could torpedo the presidency.
 Austria’s Presidential Problem
•  Europe becomes even more suspicious of Russia as a reliable energy supplier.
 Russia: Winter’s Chilling Effects on EU’s Attitude toward Gazprom
•  Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi works to shatter the Italian left in the run-up to April
parliamentary elections.
 Italy: Under the ‘New’ Rules, Berlusconi Skates Toward Victory
Upcoming 
•  French President Jacques Chirac will meet with Merkel at Versailles on Jan. 23.
•  Merkel will give the keynote speech at the World Economic Forum in Switzerland on Jan. 25, 
on “creative approaches to global challenges.”
 Switzerland: Securing the World Economic Forum
 Germany: Trying Not to Follow in Japan’s Economic Footsteps
•  The European Parliament’s commission for relations with Russia will meet a delegation of the
Russian State Duma on Jan. 26 to discuss the Russian-Ukrainian natural gas dispute.
 Russia: Winter’s Chilling Effects on EU’s Attitude Toward Gazprom
 Ukraine: Cold Rejection of Russian Gas Deal — and a Colder Europe? 
Latin America
Highlights
•  Colombian President Alvaro Uribe Velez urges the judiciary to investigate funding to
politicians by the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia.
 Colombia: Uribe’s Strike Against the AUC
•  Chile elects moderate-socialist Michelle Bachelet as president. She is the Concertacion Party’s
fourth member to lead Chile since 1990. 
•  Evo Morales is inaugurated as president of Bolivia. He is the country’s ﬁrst indigenous
head of state. 
 Bolivia: Morales Signals Left, Turns Right
•  Brazil, Venezuela and Argentina, in the process of further cementing regional ties, 
agree to build a 6,000-mile natural gas pipeline from Venezuela to Argentina. 
 Mercosur: Expanding Energy Ties at the Cost of Free Trade
•  The United States and Spain square off over Madrid’s plans to sell Spanish planes
to Venezuela. 
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
January 23, 2006
Upcoming
•  The World Social Forum in the Americas will be held in Caracas, Venezuela, beginning
Jan. 23. It will address neoliberal and U.S. policies. 
•  Morales will present his ﬁrst list of major foreign and social policy initiatives. 
 Bolivia: Morales’ Coca Conditions
 Bolivia, Brazil: Morales Spurs Brazilian Energy Independence
•  Colombia and Ecuador will present new points for negotiation on free trade agreements
with the United States.
 Colombia, Ecuador, U.S.: Trying to Avoid a Political AFTA-math
Security
Highlights
•  A homemade bomb explodes outside a shopping mall in Penang, Malaysia, killing one man
and injuring another; police suspect a local business feud or criminal mischief.
•  Jack Beauchamp, president and founder of Canadian mortgage lending company Morbank
Financial, is shot to death in the company’s high-rise ofﬁce in Calgary.
•  More than 20 mobile phone transmission stations and relay towers are attacked by militants
in southern Thailand.
•  Italian businessman Pier Paolo Antinori, who had attended an international shoe exhibition, 
is found stabbed to death in his car in central Moscow.
•  Al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden releases his latest message via audiotape, simultaneously
calling for attacks on the U.S. mainland and a truce with the West. 
 Osama bin Laden Tape: Taking Credit for Others’ Work
•  The ﬁrst suicide bombing under the watch of acting Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert occurs
in Tel Aviv, most likely perpetrated by a small, soon-to-be-marginalized militant group.
 Israel: Suicide Bombing in Tel Aviv
•  The U.S. Navy destroyer USS Winston S. Churchill stops a suspected pirate vessel off the coast
of Somalia on Jan. 21. The Churchill ﬁres shots across the vessel’s bow, and boards and
detains a number of suspects. 
 Troubled Waters Ahead for Cruise Ships?
 The Continuing Problem of Piracy
Upcoming
•  The Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta militants says it will resume attacks
against oil companies in the area in the near future. 
•  The World Economic Forum will be held in Davos, Switzerland, Jan. 25-29, attended by
many of the world’s richest, most powerful business and political leaders.
 Switzerland: Securing the World Economic Forum
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
January 23, 2006
•  The World Social Forum will take place in Caracas, Venezuela; Karachi, Pakistan; and
Bamako, Mali, on Jan. 19-23; Jan. 24-29; and March 24-29. The events are likely
to feature anti-American demonstrations. 
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Maine passes the ﬁrst producer take-back e-waste legislation, with implications for the
chemical and automobile industries. Activists are happy, the electronics industry is split. 
 The Debate on Electronics Recycling
•  The discussion on regulation of nanotechnology heats up. Is reform of the Toxic Substances
Control Act near?
 Nanotech and REACH = TSCA Reform?
•  Shareholder activists discuss the implications of a surprising report released last week
comparing the proxy voting records of mutual funds in 2004 and 2005. 
 Crisis Point for Socially Responsible Investing
•  Washington, D.C.-based U.S. Public Interest Research Group (U.S. PIRG) issues a report
implying the Environmental Protection Agency’s proposed air quality revisions threaten health. 
 2006 Clean Air Fight Beginning
Upcoming
•  John Ruggie, U.N. special representative on business and human rights, is expected to issue
his ﬁrst report this week.
•  The World Social Forum was scheduled to take place in Africa (Jan. 19-23, Bamako, Mali) 
and will take place in Latin America (Jan. 24-29, Caracas, Venezuela) and
Asia (March 24-29, Karachi, Pakistan).
•  Ceres President Mindy Lubber will encourage lawyers to put teeth into the concept of
corporate “climate risk” liability in a New York Bar Association address Jan. 27. 
•  The Securities and Exchange Commission will unveil shareholder proxy resolutions that have
passed through its multi-layered screening. This is when the games begin.
•  With the end of the Samuel Alito hearings, Congress will be back in full swing. Congress’ 
priorities and calendar will be much clearer after next week.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
