Page 1
Global Vantage
February 6, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  Japanese Foreign Minister and prime ministerial hopeful Taro Aso causes a stir by suggesting
the Japanese emperor should visit the controversial Yasukuni Shrine. 
•  Indonesian security ofﬁcials say Malaysian Noordin Mohammad Top has founded a new
militant organization, Tanzim Qaedat al-Jihad. Separately, Indonesian security forces capture
Singaporean Jemaah Islamiyah militant Mas Selamat Kastari.
 Indonesia: JI Militant Noordin Top’s New Group
•  China meets with U.S. and Iranian ofﬁcials over Tehran’s nuclear program, and agrees to send
an International Atomic Energy Agency report about Iran to the U.N. Security Council.
 Iran: A Turning Point Without Consequences
•  North Korea resumes normalization talks with Japan and defense talks with South Korea. 
•  South Korea and the United States announce the start of free trade agreement negotiations.
•  Thai Culture Minister Uraiwan Thienthong resigns, and opposition leader Sondhi Limthongkul
separately holds a rally to call for Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra’s ouster. 
•  Indonesian presidential envoy Nana Sutresna is visiting North and South Korea to facilitate
ministerial-level defense talks between the two Koreas. 
Upcoming
•  The release of the U.S. Defense Department’s Quadrennial Defense Review will trigger Asian
nations to reassess their future defense initiatives. 
•  Japan’s Diet will discuss the ﬁscal 2006 budget, which goes into effect in April.
•  Southeast Asian governments will begin to rein in — or at least seek to gain control
over — protesters demonstrating against the publication of cartoons depicting the
Prophet Mohammed.
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Tensions in Georgia’s secessionist regions escalate after a confrontation between Georgian
troops and Russian peacekeepers near South Ossetia, and a series of mutual accusations
with Russia. 
 Georgia, Russia: Edging Toward Confrontation
•  Explosions hit three North Ossetian gaming halls nearly simultaneously, killing two
people and injuring 25. Investigators call the blasts terrorist acts.
•  Russia and Ukraine form Ukrgaz-Energo, which will distribute natural gas within Ukraine
through 2006. 
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
February 6, 2006
•  After explosions destroy pipelines from Russia, Georgia begins receiving Iranian natural gas
at twice the price of Russian supplies. 
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin holds a three-hour press conference, addressing domestic and
foreign issues and personal questions.
Upcoming
•  The presidents of Azerbaijan and Armenia will meet in Paris on Feb. 10 to discuss the future of
Nagorno-Karabakh, an Armenian-populated region of Azerbaijan. 
 The Russian Reversal: Part 1
•  Georgia’s Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions will experience continuing disturbances along
the borders patrolled by Russian peacekeepers.
•  Moldova will pay up to 37 percent more for natural gas delivered by Gazprom. The
Moldovan national energy committee will announce prices that will take effect April 1.
Middle East
Highlights
•  Al Qaeda issues a new videotaped communiqué featuring deputy leader Ayman al-Zawahiri.
 Al-Zawahiri’s New Tape
 Geopolitical Diary: Video Message From Al-Zawahiri
 Al-Zawahiri Tape: Key Insights into Al Qaeda Prime
•  Hamas resists calls from the West and the Arab/Muslim world to disarm and to recognize
Israel. The United States and Europe withhold aid to the Palestinian National Authority.
 PNA: Hamas’ Political Strategy
 Geopolitical Diary: Merkel in the Middle East
 Geopolitical Diary: Regional Implications of Hamas Win
•  Sunni nationalist insurgents in Iraq continue to pull away from al Qaeda-linked jihadists.
 Iraq: Drop in Bombings Could Signal a Growing Rift
•  Iran and the West issue threats and counterthreats, but negotiations continue on the issue
of reporting Iran to the U. N. Security Council.
 Iran: A Turning Point Without Consequences
•  Muslim governments condemn European newspapers’ publication of cartoons depicting
the Prophet Mohammed. Islamic and European groups hold protests. 
 EU: Of Cartoons and What it Means to Be ‘European’ 
 The Mohammed Cartoon and the Widening European-Muslim Divide
•  Saudi King Abdullah visits Pakistan and meets with the Pakistani leadership. The two sides
sign ﬁve agreements to enhance cooperation.
 Saudi Arabia: Seeking Protection From a Nuclear Iran
•  Al Qaeda makes its presence known in the Levant in an attack against Lebanese army
barracks in Beirut. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Thursday, Dec. 29, 2005 
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
February 6, 2006
•  Hezbollah staves off pressure to disarm through its political channels.
 Iran’s Hezbollah Connection
•  Protesters demonstrating against the Prophet Mohammed cartoons set ﬁre to the Danish and
Norwegian embassies in Damascus, Syria, and the Danish Consulate in Beirut, Lebanon.
 Protesters Burn European Embassies
•  The International Atomic Energy Agency board of governors reports Iran to the
U.N. Security Council.
 Geopolitical Diary: Iran and the IAEA
Upcoming
•  Hamas and Fatah will hold negotiations, with Cairo mediating, on the formation of
a government. 
 PIJ: Is Retaliation in the Works?
 The New Power in the PNA
•  Talks will continue in Iraq among Shia, Sunni and Kurds to appoint a president and prime
minister and to distribute Cabinet portfolios.
Europe
Highlights
•  German Chancellor Angela Merkel concludes her visit to the Middle East and places strict
guidelines on German aid to Hamas.
 Geopolitical Diary: Merkel in the Middle East
•  Controversial cartoons printed in several European newspapers incite anger and protests
from the Muslim community. 
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=261709"] The Mohammed Cartoon and the Widening European-Muslim Divide
 EU: Of Cartoons and What it Means to Be ‘European’
•  EU leaders ask the International Atomic Energy Agency to hold an emergency meeting
regarding Iran’s nuclear program.
 Iran: A Turning Point Without Consequences
 Iran: Prolonging the Controversy
•  Tensions continue to grow in Kosovo concerning the presidency as the days of mourning
for deceased President Ibrahim Rugova end. 
 Kosovo: The Power Struggle After Rugova’s Death
•  Protesters angered over cartoons depicting the Prophet Mohammed burn the Danish and
Norwegian embassies in Damascus, Syria, and the Danish Consulate in Beirut, Lebanon.
 Protesters Burn European Embassies
Upcoming
•  Russia will chair a meeting of G-8 ﬁnance ministers in Moscow with invitations also extended
to ministers from India, China and Brazil.
•  The Winter Olympics will begin in Torino, Italy, on Feb. 10.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
February 6, 2006
•  The Italian Parliament will dissolve Feb. 11, kicking off two months of campaigning before
April elections. 
 Italy: Under the ‘New’ Rules, Berlusconi Skates Toward Victory
•  Polish President Lech Kaczynski will meet with U.S. President George W. Bush in
Washington, D.C., on Feb. 9.
 Poland’s New Twin Pillars and the Policy Changes to Come
Latin America
Highlights
•  Ecuador deploys an aircraft squadron to its northeastern border with Colombia after
Colombian military planes enter Ecuadorian airspace in pursuit of Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia (FARC) rebels. 
 Ecuador: Saber-Rattling on the Northeastern Border
•  Ecuador and Colombia halt the 14th round of free trade negotiations with the United States, 
saying they want better terms on textiles, agricultural goods and intellectual property rights. 
 Colombia, Ecuador, U.S.: Trying to Avoid a Political AFTA-math
•  Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez celebrates his seventh year in power and expels a U.S. 
naval attaché for espionage. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Chavez Marks Seven Years in Power
•  Hamas announces plans to send diplomats to Brazil, Venezuela, Bolivia and Argentina
in hopes of earning the political and economic support of South Americans. Brazil refuses
to negotiate with Hamas until it recognizes Israel and works toward peace. 
•  Costa Rica holds elections. Former President Oscar Arias is running against Citizens’ Action
Party candidate Otton Solis for the presidency. 
Upcoming
•  The United States is expected to respond to Venezuela’s expulsion on espionage charges
of U.S. naval attaché John Correa. 
•  Haiti will hold the ﬁrst round of national elections to replace the interim government Feb. 7, 
barring further delays. The elections have been delayed several times since October 2005.
 Haiti: Elections and Continued Dependence
Security/ Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  Al Qaeda No. 2 Ayman al-Zawahiri’s latest videotaped message offers key insights into the
probable location of al Qaeda’s leadership, its media-relations capabilities and its inﬂuence
on society. 
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=261604"] Al-Zawahiri Tape: Key Insights into Al Qaeda Prime
 Al-Zawahiri’s New Tape 
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
February 6, 2006
•  The Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) attacks Philippine government positions, leaving four
rebels dead and two injured, jeopardizing upcoming talks between the military and MILF. 
Talks between the sides began Feb. 6 but could be jeopardized by further ﬁghting.
•  Lesotho’s foreign minister, Monyane Moleleki, is injured in an assassination attempt when
gunmen open ﬁre on his home in Lesotho’s capital, Maseru.
•  Business at India’s main airports is disrupted when airport workers in Kolkata, Mumbai and
New Delhi launch an indeﬁnite strike. Flights in Kolkata are canceled due to the strike, 
but later resume.
•  The ofﬁces of Danish newspaper Jyllands-Posten, which printed cartoons deemed offensive
by Muslims, are evacuated following a bomb threat. Newspapers in other European countries
reprint the cartoons. 
•  Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade militants reportedly search apartments in the West Bank for
foreigners to kidnap in response to the European publication of cartoons depicting the
Prophet Mohammed. 
•  Palestinian militants ask hotels in the Palestinian territories to deny lodging to Danish citizens
and to citizens of other countries publishing cartoons depicting the Prophet Mohammed.
•  Protests by Muslims over the publication of cartoons depicting the Prophet Mohammed are
held at the Danish, Norwegian, French, German, Italian and Spanish embassies in London.
 The Mohammed Cartoon and the Widening European-Muslim Divide
•  A demonstration against Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra by up to 100,000 people
is expected in Bangkok. 
•  Bangladesh’s main opposition alliance says police have arrested nearly 1,500 activists in
nationwide raids ahead of an anti-government rally. 
•  Bangladeshi opposition leaders warn that if a police clampdown does not end, the country
will be brought to a standstill. 
•  A female former employee shoots six people to death at a U.S. Postal Service sorting facility
in Goleta, Calif., before killing herself.
 Going Postal: A Rare Case of Workplace Violence 
•  Police in New Bedford, Mass., investigate a suspected hate crime in which a man attacked
several patrons of a gay bar with a hatchet before opening ﬁre. The suspect is later killed
in a shootout with police in Arkansas.
•  Tens of thousand of opposition protesters demonstrate in Bangkok, Thailand. The
demonstrations ended peacefully. 
•  About 200 demonstrators throw stones and ﬁrebombs at the Austrian Embassy in Tehran, Iran. 
The embassy is damaged but does not catch on ﬁre.
•  A small group of Islamic extremists protesting the publishing of cartoons in European
newspapers of the Prophet Mohammed set ﬁre to the Danish Embassy in Beirut, Lebanon.
•  Syrian police use water hoses to prevent protesters from storming the French Embassy in
Damascus. Demonstrators burn the Danish and Norwegian embassies in Damascas.
 Protesters Burn European Embassies
•  In Gaza, protesters storm the German cultural center and throw stones at the EU Commission
building. 
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
February 6, 2006
Upcoming
•  Opening ceremonies for the Winter Olympics will be held Feb. 10, in Torino, Italy.
•  Talks will begin between the Philippine military and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF).
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Activists are counting on using the debate over the Strategic Approach to International
Chemicals Management to support REACH and stimulate reform of the Toxic Substances
Control Act.
 Activists to use SAICM to Support Larger Chemicals Policy Change
•  The momentum toward a windfall proﬁts tax following the oil industry proﬁt reports has not
picked up with the vigor that seemed at one time to be inevitable.
 Little Response to Oil Industry Proﬁts
•  Ceres releases a climate-risk tool kit for business senior management — signaling a shift in
climate-risk campaigning, from gaining industry expressions of support toward deﬁning the
speciﬁcs of implementation.
 Climate Risk Debate Moves to Implementation Phase
•  Environmental groups react to U.S. President George W. Bush’s State of the Union address, 
and their reactions indicate that they are rethinking their strategies.
 State of the Union Sparks Change in Environmentalists’ Course on Energy
•  British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown announces that a set of regulations
mandating the Operating and Financial Review is back on the agenda.
 Operating and Financial Review: The Cat Came Back
Upcoming
•  U.S. President George W. Bush will send his 2007 budget to Congress on Feb. 6, and
advocacy groups will respond with alternative budget proposals. 
•  The National Biodiesel Conference and Expo, taking place Feb. 5-8 in San Diego, Calif.,
will consider the future of biodiesel in the context of the Bush administration’s energy policy.
•  The International Finance Corp. is scheduled to announce the revised Policy and Performance
Standards on Social and Environmental Sustainability — the foundation for the private
banking sector’s Equator Principles.
•  The Winter Olympics, beginning Feb. 10 in Torino, Italy, could provide a venue for
anti-globalization demonstrations. 
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
