Page 1
Global Vantage
February 20, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  The Chinese government launches a full media barrage to respond to growing U.S. congressional
pressure over trade and the yuan.
 China: Using the Media to Appeal to U.S. Investors
•  South Korea chooses Israel over the United States or France to upgrade military aircraft
surveillance systems, opening its defense sector to alternative suppliers.
 Foreign Frustrations Threaten South Korean Defense Program
•  Protests against Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra continue, though the Thai Constitutional
Court rejects investigations into Thaksin’s ﬁnancial activities.
•  Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi sees another agenda item delayed as he
backtracks on his plan to create a Ministry of Defense.
•  The Philippine military claims to have countered another planned coup attempt and a small
bomb explodes outside the presidential palace ahead of the anniversary of the “people
power” movement.
•  Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf is visiting China until Feb. 23.
•  North Korea marks the 64th birthday of leader Kim Jong Il amid the nuclear standoff and
rumors of a potential inter-Korean summit.
 Geopolitical Diary: The ‘Dear Leader’s’ Birthday and the Six-Party Impasse
•  A bomb kills one and injures 28 on the Philippine island of Jolo near where U.S. troops are
basing for joint Balikatan exercises with the Philippine military.
Upcoming
•  A defense delegation from India will visit China on Feb. 20-25. 
•  The Philippines will mark the anniversary of the “people power” movement Feb. 22-25 amid
rising coup rumors and increased security in Manila. 
•  Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono will travel to Brunei and Cambodia. He also
will try setting a date for a visit to Myanmar.
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Russia invites Hamas to hold talks in Moscow in early March.
 The Middle East and Russia’s New Game
•  Turkmen President Saparmurat Niyazov says he will raise natural gas prices, affecting the
agreement with Ukraine and deliveries to Europe. He meets with Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller. 
 Geopolitical Diary: The Turkmenbashi and a New Gas Crisis? 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
February 20, 2006
•  Iran postpones by four days talks with Russia in Moscow on a proposed deal to enrich uranium. 
 Russia, Iran: Moscow Gets Sidelined in Nuclear Discussions 
•  Kyrgyz President Kurmanbek Bakiyev wants the United States to pay 100 times more for the
use of a military base in Kyrgyzstan. 
•  Russia announces it will reinforce its Kant base in Kyrgyzstan and more than double the
personnel and aircraft stationed there.
•  Georgia’s parliament approves a resolution to remove Russian peacekeepers in South Ossetia
and internationalize the forces. Georgia’s minister for conﬂict resolution discusses the decision
with Russian Duma members.
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=262057"] Georgia: Simmering Conﬂict in South Ossetia
•  Four candidates register for the March 19 Belarusian presidential elections. Belarusian
President Aleksandr Lukashenko is expected to defeat opposition leader Alexander
Milinkevich and the other two candidates.
Upcoming
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin will visit Azerbaijan on Feb. 21 to launch the “Year of Russia
in Azerbaijan” celebration and the Feb. 22-25 Russia-Azerbaijan economic forum. 
•  Royal Dutch/Shell, Gazprom, Mitsui and Mitsubishi ofﬁcials will meet Feb. 21 to discuss the
possible sale of the Japanese share of Sakhalin-2 natural gas project.
•  An Iranian delegation is scheduled to visit Moscow on Feb. 20 to discuss uranium enrichment. 
•  The Joint Control Commission, which administers peacekeeping operations in South Ossetia, 
will meet Feb. 20-21 in Vienna, Austria.
•  Russia makes inroads into the U.S sphere of inﬂuence by inviting Hamas leaders to the Kremlin
and hinting that it could sell arms to the Palestinian National Authority.
 The Middle East and Russia’s New Game
Middle East
Highlights
•  Iran delays talks with Russia on a proposed uranium enrichment deal by four days.
 Geopolitical Diary: A U.S.-Israeli Policy Rift?
 Iran: Pushing the Limits on Nuclear Power
 Iran: Setting the Stage for a Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty Withdrawal
•  Hamas ofﬁcially nominates Ismail Haniyeh as prime minister of the Palestinian National
Authority (PNA) and Abdel Aziz Duaik as speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council, 
which is sworn in. Israel cuts off funding to the PNA. 
 PNA: Hamas’ Plans to Counter International Pressure
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
February 20, 2006
•  Baloch militants up the ante against Islamabad by killing three Chinese engineers near
Karachi, Pakistan. Along with ongoing Mohammed cartoon protests, this complicates matters
for the Musharraf government.
 Pakistan’s Measured Response to the Baloch Insurgency
 Pakistan: Cartoon Protests Add to Musharraf’s Worries
•  Iran cozies up to Cuba and Venezuela to remind Washington of its reach beyond the
Middle East.
 Iran: Searching for a Salsa Partner
•  Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf is visiting China until Feb. 23.
•  Egypt postpones municipal elections by two years to prevent the Muslim Brotherhood from
enhancing its political standing after recent parliamentary gains.
 Geopolitical Diary: The MB and Mubarak’s Countermeasures
Upcoming
•  U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will visit Saudi Arabia, Egypt and the United Arab
Emirates on Feb. 20-24.
•  An Iranian delegation is scheduled to visit Moscow on Feb. 20 to discuss uranium enrichment.
Latin America
Highlights
•  Gholam Ali Haddad-Adel, Iranian parliament speaker, begins an eight-day visit to South
America, with stops in Venezuela and Cuba. He also will visit Brazil and Uruguay by Feb. 22.
 Iran: Searching for a Salsa Partner
•  Rene Preval becomes Haiti’s president.
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=262279"] Haiti’s Fruitless Election Hopes
•  Colombia and the United States hold another round of free trade talks in Washington. 
 Colombia, Ecuador, U.S.: Trying to Avoid a Political AFTA-math
•  A major political scandal develops in Mexico after tapes show Puebla’s governor and a
prominent businessman conspiring against a journalist who uncovered a child pornography
ring.
Upcoming
•  Colombian and Ecuadorian ofﬁcials will meet in San Juan de Pasto, Colombia, on Feb. 23-24
to discuss border issues. 
 Ecuador: Saber-Rattling on the Northeastern Border
•  Japan and Chile will hold their ﬁrst ofﬁcial bilateral meeting to create a free trade
agreement (FTA) on Feb. 23-24 in Tokyo.
•  Ecuador will restart free trade negotiations with the United States on Feb. 23.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
February 20, 2006
Europe
Highlights
•  The European line against Iran’s nuclear program sharpens, with Paris directly labeling the
Iranian program as “clandestine” and “military.”
 Iran: The French Angle
•  The Italian election campaign continues to overshadow the Winter Olympics. At least one poll
puts Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi’s coalition in the lead.
 Italy: Under the ‘New’ Rules, Berlusconi Skates Toward Victory 
•  German Chancellor Angela Merkel achieves two important victories: turning popular opinion
against striking municipal workers, and reaching an agreement with German Lander on
constitutional changes to federal-state relations.
 Geopolitical Diary: Merkel’s First Domestic Test 
•  The European Parliament passes a watered-down services directive, raising the prospect of
stronger EU growth. Fourth-quarter ﬁgures are disappointing, particularly Germany’s.
 EU: The Downward Spiral 
•  Fresh bird ﬂu cases are detected in a number of EU countries. States that have reported
at least one incident include Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Greece and Slovenia.
 EU: The Real Bird Flu Threat
Upcoming
•  The European Commission will intensify efforts to improve EU energy security and ﬂexibility
against a backdrop of fear of additional Russian natural gas cutoffs.
 Russia: Winter’s Chilling Effects on EU’s Attitude Toward Gazprom
 EU: Austria Addresses Energy Dependence
•  The European Commission likely will launch multiple investigations into European energy
conglomerates for noncompetitive practices. 
•  Talks on Kosovo’s ﬁnal status will recommence Feb. 20.
 Kosovo: The President and the Militant
•  Polish President Lech Kaczynski continues his European tour with a trip to France on Feb. 24
to discuss the evolution of the European Union.
 Poland’s New Twin Pillars and the Policy Changes to Come
Security
Highlights
•  An explosion at a supermarket in Istanbul, Turkey, kills one person and wounds ﬁve.
 Turkey: A New Kurdish Front in the Battle Against Ankara
•  Roughly 10,000 people march in London to protest the Prophet Mohammed cartoons. 
The march is organized by Muslim groups in the United Kingdom, notably Hizb al-Tahrir.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
February 20, 2006
•  Large protests over the Mohammed cartoons occur in Indonesia, Pakistan, Nigeria, Libya
and Turkey. At least 28 rioters are killed in Nigeria, 10 in Libya and two in Pakistan. 
 When Mobs Attack Multinationals Abroad: The Best Advice is -- Run
•  The United States issues a Warden Message for London because of ongoing cartoon
protests there.
•  A Pakistani Muslim cleric offers a $1 million reward to anyone who kills the Danish cartoonist
associated with Prophet Mohammed cartoons, though they actually were created by several
artists.
•  Gunmen kill two police chiefs in Monterrey and Sabinas Hidalgo in northeastern Mexico within
hours of one another. 
 Mexico: As Violence Spreads, the Threat to Corporations Rises
•  The United States issues a Warden Message for Bahrain.
 Attack in Qatar: Heightened Risks in the Arabian Peninsula
•  Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni’s convoy is attacked by gunmen in the country’s northeast. 
Museveni is not injured.
•  No-TAV, anti-globalization and other groups continue peaceful protests in and around
Turin, Italy, during the Winter Olympics.
•  The Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta abducts nine of Royal Dutch/Shell’s
foreign petroleum workers in Nigeria, and claims to have attacked a company oil facility
and a Nigerian naval vessel.
Upcoming
•  Protests will continue in the Middle East and South Asia over the Prophet Mohammed cartoons, 
with possible violence.
•  Rowdy but nonviolent protests will continue in and around Turin, Italy, during the Winter
Olympics.
•  The anniversary of the 1986 revolt that swept Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos from
power is Feb. 22-25.
•  Italian election rallies with Northern League party supporters wearing T-shirts with Prophet
Mohammed cartoons on them could invite jihadist action.
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Cisco, Google, Microsoft and Yahoo attend a House hearing on complicity with Internet
censorship and surveillance in China; proposed legislation could set precedent for regulating
American companies abroad.
 Internet Censorship Outcry Could Lead to Regulation of Multinationals
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
February 20, 2006
•  Greenpeace scores an anti-toxics victory when French President Jacques Chirac is forced to
recall the asbestos-laden warship Clemenceau, destined for shipbreaking in India.
 French Capitulation on Shipbreaking to Revolutionize Ship Making?
•  An Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) panel says perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA),
the chemical used in the production of Teﬂon, is a “likely carcinogen.”
 EPA Panel Considers PFOA Carcinogenic
•  Environmental groups and congressional Democrats gear up for a ﬁght over natural gas, 
oil royalties and tax breaks. Environmentalists will use this as a tactic in a larger anti-oil
campaign. 
 Environmental Groups Critical of Oil Industry’s Lack of Royalty Payments and Tax Breaks
Upcoming
•  The second Australia-New Zealand Climate Change and Business conference Feb. 20-21 will
provide an opportunity for activists to try to convince Australian businesses to lobby for carbon
caps. 
•  Montreal will host an international meeting Feb. 20-24 on how to determine liability for
“genetic pollution” caused by biotechnology crops (GMOs).
•  The Supreme Court will hear cases beginning this week that say the Clean Water Act illegally
stretches federal authority to restrict land use; results could mean deregulation of wetlands.
•  Environmental Integrity Project (EIP) will release a report alleging the Environmental Protection
Agency’s (EPA) voluntary Performance Track program lets companies pollute unchecked. 
EIP urges an audit of the program.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
