Page 1
Global Vantage
March 13, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  The Bank of Japan decides to tighten monetary policy amid signs of a tentative economic
recovery.
 Japan’s New Bullish Attitude -- With One Curious Exception
 Japan: Testing the Waters on Monetary Policy
•  Protests against Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra in Thailand shift toward the
Singaporean Embassy, but there is an underlying move toward compromise.
 Thailand: Thaksin Navigates Through a Political Storm
•  Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono appoints ExxonMobil the sole operator
of the Cepu oil ﬁeld in a partnership with Indonesian company Pertamina.
 Indonesia: Jakarta’s Economic Jump Start
•  China’s National People’s Congress meets to address economic and social issues such as the
growing rural/urban gap.
 China: Riding the Rural Tiger
 China: Damage Control in Guangdong
•  North Korea tests another short-range missile amid discussions on counterfeiting and the
stalled six-party nuclear talks. 
 N. Korea: Missile Tests More Likely to Be Messages than Mistakes
•  China and Japan meet, but again fail to resolve a dispute over oil and gas exploration
in the East China Sea.
•  Protests are held in Taipei against Taiwanese President Chen Shui-bian, who is accused
of stoking tensions with China by scrapping the National Uniﬁcation Council.
Upcoming
•  Protests will be held March 14 during Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra’s weekly
Cabinet meeting in Bangkok.
•  Taiwan’s ruling Democratic Progressive Party will hold a parade to underscore national
sovereignty March 18 in Taipei. 
•  U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will discuss counterterrorism and regional security
measures with ofﬁcials March 14 in Indonesia. 
•  U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will discuss China’s military buildup with Australian
Foreign Minister Alexander Downer on March 16 in Australia. 
•  Japanese Foreign Minister Taro Aso will join his U.S. and Australian counterparts to discuss
China’s military buildup March 18 in Australia. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
March 13, 2006
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  The United States repeals the Jackson-Vanik amendment for Ukraine, normalizing trade
relations ahead of Ukraine’s March 26 parliamentary elections. 
 Ukraine: Timoshenko the Kingmaker? 
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin and Gazprom head Alexei Miller visit Algeria. The two
countries conclude a $7.5 billion arms deal and discuss another deal worth $2 billion-$3 billion. 
•  Russia forgives $4.7 billion of Algeria’s debt, and Algeria announces it might build liqueﬁed
natural gas plants in Russia.
•  Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and
President George W. Bush meet in Washington to discuss Iran’s nuclear aspirations, Hamas
and Russia’s G-8 presidency. 
•  Moldovan secessionist region Transdniestria comes under a blockade after Ukraine refuses
to process customs documents not from Chisinau. Russia, as Transdniestria’s sole benefactor, 
plays a major role in this conﬂict.
 Russia: The Transdniestria Conundrum
•  The tenuous cease-ﬁre between Azerbaijan and Armenia is violated repeatedly, resulting
in the death of an Azerbaijani soldier. 
Upcoming
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin and European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso will
meet March 17 in Moscow and discuss strengthening Russo-EU relations as well as cooperation
on energy concerns.
 Europe: Energy Liberalization Versus Energy Giants
•  Deputy foreign ministers from the Caspian Sea’s littoral states -- Azerbaijan, Russia, 
Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Iran -- will meet March 14-15 in Moscow to discuss the sea’s
legal status.
 EU: Exploring Its Energy Options
•  Russian, Jordanian and Iraqi ofﬁcials will meet in Amman, Jordan, on March 15 for a
conference exploring economic cooperation prospects as part of the annual industrial
exposition Expo-Russia 2006.
•  Belarusian President Aleksandr Lukashenko likely will win the March 19 presidential election. 
Security forces likely will crush demonstrations. Monthly demonstrations March 16 are
expected to intensify before the election.
 Belarus: No Surprises On Election Day
•  Russia’s Ministries of Economic Development, Finance, Industry and Energy, the Federal Service
for Tariffs and the Federal Anti-Monopoly Service will present draft proposals on bringing
down inﬂation March 13. 
•  G-8 energy ministers will meet with World Bank, OPEC, the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the International Energy Agency, and International Energy Forum representatives and
energy ministers from India, China, Brazil, Mexico and South Africa on March 16.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
March 13, 2006
Middle East And South Asia
Highlights
•  As rhetorical warfare over Iran’s nuclear program intensiﬁes, Tehran again avoids drastic
measures by the International Atomic Energy Agency and the U.N. Security Council. 
 Iran: Another Salvo in a War of Words
•  Divisions emerge within Israel’s Kadima party as a spat between Hamas and Fatah over
legislation approved by the previous parliament complicates negotiations to form a coalition
government. 
 Geopolitical Diary: New Challenges for Hamas and Kadima 
•  Kashmir-based Islamist militants attack a railway station and temple in the Hindu holy city
of Varanasi, India, raising tensions and giving political ammunition to the opposition Bharatiya
Janata Party. 
 India: Explosions in Varanasi
•  Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf experiences domestic blowback in the wake of
U.S. President George W. Bush’s visit to Pakistan. 
 Geopolitical Diary: The Musharraf Dilemma
•  United Arab Emirates state-owned ﬁrm Dubai Ports World reacts to opposition from the
U.S. Congress by announcing it will transfer control of six U.S. ports to a U.S-based entity.
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=263313"] UAE: The Effects of the Port Deal Reversal in the Middle East
•  A Hamas delegation visiting Saudi Arabia secures ﬁnancial aid from Riyadh as part of the
Islamist group’s efforts to resist possible pressure on it from the United States.
Upcoming
•  Negotiations involving the Shia, Sunnis, Kurds and secular nationalists will intensify in an effort
to form a coalition government in Iraq, with Washington playing a more direct role. 
•  The United States will use U.N. Security Council meetings to provide details on proposed
sanctions against Tehran for continuing its uranium enrichment program. 
•  To bolster his campaign for re-election, acting Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert will order
surgical airstrikes against Palestinian militants as negotiations on power-sharing continue
between Hamas and Fatah. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Olmert’s 2010 Strategy 
•  Tensions will rise between Washington and Riyadh when Saudi Arabia hosts an Organization
of the Islamic Conference meeting March 13-15 to rally Muslim support for the economic
boycott against Israel. 
 Saudi Arabia: The Beneﬁts and Burdens of WTO Accession
•  A national conference of sectarian leaders will resume March 13 in Lebanon but will do little
to ease the political stalemate in the country.
•  Palestinian National Authority (PNA) President Mahmoud Abbas will meet March 14 with
EU ofﬁcials in Vienna, Austria, to secure funding for the PNA.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
March 13, 2006
Latin America
Highlights
•  Ecuador calls a state of emergency after striking oil workers paralyze production. 
 Latin America: Oil Prices Approach Center Stage
•  Bolivian police raid the local ofﬁce of a subsidiary of the Spanish-owned oil company Repsol. 
 Bolivia: Morales’ Energy Hopes Dashed? 
•  The National Liberation Army of Colombia (ELN) starts talks with the government, while
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas increase attacks ahead of
legislative elections. 
 Colombia: Uribe’s Re-election Bid and the FARC Threat
•  Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez accuses a governor in the oil-rich western province of
Zulia of fomenting a secessionist movement with the backing of the U.S. government. 
 The United States and the ‘Problem’ of Venezuela
•  Outgoing Peruvian President Alejandro Toledo Manrique meets with U.S. President
George W. Bush in Washington.
 Peru: A New Beginning, Or Back to the Past?
Upcoming
•  The deadline for the presentation of evidence in the case of Ecuadorian state oil company
PetroEcuador against Occidental Petroleum Corp. is March 13.
•  The Party of the Brazilian Democratic Movement will announce its presidential candidate
March 19. Former President Fernando Henrique Cardoso’s Social Democratic Party probably
will do the same.
•  Haitian President-elect Rene Preval will meet with Argentine President Nestor Kirchner to
discuss economic support for Haiti. 
•  Haitian President-elect Rene Preval will ask the United Nations to extend the stay of Brazilian
peacekeeping forces in Haiti to ensure the country’s security situation.
Europe
Highlights
•  The European Commission lays out the EU’s ﬁrst steps toward a regionally uniﬁed energy
policy and away from state-determined energy agendas, threatening to break up Europe’s
energy conglomerates.
[URL: " http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=262836"] Europe: Energy Liberalization Versus Energy Giants
•  Polish President Lech Kaczynski, striding toward a more inﬂuential role in the European Union, 
visits Germany. He meets with Chancellor Angela Merkel and other German ofﬁcials. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Kaczynski in Berlin and Poland’s Power Play
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
March 13, 2006
•  French Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin faces renewed public demonstrations protesting
his labor policies. The strikes in France, which paralyzed 85 universities, are expected to
continue. 
 France: De Villepin Risks Labor Reform
•  Agim Ceku is sworn in as Kosovo’s prime minister. His appointment, while supported by NATO
and Kosovar leaders, could destabilize the Balkans. 
 Kosovo: The Quiet Support Behind Ceku’s Political Rise
•  Former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic dies while on trial at The Hague. Although
he suffered from heart disease, rumors circulate as to the cause of his demise.
 Geopolitical Diary: The Death of Milosevic
Upcoming 
•  France will respond this week to a European Commission request for an explanation of why it
merged two major energy groups, Gaz de France and Suez.
 Europe: Energy Liberalization Versus Energy Giants
•  The United Nations will mediate a second round of talks between Kosovar Albanians and
Serbs over Kosovo’s status March 17, potentially inspiring other Balkan secessionist groups
to seek independence. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Kosovo and the Implications of Independence
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin will meet with European Commission President Jose Manuel
Barroso on March 17 to discuss strengthening EU-Russian relations and energy cooperation.
 Europe: Energy Liberalization Versus Energy Giants
•  Palestinian National Authority President Mahmoud Abbas will meet with the current
EU president, Austria’s Wolfgang Schuessel, on March 14. 
 PNA: Hamas’ Plans to Counter International Pressure
•  Slovak Prime Minister Mikulas Dzurinda will meet with U.S. President George W. Bush
in Washington on March 13. 
Security and Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  A bomb explodes outside the home of former Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda in Bangkok, 
Thailand. Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra blames people with “bad intentions” for
heightening political tensions.
 Thailand: Trouble for Thaksin
•  Unknown gunmen kill an employee of the U.S. shipping company SeaBoard Marine in the
northern Honduran city of San Pedro Sula as he leaves his ofﬁce. 
•  At least six civilians are killed and 15 injured when Maoist rebels carry out two attacks in the
eastern Indian state of Chhattisgarh. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
March 13, 2006
•  Multiple blasts strike a railway station and a temple in the Hindu holy city of Varanasi in
northeastern India, killing at least 20 people and wounding dozens more. 
 India: Explosions in Varanasi
•  Three children of a Canadian expatriate and their driver are reportedly kidnapped by
abductors disguised as police ofﬁcers at a fake roadblock in Caracas, Venezuela. 
•  Masked gunmen crash through a fence at Stockholm’s Arlanda airport and hold up luggage
handlers unloading crates of foreign currency from an airliner. 
•  Israeli Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz closes border crossings between Israel and the
Palestinian territories during the Purim holiday amid concerns that militants would attempt
attacks during the holiday.
•  A British expatriate couple was found strangled to death in their home in western Crete, 
Greece. Greek authorities are investigating.
Upcoming
•  Militant attacks could occur in Israel during the Purim holiday, which continues through March 15.
•  Anti-government demonstrations will continue in Bangkok, including one beginning March 13
and concluding March 14 with a march to Government House.
•  A Holi religious festival in India on March 15 could result in sectarian violence or demonstrations.
•  The Commonwealth Games will be held March 15-18 in Melbourne, Australia. 
•  Anti-government protests by Maoists in Nepal on March 18 could result in riots or insurgent attacks.
•  Demonstrations for and against President Chen Shui-bian on March 18 in Taiwan could result
in clashes with police or riots.
Public Policy
Highlights
•  The U.S. Senate Energy Committee votes to open federal waters to energy exploration
100 miles off the western Florida coast.
 Energy Committee Votes to Open Federal Waters to Energy Exploration
•  The U.S. District Court rules that the Alien Torts Claim Act lawsuit against ExxonMobil Corp. 
can proceed.
 U.S. District Court Rules in Favor of Indonesian Citizens
•  The U.S. House of Representatives passes the National Uniformity for Food Act; a similar
measure is expected in the Senate. 
 National Uniformity for Food Act Passes in House
•  The Coalition of Immokalee Workers creates the Alliance for Fair Food and calls on the
fast-food industry to ensure better treatment for agricultural workers. 
 CIW Creates Alliance for Fair Food, Focuses on Improving Farmworkers’ Conditions
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 7
Global Vantage
March 13, 2006
•  A new study shows how pesticides affect people differently based on genetics; activists use
it to urge more stringent safety limits. 
 Groups Use Study to Demand Tighter Pesticide Restrictions
•  John Ruggie, U.N. special representative on business and human rights, has released an interim
report dismissing the draft U.N. Norms as an unﬁt foundation for his work.
 Ruggie Clears the Way for a Global Business Human Rights Regime
•  James Woolsey praises the role biotechnology has to play in making the United States less
reliant on foreign sources of energy
 Woolsey’s Endorsement of Biofuels could put Environmentalists in a Bind
Upcoming
•  American Enterprise Institute will host a discussion March 13 on “Sarbanes-Oxley: What Have
We Learned?”
•  The 3rd Meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety is March 13-17
in Curitiba, Brazil. Shipping labeling requirements for genetically modiﬁed organisms will be
discussed.
•  Biotechnology Industry Organization will hold a discussion March 13 on technological
advances and remaining hurdles toward large-scale commercial production of ethanol.
•  Veterans’ and Survivors’ March for Peace and Justice will march from Mobile, Ala.,
to New Orleans, La., March 14-19 protesting the Iraq war and Katrina reconstruction.
•  Civil Society Institute has a conference call March 15 to discuss a survey claiming Americans
show increased support for state and local initiatives on climate change and renewable
energy.
•  Commonweal and others will hold a California Chemical Policy Symposium on March 16-17
in Oakland, Calif., to discuss the development of a statewide precautionary chemical policy.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
7
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
