Page 1
Global Vantage
March 6, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo lifts a week-old state of emergency after the
threat of a coup recedes. 
•  Taiwanese President Chen Shui-bian scraps the National Uniﬁcation Council, a body formed
to chart reuniﬁcation with mainland China, triggering consternation in China and the
United States.
 Taiwan: Chen’s Risky Business
•  A rally in support of Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra is held in Bangkok as the
opposition calls for Thaksin’s resignation.
 Thailand’s Upcoming Rallies and the Reasons for Restraint
•  South Korea’s umbrella labor union launches a strike against a bill allowing employers more
ﬂexibility in using part-time workers, shutting down rail transport. 
Upcoming
•  China’s National People’s Congress will meet March 6 to approve an economic plan to
develop China’s interior, impacting the ﬁscal and economic relationship between interior and
coastal provinces.
•  Senior working-level talks between Japan and the United States over U.S. military
realignment in Japan will be held March 7-11 in Honolulu, Hawaii.
•  Japan and China will resume talks March 6-7 on the development of gas resources in
disputed waters between the two countries.
•  The Bank of Japan will meet March 8-9 to propose ending the so-called quantitative easing
policy and reverting to a more conventional interest rate policy.
[URL: " 	http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=262802"] Geopolitical Diary: ‘Quantitative Easing’ and the Bank of Japan
•  The Bank of Thailand’s Monetary Policy Committee will meet March 8 to discuss raising
interest rates. 
•  Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono will decide between March 6 and March 10
whether ExxonMobil or state-owned company Pertamina will control operations in the Cepu oil
ﬁeld. 
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin visits Hungary and the Czech Republic to discuss energy
policy, investment in infrastructure and delivery and transit of natural gas.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
March 6, 2006
•  Chechen Prime Minister Sergei Abramov resigns in favor of his deputy, Ramzan Kadyrov, who
likely will earn parliament’s conﬁrmation and continue running Chechnya as a gangster state
and militant haven.
 Chechnya: The Strongman Formally Takes Charge
•  The Belarusian presidential campaign is punctuated by the arrest of an opposition candidate
and the discovery of an alleged coup to take place after the March 19 election. 
 Belarus: No Surprises On Election Day
Upcoming
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin on March 9 likely will approve a bill limiting foreign
investment in mining, oil and natural gas production, weapons production, nuclear industry
and possibly cellular communications.
•  The U.S., French and Russian co-chairs of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Minsk Group will meet March 7-8 to discuss further steps to resolve the Nagorno-
Karabakh dispute.
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=261305"] Geopolitical Diary: A Pivotal Moment for Nagorno-Karabakh
•  Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov will visit Washington on March 6 to discuss the Middle
East, including his recent meetings with Hamas and Iranian ofﬁcials.
 The Middle East and Russia’s New Game
•  The United States and Ukraine will sign a protocol March 6 on mutual access to markets, 
which will allow the latter to join the World Trade Organization.
•  Zurich, Switzerland, will host a March 9 conference on investment opportunities in Azerbaijan. 
The Azerbaijanis and Swiss will discuss the prospects for mutual cooperation and investment
project implementation.
•  Representatives from Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Japan and the United
States will meet at the conference, Democracy and Security in Central Asia, scheduled for
March 6 in Kazakhstan. 
Middle East and South Asia
Highlights
•  Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and U.S. President George W. Bush reach on
understanding on the implementation of a civilian nuclear deal, although several hurdles
remain. 
 Geopolitical Diary: The Indian Nuclear Deal
•  In a new videotaped statement, deputy al Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri calls on Hamas
to ﬁght and to refrain from compromising with Israel. The Palestinian Islamist movement rejects
the call.
•  A suicide car bomber, thought to be an al Qaeda operative, attacks a bus at the
U.S. Consulate in Karachi, Pakistan, killing four people, including an American diplomat.
 Pakistan: U.S. Diplomat Dies in Blast
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
March 6, 2006
•  As Shiite-Sunni tensions escalate, a Shiite-Kurdish spat breaks out over Prime Minister Ibrahim
Jaafari’s trip to Turkey. 
 Iraq: The Kurdish Factor
•  While maintaining its hard-line position, Iran tries to give the impression it has been seeking
accommodation with the West over its nuclear issue.
 Iran: The Regime’s Strategic Moderation
Upcoming
•  Sunni, Kurdish and secular-nationalist Iraqi parliamentary blocs will try to press ahead with
their opposition to the nomination of Shiite leader Ibrahim Jaafari as prime minister. 
•  As the prospect of compromise hangs in the air, the March 6 meeting at the International
Atomic Energy Agency will not lead to any drastic measures against Iran.
•  Additional attacks by al Qaeda beyond routine activity in Iraq and Afghanistan could take
place in keeping with the group’s pattern of clustering attacks.
•  U.S. President George W. Bush’s visit to Pakistan will exacerbate existing problems for
Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf at home as political opponents intensify their anti-
regime campaign.
 Pakistan: Musharraf on the Defensive
•  The U.S.-Indian nuclear deal will apply more pressure on Indian Prime Minister Manmohan
Singh as opposition groups try to link it to India’s vote on Iran at the International Atomic
Energy Agency.
Latin America
Highlights
•  Colombia and the United States complete free trade negotiations.
 Colombia, Ecuador, U.S.: Trying to Avoid a Political AFTA-math
•  Venezuela, Brazil and Argentina begin talks on a South American gas pipeline. 
 The South American Pipeline: Going Ahead Despite the Cost?
•  Wildcat strikes hit Mexico’s mining industry.
 Mexico, U.S.: Election-Year Rhetoric on Both Sides of the Border
•  Colombian guerrillas step up violence as the electoral campaign intensiﬁes.
 Colombia: Uribe’s Strike Against the AUC
Upcoming
•  Chilean President-elect Michelle Bachelet will be inaugurated in Santiago on March 11. 
The Bolivian, Venezuelan and Colombian presidents and U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza
Rice plan to attend. 
•  Peruvian President Alejandro Toledo Manrique’s March 10 meeting with U.S. President
George W. Bush in Washington is expected address terms of the recent free trade
agreement.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
March 6, 2006
•  U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will travel to Peru on March 12 to follow up on
discussions between the U.S. and Peruvian presidents.
•  Colombian congressional elections are scheduled for March 12. No party is expected to win
an outright majority. 
•  Brazil’s central bank will convene March 8 to announce changes in interest rates. A 1.0 percent
drop is expected.
Europe
Highlights
•  Initiating steps to create a regional energy policy, EU ofﬁcials call for countries to re-evaluate
protectionist stances on energy industries. 
 Europe: Energy Liberalization Versus Energy Giants
•  Kosovar Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi resigns under pressure, and former guerrilla leader
Agim Ceku is nominated to replace him. The change could increase tensions during talks over
Kosovo’s status. 
 Kosovo: The Quiet Support Behind Ceku’s Political Rise
•  EU foreign ministers meeting in Brussels, Belgium, remain consistent in their decisions on Serbia
and Montenegro, Iran, Iraq and the Mohammed cartoon incident. 
•  Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi visits the United States while President George W. Bush
is away. The visit is considered an electoral tool for Berlusconi. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Photo Ops and Implications
Upcoming
•  Polish President Lech Kaczynski will travel to Germany on March 8, likely to discuss a possible
German-French-Polish power triumvirate. 
 Geopolitical Diary: In Europe, a Budding Alliance
•  G-6 countries will meet March 10-11 in London to discuss differences over agricultural and
industrial issues covered in the Doha round of World Trade Organization talks.
•  Kosovo likely will get a new prime minister this week, which could lead to conﬂict between
Serbia and Kosovo. 
 Kosovo: The Quiet Support Behind Ceku’s Political Rise
•  Turkish and EU ofﬁcials will meet March 8 in Vienna, Austria, to discuss Turkey’s accession. 
The meeting follows an escalation in tension between Turkey and a combined force of Austria
and Greek Cyprus. 
 EU: Austria Frustrates Turkey’s Accession
•  Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak will meet German Chancellor Angela Merkel on
March 11-12 in Germany to discuss the Middle East. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
March 6, 2006
Security and Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  Suspected tribal militants attack a train with small-arms ﬁre near Baneri, Pakistan, about 50
miles southeast of Quetta. No injuries are reported.
•  U.S. President George W. Bush travels to Afghanistan, India and Pakistan amid protests and
security concerns.
 The U.S. President’s Risky Trip to India
•  Small bombs explode in three cities in Iran’s restive Khuzestan province, injuring four people
and causing light damage.
•  Clashes between Maoist rebels and government troops in Nepal claim at least 16 lives and
injure at least 24 as the government conducts an offensive.
•  The United Kingdom passes legislation that enables parents to check the backgrounds of
child-care workers and tutors online. 
•  South Africa’s minister for minerals and energy says sabotage is suspected to be behind
recent power outages at the Koeburg nuclear power plant in Cape Town. 
•  Jordanian intelligence ofﬁcials claim to have foiled an al Qaeda plot to mount a suicide
attack against a civilian target in Jordan. 
•  A suicide car bomber attacks a bus ferrying commuters to the U.S. Consulate in Karachi, 
Pakistan, killing four people, including the consulate’s ﬁnancial management ofﬁcer. 
 The U.S. Consulate Bombing in Pakistan: Getting Around Security Measures
•  Iranian-born University of North Carolina graduate Mohammed Reza Taheri-azar is charged
with attempted murder after allegedly injuring nine people on the Chapel Hill campus to
avenge the ill treatment of Muslims. 
Upcoming
•  U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will visit Indonesia on March 14. The visit could
spark demonstrations or attacks against U.S. diplomatic facilities before she arrives. 
•  Possible labor strikes in South Korea could affect transportation and security in Seoul. 
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Sens. Barack Obama, D-Ill., and Frank Lautenberg, D-N.J., announce plans for new chemical
plant security legislation that calls for promotion of “safer technologies.”
 Senators Call for Chemical Plant Security Legislation, Safer Chemical Technologies
•  Ralph Nader’s Center for Study of Responsive Law publishes a report critical of the auto
industry for allegedly failing to create safer and more fuel-efﬁcient automobiles.
 Nader Calls for Auto Safety and Fuel-Efﬁciency Innovations, Higher CAFE Standards
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
March 6, 2006
•  National environmental groups oppose a House bill on uniform food labeling, claiming the
measure would nullify state laws and threaten public health. 
 Environmental, Public Health Groups Strongly Oppose the National Uniformity for Food Act
•  Environmental Working Group and Public Employees for Environmental Responsibility release
a report showing long-term persistence of chemicals from a 3M plant.
 Groups Warn of Continued Threat after Chemicals’ Phase Out
•  A seafood distributor announces its use of computer-based technology to certify a new brand
of ﬁsh as low in mercury. 
 New Technology Quickly Measures Mercury in Seafood
•  Former U.S. Vice President Al Gore announces a major climate change ad campaign
sponsored by a new coalition of labor, environmental and religious groups. 
 Gore Announces Climate Change Coalition and Ad Campaign
•  The annual Society of Toxicology conference begins in San Diego. It includes a roundtable on
the precautionary principle and sessions on nanotoxicity. The conference concludes March 9.
•  The Paciﬁc Fishery Management Council, which advises the U.S. Department of Commerce, 
is meeting in Seattle to consider restricting salmon and halibut ﬁshing and krill harvesting. 
The meeting ends March 10.
Upcoming
•  The World Bank’s Energy Week 2006: Clean Energy for Development, slated for March 6-8
in Washington, D.C., will extend the G-8 Plan of Action adopted at Gleneagles.
•  The National Marine Fisheries Service is expected to decide whether to adopt a ban on trawl
ﬁshing in nearly 300,000 square miles off the West Coast by March 8.
•  Senate committee hearings March 9 will consider the Obama/Durbin Nuclear Release Notice
Act, requiring nuclear utility companies to inform state and local ofﬁcials of leaks of
radioactive material.
•  The Public Interest Environmental Conference, slated for March 8-11 at the University of
Florida College of Law, will include sessions on global warming and waiving environmental
laws in disaster response.
•  The House is expected to vote this week on the Uniformity for Food Act, which would create
a national standard for food labeling, limiting state discretion.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
