Page 1
Global Vantage
February 27, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  Japanese Trade Minister Toshihiro Nikai meets with Chinese Minister of Commerce Bo Xilai
and Premier Wen Jiabao, restarting high-level talks.
 China: Setting Aside the Japan Card, For Now
•  The European Union says it will impose duties on shoes coming from China and Vietnam. 
•  Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf visits China, signs 13 treaties and negotiates
a free trade agreement. Rumors indicate possible negotiations for a nuclear development
program.
 Pakistan’s Measured Response to the Baloch Insurgency
•  Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo declares a state of emergency as
demonstrations escalate and after the military quashes a coup attempt. 
 Philippines: Arroyo’s Tenuous Hold on Control
•  Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra dissolves parliament and sets elections for April 2
after meeting with King Bhumibol Adulyadej and business leaders. Thai opposition parties
threaten to boycott the elections.
 Thailand: Trouble for Thaksin
Upcoming
•  South Korea’s Korean Confederation of Trade Unions will launch a nationwide strike over
part-time worker legislation Feb. 28. 
•  Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono will visit Myanmar on March 1-2 to speak
with the government about its democratic progress and economic issues. 
•  General-level military talks will resume March 1-2 between North and South Korea.
•  Negotiators for the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the Philippine government will meet
March 5-7 in Malaysia. 
•  North Korean Foreign Ministry Director General for North America Li Gun will travel to the
United States in March for bilateral nuclear talks.
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Sakhalin-2 participants Royal Dutch/Shell, Russian monopoly Gazprom and Japan’s
Mitsui & Co. Ltd. and Mitsubishi Corp. meet in Russia to discuss the petroleum project’s future.
 Sakhalin: That Sinking Feeling
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
February 27, 2006
•  Russian and Iranian delegations meet in Moscow to discuss uranium enrichment. The talks
continue in Tehran with Russian Atomic Energy Minister Sergei Kiriyenko’s visit. 
 Russia, Iran: Moscow Gets Sidelined in Nuclear Discussions
•  The Joint Control Commission monitoring the conﬂict in Georgia’s breakaway South Ossetia
region meets in Moscow. Both Georgian and Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe delegations attend. 
 Georgia: Simmering Conﬂict in South Ossetia
Upcoming
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin will visit Czech Prime Minister Jiri Paroubek on March 1-2
to discuss Gazprom’s energy deliveries after current contracts end in 2013.
 Russia: Winter’s Chilling Effects on EU’s Attitude Toward Gazprom
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin will visit Hungary Feb. 28-March 1. 
•  Hamas representatives will visit Russia on March 3. Russia plans to pressure the new
Palestinian government to moderate its stance.
 The Middle East and Russia’s New Game
•  Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili and Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko will discuss
cooperation and possible Ukrainian assistance in the conﬂict in South Ossetia. 
•  Belarusian President Aleksandr Lukashenko’s presidential campaign will ofﬁcially begin
Feb. 27. He is widely expected to win the March 19 elections.
Middle East
Highlights
•  Al Qaeda stages its ﬁrst attack against an oil facility in Saudi Arabia but security guards
thwart the effort.
 Saudi Arabia: A Shift in Al Qaeda’s Thinking
 Saudi Arabia: Explosion Near Oil Reﬁnery
•  A bombing of one of the holiest Shiite shrines in Iraq triggers an unprecedented violent
reaction against Sunnis, leading to a breakdown in negotiations toward a coalition
government.
 Geopolitical Diary: Implications of a Mosque Bombing
 Shiite Mosque Bombing in Iraq: Insurgents at Work?
•  Iran signals that it can cause trouble for the United States in Iraq if Washington does not back
off its policy of containing the Iraqi Shia.
 Iraq: The Al-Askariyah Bombing’s Threat to Stability
•  The Bush administration and Iraqi Shiite Islamists, hitherto allies, clash publicly over the extent
to which the Shia will control Iraq once a full-term government is in place.
 Iraq: A U.S.-Shiite Rift
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
February 27, 2006
•  Hamas cautiously moves forward in consolidating its hold on power over the Palestinian
National Authority, while Kadima consolidates its power in Israel.
 PNA, Israel: Hamas, Kadima and Their Respective Power Plays
•  Pakistani Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz travels to China for a ﬁve-day visit to enhance strategic
ties between Islamabad and Beijing.
Upcoming
•  Iran will try to show that a deal on its nuclear program is pending to prevent the International
Atomic Energy Agency from taking a tough stance at its upcoming meeting.
•  Russia will attempt to moderate Hamas’ stance toward Israel when a Hamas delegation
travels to Moscow on March 3, but the Islamist movement will continue to play hardball.
•  U.S. President George W. Bush will travel to Pakistan on March 4 in an attempt to burnish
Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf’s image.
•  Iraqi and U.S. government ofﬁcials will engage in damage control following the Shiite shrine
bombing, bringing negotiations toward forming a new government.
Europe
Highlights
•  France discovers the ﬁrst agricultural case of bird ﬂu in the European Union. 
 France: Avian Flu Strain Jumps to Domestic Birds
 EU: The Real Bird Flu Threat
•  The European Union decides to implement tariffs on shoes imported from China and Vietnam
beginning in April. China calls the decision a violation of free trade. 
•  German union leaders meet with government ofﬁcials to negotiate a labor strike by public
workers. 
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=262336"] Geopolitical Diary: Merkel’s First Domestic Test
•  Austria says Turkey must allow Greek Cypriot ships to dock in Turkish ports before the end
of the year. The ultimatum would require Turkey to recognize Cyprus. 
 EU: Austria Frustrates Turkey’s Accession
•  The Olympic Games end in Turin, Italy. 
 Olympics: Let the Games -- and Europe’s Security Challenge -- Begin
•  Kosovar Albanian and Serb representatives hold talks in Vienna over Kosovo’s status. 
U.N. ofﬁcials mediate. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Kosovo and the Implications of Independence
•  Polish President Lech Kaczynski meets French President Jacques Chirac in Paris. 
 Geopolitical Diary: In Europe, a Budding Alliance
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
February 27, 2006
Upcoming
•  EU Commissioner for Agriculture Mariann Fischer Boel will begin an eight-day visit to Australia
and New Zealand to discuss agricultural policy. 
•  EU foreign ministers will meet Feb. 27 in Brussels, Belgium, to discuss Iran, Iraq, the cartoon
controversy, Montenegro’s independence referendum, and accession talks with Serbia and
Montenegro. 
 The Mohammed Cartoon and the Widening European-Muslim Divide
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin will travel to Hungary on Feb. 28-March 1, followed by a visit
to the Czech Republic on March 1-2.
 Russia: Winter’s Chilling Effects on EU’s Attitude Toward Gazprom
Latin America
Highlights
•  Venezuela restricts U.S. airlines from ﬂying to Caracas.
 The United States and the ‘Problem’ of Venezuela
•  Ecuadorian protesters occupy pipeline stations, disrupting oil exports for several days.
 Ecuador: An Oil Strike’s Present and Future Consequences
•  Brazil and Mexico buy back debt bonds as their economies strengthen.
 Latin America Net Assessment -- 2005
•  Ecuador ﬁghts Colombian guerrillas on its own territory along the Colombian border. 
 Ecuador, Colombia: A New Spirit of Cooperation? 
Upcoming
•  Costa Rica’s ofﬁcial election results are expected this week. 
•  The campaign for congressional elections in Colombia will start Feb. 27.
Security/ Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  An attack by suicide car-bombers against an oil facility in Saudi Arabia is foiled by
security guards.
 Saudi Arabia: Anatomy of the Abqaiq Bombing Attempt
•  The U.S. government issues Warden Messages for Bahrain and Jordan and the Australian
government issues a travel warning for Bahrain.
 The Terrorist Threat in the Persian Gulf
•  Two men are arrested in Massachusetts for allegedly kidnapping a Rhode Island
businesswoman at gunpoint in South Providence and demanding a $150,000 ransom.
 The Rhode Island Kidnapping and the Risks to Small-Business Owners
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
February 27, 2006
•  More than $40 million in cash is stolen from a banknote storage depot in England after
gunmen posing as police abduct its security manager and his family.
•  Multiple demonstrations against Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo and in support
of former President Joseph Estrada occur throughout Manila as tensions mount over coup
rumors. 
 Philippines: The Political Landslide Threat
•  Three Ohio men are indicted on charges of planning attacks against U.S. military personnel
in Iraq. 
 U.S.: Uncovering a Suspected Jihadist Cell in the Midwest
•  Several people are killed and churches and mosques are burned in violence targeting
Christians in northern Nigeria and Muslims in the southern city of Onitsha. 
•  A Shariah court in India issues a fatwa calling for the deaths of the Danish cartoonists who
produced controversial caricatures of the Prophet Mohammed.
 Fatwas and Rewards: An Inﬂection Point in the Cartoon Controversy
•  A bomb explodes outside the Bangkok, Thailand, ofﬁces of a Buddhist sect afﬁliated with the
opposition to Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. Separately, the opposition stages a protest
in Bangkok.
•  A vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonates during an opposition rally against
Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra near the Royal Palace in Bangkok.
•  Texas ofﬁcials respond to reports of Ricin found in a University of Texas dormitory in Austin. 
Initial tests indicating traces of Ricin appear to have produced a false positive.
Upcoming
•  Maoist guerrillas in Nepal call for a nationwide strike starting April 3 to protest the
authoritarian rule of King Gyanendra.
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Labor and environmental groups seek to list Teﬂon component perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA) 
as a known carcinogen in California, thereby requiring warning labels on all products
containing PFOA. 
 Labor, Environmental Groups Urge Warning Labels for Teﬂon Component
•  U.S. Public Interest Research Group praises a bill that would regulate persistent organic
pollutants (POPs); the proposed legislation could affect chemicals usage in non-regulatory 
ways. 
 Proposed Chemicals Regulation Bill Could Point to Broader Plans
•  San Francisco passes an e-waste resolution, apparently part of a larger strategy to
encourage electronics manufacturers to reformulate their products to include less-toxic
chemicals.
 San Francisco Board Passes E-waste Resolution
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
February 27, 2006
•  Environmental groups use U.S. President George W. Bush’s budget proposal for ﬁscal year
2007 to attack his renewable energy speeches.
 Bush Is Not Putting Budget Where his Mouth Is -- Environmentalists
•  The International Finance Corp. releases revised environmental and social standards for
project ﬁnance. Despite the supposed strengthening of the Equator Principles, activists are
not placated.
 Groups Demand Banks to Endorse the Draft U.N. Norms
•  The ﬁsh industry attempts to counter environmentalist charges that ﬁsh contain toxic chemicals, 
which could lead to discussions between the industry and activist groups.
 The Fish Industry Fights Back
Upcoming
•  The Public Interest Environmental Law Conference will be March 2-5 at the University of
Oregon School of Law. Environmentalists will promote their campaigns to lawyers and the
broader activist community.
•  The United Nations will vote to approve a new Human Rights Council, which bears a striking
resemblance to the discredited Commission on Human Rights it is supposed to replace.
•  Senator Barack Obama, D-Ill., could introduce legislation this week requiring nuclear utilities to
notify state and local ofﬁcials of accidental or unintentional leaks of radioactive substances. 
•  The Idaho House Environment, Energy and Technology Committee will consider legislation
March 2 to place a two-year moratorium on building coal-ﬁred power plants; activists urge
similar measures in Texas.
•  The 2006 World Mines Ministries Forum will convene March 2-5 in Toronto to discuss such
topics as sustainable mining, corporate social responsibility, revenue sharing and post-mining
land use.
•  U.S. governors will discuss energy policy, including interstate nuclear waste transport, 
Feb. 27 at the National Governors Association’s Healthy America Forum and Winter Meeting.
•  Consumer Federation of America will release its best and worst vehicle fuel-economy ratings
by size and class, along with a new mileage rating scale Feb. 27.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
