Page 1
Global Vantage
March 27, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  U.S. Sens. Lindsey Graham and Charles Schumer visit Beijing to talk about yuan revaluation
prior to a congressional vote on tariffs on all imports from China. 
•  Japan says it no longer will give China infrastructure loans until the two are able to
reduce tensions. 
 Geopolitical Diary: The Utility of Conﬂict in Sino-Japanese Relations
•  Russia and China sign a plan to initiate a feasibility study on an oil pipeline connecting
the two, along with agreements to increase energy supplies from Russia to China. 
 Geopolitical Diary: The Signiﬁcance of Putin’s Beijing Trip
•  South Korea and the United States hold military talks in Seoul regarding the wartime
command of South Korean troops; the two nations also begin joint military exercises. 
•  Japan and the United States hold talks in Tokyo regarding the realignment of U.S. troops
in Japan. 
•  U.S. Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez begins talks on yuan revaluation in Beijing prior
to Chinese President Hu Jintao’s mid-April visit to the United States. The talks are scheduled
to conclude April 1.
Upcoming
•  The deadline for a U.S. congressional vote on whether to impose tariffs on all imports from
China will pass March 31; Sen. Charles Schumer could ask for a delay. 
•  South Korean transportation workers will hold an emergency meeting March 27 to decide
whether to strike if Samsung Electronics Co. does not re-employ 51 cargo drivers. 
•  British Prime Minister Tony Blair will visit Indonesia on March 29.
•  Japan and the United States will continue talks on the realignment of U.S. troops stationed
in Japan on March 30-31 in Washington.
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin begins a two-day visit to China, during which the countries
sign numerous agreements, including many on future joint energy-sector projects.
 Geopolitical Diary: The Signiﬁcance of Putin’s Beijing Trip
•  Georgia threatens to cancel a bilateral agreement with Russia on the latter’s World Trade
Organization accession due to violations of customs regulations. 
 Georgia: Putting Pressure on Russia With the WTO 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
March 27, 2006
•  Ukraine holds parliamentary elections. 
 Ukraine: Timoshenko the Kingmaker?
•  Belarus holds presidential elections, with incumbent Aleksandr Lukashenko winning as
expected. A ﬁve-day peaceful protest and a march in the capital are dispersed by
special services.
 Belarus: No Revolution Blooming this Spring
 Geopolitical Diary: The Elections in Belarus
•  A Russian convoy of humanitarian aid and supplies arrives in the blockaded Transdniestria
region. Ukraine has imposed restrictions on the route and timing of transit through its territory.
[URL: " http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=263129"] Russia: The Transdniestria Conundrum
Upcoming
•  Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller will visit Tajikistan on March 27 to work out a joint oil and natural
gas venture in which Gazprom will prospect and develop Tajik ﬁelds.
•  The Russian delegation to the World Trade Organization admission talks will meet with U.S. 
colleagues at the talks, which will continue through March 28 in Geneva.
•  Uzbek President Islam Karimov will visit South Korea on March 28-30 to discuss trade and
investment cooperation, energy and resource development, and the Korean minority living in
Uzbekistan.
•  The Moscow arbitration court will hear the bankruptcy case against oil company Yukos on
March 28. Yukos holds assets in Russia and a majority stake in a Lithuanian reﬁnery.
•  Results from Ukraine’s parliamentary elections are expected this week. The results likely will
be followed by negotiations to form coalitions, as no one party holds a majority.
 Geopolitical Diary: Ukraine Elections and an Orange Reversal?
•  The Joint Control Commission for Georgian-South Ossetian Conﬂict Resolution will meet in
Vladikavkaz, North Ossetia, on March 27-28 to discuss a joint program and security
guarantees.
 Georgia: Simmering Conﬂict in South Ossetia
•  The Russian Paciﬁc Fleet and the U.S. Navy will conduct joint exercises on communications and
maneuvering April 1 near the Mariana Islands in the Paciﬁc Ocean.
Middle East and South Asia
Highlights
•  Offering “peace, security and friendship,” Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh responds to
a call from Pakistan to resolve the Kashmir dispute. 
 India, Pakistan: Singh Extends an Olive Branch
•  In a crafty political maneuver, Indian Congress party leader Sonia Gandhi resigns her seat
in parliament following a controversy over her holding “positions of proﬁt.”
 India: Gandhi’s Goodbye Gambit
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
March 27, 2006
•  Afghan President Hamid Karzai reshufﬂes his Cabinet in a move that includes the removal
of former Northern Alliance leader Abdullah Abdullah from his position as foreign minister. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Reading Signals from Kabul
•  Fatah tries to counter its weakening political position by seeking to revive the Palestine
Liberation Organization as an institution that can have oversight over the Hamas-led
Palestinian National Authority.
 Geopolitical Diary: The Battle Over the PLO
•  To break the deadlock over forming a national unity government, Iraq’s political leaders
announce the creation of a national security council, complicating the negotiating process.
 Iraq: Complicating the Political Fray
Upcoming
•  A delegation of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission will visit India on March 27 as the
Bush administration tries to get congressional approval of the U.S.-Indian civilian nuclear deal.
•  The Palestinian parliament will meet this week to vote on the new Hamas-led Cabinet, 
which will likely be approved.
•  Iran and the United States are expected to begin their public negotiations over Iraq as early
as this week.
 Geopolitical Diary: The Beginning of the End Game
[URL: " http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=263540"] U.S., Iran: Talks on Iraq Move to the Forefront
•  Gridlock among Iraq’s ethno-sectarian factions over forming a coalition regime will continue
because of the upcoming U.S.-Iranian talks and the resulting fallout.
 Putting Cards on the Table in Iraq
•  To show that he has matters ﬁrmly under control at home, Pakistani President Gen. Pervez
Musharraf will strengthen his offensive against the jihadist insurgency in the northwestern tribal
areas.
•  India and France will begin joint naval exercises March 27 off the west coast of India that are
expected to last 12 days.
•  Israeli parliamentary elections March 28 will make Kadima the single largest party in the
Knesset and will lead to the formation of a coalition government.
Europe
Highlights 
•  European leaders meet in Brussels for a two-day summit. Increasing Europe’s economic
competitiveness is the meeting’s planned focus, but energy protectionism and security
overshadow the talks. 
 EU: Protectionism Versus Progress at the EU Summit
 Europe: Energy Liberalization Versus Energy Giants
 EU, Russia: An Elusive Energy Partnership
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
March 27, 2006
•  French Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin meets with union leaders as protests against his
controversial labor law become violent. 
 France: De Villepin Risks Labor Reform
•  The European Union adopts proposals to impose tariffs on shoe imports from China and
Vietnam in response to perceived dumping that some European countries allege undermines
their revenue. 
 EU: When Shoe Tariffs Don’t Fit
•  Basque separatist group ETA declares a permanent cease-ﬁre, possibly ending 40 years of
militancy. The group, whose support and membership are waning, is hoping to remain
politically viable. 
 Spain: ETA’s Cease-Fire and its Search for Viability
Upcoming
•  French student and labor groups will hold a general strike March 28, protesting a
controversial law that makes ﬁring young workers easier. Public services could be interrupted.
 France: De Villepin Risks Labor Reform
•  A meeting of the World Trade Organization will begin in Geneva on March 27. Topics will
include agricultural disputes and Russia’s admission into the group. 
 Georgia: Putting Pressure on Russia With the WTO
•  The deadline for Serbia and Bosnia to hand over war criminals to the war crimes tribunal
in The Hague is March 31.
 Serbia After Milosevic
•  Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev will visit Finland to discuss Bulgaria’s accession
to the European Union. Finland will take over the rotating EU presidency from Austria on July 1.
 Bulgaria: EU Bid Down the Drain?
•  Romanian President Traian Basescu will visit Chinese President Hu Jintao on March 27-29
to discuss increasing economic cooperation between the two countries.
Latin America
Highlights
•  Venezuela and the United States reach a preliminary agreement to keep U.S. airlines ﬂying
into Venezuela.
[URL: " http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=262577"] The United States and the ‘Problem’ of Venezuela
•  Ecuador declares a state of emergency in ﬁve provinces while free trade protests continue. 
 Colombia, Ecuador, U.S.: Trying to Avoid a Political AFTA-math
•  Peru’s Nationalist Party candidate Ollanta Humala takes the lead in polls ahead of the
April 9 presidential election.
 Peru: A New Beginning, Or Back to the Past? 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
March 27, 2006
•  The United States indicts 55 leaders of Colombian militant group Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia (FARC) with charges of drug trafﬁcking. 
 Colombia, U.S., Venezuela: Anti-Drug Status Quo Returns
Upcoming
•  Uruguayan President Tabare Vazquez and Argentine President Nestor Kirchner will meet
March 29 to discuss the construction of paper plants in Uruguay, which Argentina and
environmentalist groups oppose. 
•  The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration will send a mission this week to Venezuela to
evaluate aeronautical facilities in order to prevent a Venezuelan ban on U.S. airline ﬂights
into the country.
•  Leaders of the United States, Mexico and Canada will meet March 30-31 to evaluate
the progress of the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America.
•  Indian Minister of State for External Affairs Anand Sharma will visit Chile on March 27-28
to discuss trade and defense cooperation; he will travel to Brazil on March 29-31.
•  The U.S. Senate will start debate on immigration-reform and border-security bills March 27.
•  Haitian President-elect Rene Preval will meet March 27-28 with U.S. President George W. Bush
and ofﬁcials of the Organization of American States, World Bank, International Monetary
Fund and United Nations.
Security And Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  A U.S. citizen from San Antonio is stabbed to death on a main street in Nuevo Laredo, 
Mexico — the 52nd homicide of the year in the border town. 
•  More than 30 Maoist rebels and 20 Nepalese government troops are killed in continuing
violence throughout Nepal. 
•  Explosions in two low-budget hotels in La Paz, Bolivia, kill two people and wound at least
seven. Bolivian authorities say the bomber is a mentally disturbed U.S. citizen.
 Bombing in Bolivia: No Sign of Terrorism
•  Fighting north of Mogadishu, Somalia, between the Alliance for the Restoration of Peace and
Counter-Terrorism and a militia loyal to local Islamist groups leaves about 90 people dead. 
•  Basque separatist group ETA says it has implemented a permanent cease-ﬁre, an effort to
remain viable amid increasing opposition to terrorism in Spain since the Madrid bombings. 
 Spain: ETA’s Cease-Fire and its Search for Viability
•  A small bomb detonates outside a Citibank branch in central Athens, Greece, damaging
the building’s entrance but causing no injuries.
•  Militants in Nigeria’s Niger River Delta region release their three remaining Western hostages, 
two Americans and a Briton, after holding them for more than ﬁve weeks. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
March 27, 2006
Upcoming
•  French labor and student unions, including the Confederation Francaise Democratique du
Travail, France’s largest labor union, will launch a nationwide strike March 28 to protest
controversial labor laws. 
•  The Indian and French navies will begin a 12-day exercise March 27 off the west coast of
India. The annual exercise will focus on antisubmarine warfare and counterterrorism. 
•  Philippine police and security forces will be on heightened alert March 29 for possible attacks
during the anniversary of the founding of the New People’s Army militant group.
•  Local elections will be held March 30 in Sri Lanka in all areas except those held by rebels. 
Rebel attacks could occur to discourage participation or inﬂuence the voting. 
Public Policy
Highlights
•  U.S. Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff announces support for federal chemical-
security legislation; activists call his plan insufﬁcient. 
 Homeland Security Chief Calls for Chemical Safety Legislation
•  U.S. Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., outlines legislation to implement a mandatory carbon-
cap-and-trade system.
 Sen. Feinstein Outlines Carbon Cap and Trade System
•  Ceres ranks companies based on their climate-risk policies. It could pressure low-ranked
companies to improve their efforts, and push companies that have not yet addressed the issue.
 Ceres Ranks Companies on Climate Change Policies
•  The Ad Council agrees to work with Environmental Defense to run climate-change
advertisements. 
 Environmental Defense, Ad Council Working Together on Climate Ads
•  The Center for Sustainable Innovation announces the “Social Footprint,” a corporate
sustainability reporting method that seeks to measure quantitatively a company’s impact
against a given community need.
 New CSR Reporting Method Pioneers a Contextual Approach to Sustainability
Upcoming
•  The 8th conference of the parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity will conclude
March 31 in Curitiba, Brazil.
•  “McDonald’s Truth Tour 2006,” organized by the Coalition of Immokalee Workers, will be
ongoing throughout the week.
•  Environmental Health Lobby Day, coordinated by Environmental Health Strategy Center, 
will take place March 27 in Augusta, Maine; issues include restrictions on mercury and
ﬂame retardants. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 7
Global Vantage
March 27, 2006
•  The Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works will hold hearings March 29 on the
impact of removing additive MTBE from gasoline supplies. 
•  March 31 is the last day of a 90-day public comment period for the draft G3 Guidelines
of the Global Reporting Initiative. 
•  The Science and Environmental Health Network and Environmental Research Foundation’s
Precaution Academy will be held March 31-April 2 in New Brunswick, N.J.
•  Fossil Fools Day on April 1, led by Global Exchange, Rainforest Action Network and Ruckus
Society, will feature adopt-a-dealer events around the country pressing Ford Motor Co. to
become more fuel-efﬁcient. 
•  Resources for the Future will host Steve Specker, president and CEO of the Electric Power
Research Institute, on March 30 to speak on “Generating Electricity in a Carbon-Constrained
World.”
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
7
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
