Page 1
Global Vantage
April 10, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra claims victory in snap elections before announcing that
he will step down from ofﬁce. 
 Thailand: Thaksin’s Electoral Win Doesn’t Spell Victory
 Thailand: Thaksin Steps Down
•  China and Australia reach deals on uranium and on accelerating negotiations toward a free
trade agreement. Australia moves away from its declaration that it will not provide uranium
to India.
 Australia: A New Uranium Deal Done?
•  China promises development aid to all South Paciﬁc island nations recognizing the one-China
policy. Premier Wen Jiabao says this is a strategic venture, not a diplomatic gesture.
•  The opposition Democratic Party of Japan makes veteran politician Ichiro Ozawa its new
leader when Seiji Maehara resigns following an attempt to discredit the ruling Liberal
Democratic Party.
•  Chinese Vice Premier Wu Yi leads a delegation of more than 200 executives from
111 Chinese companies to Washington, signing deals with major U.S. corporations exceeding
$4 billion. 
 U.S.: A New Option on Dealing With the Yuan
Upcoming
•  Top U.S. negotiator for North Korea Christopher Hill will attend the Northeast Asian
Cooperation Dialogue on April 10; unofﬁcial talks on resuming the ofﬁcial six-party talks
are expected there.
 Second-Quarter Forecast: The Presidency, Iraq and the Waiting Game-Part One
 N. Korea: Missile Tests More Likely to be Messages than Mistakes 
•  Talks between Tokyo and Washington on the realignment of U.S. bases in Japan that failed
April 6 will continue April 13 in Tokyo.
•  U.S. House Speaker Dennis Hastert, in Vietnam on April 14-17, will meet Prime Minister Phan
Van Khai to discuss normalizing U.S.-Vietnamese trade relations after Vietnam’s World Trade
Organization accession.
•  Chinese Vice Premier Wu Yi, U.S. Trade Representative Rob Portman and Commerce Secretary
Carlos Gutierrez will co-chair the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade
on April 11.
•  The ﬁrst Sino-Taiwanese cross-strait economic and trade forum will begin April 14 in Beijing, 
possibly including a conﬁdential talk between Chinese President Hu Jintao and Kuomintang
chairman Lien Chan.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
April 10, 2006
Middle East and South Asia
Highlights
•  Hamas hints that it might recognize Israel, as Israel warns that it will not engage in peace talks
with Palestinian National Authority President Mahmoud Abbas until Hamas moderates its
stance toward Israel.
 Israel, PNA: A Misguided Missile’s Political Fallout
•  Expressing its wish for Pakistan to return to civilian control, Washington publicly reveals that
it has begun looking at Islamabad in post-Musharraﬁan terms.
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=264486"] U.S.: Imagining a Pakistan Without Musharraf
•  Pressure from Iraq’s Sunnis and Kurds and internal inﬁghting force the Shiite bloc to seek
Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani’s intervention in resolving the deadlock over the position
of prime minister.
 Geopolitical Diary: The UIA’s Dilemma
•  Iran stages military war games in the Persian Gulf and openly demands that the United States
recognize Tehran as the regional hegemon in the Middle East.
 Iran’s New Weapons: More Flash than Force?
•  Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak accuses Shia living in Arab states of being more loyal
to Iran than to their home countries. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Exploiting Sectarian Fault Lines 
•  A media report says the United States is preparing to launch airstrikes to neutralize Iranian
nuclear facilities, and Washington and Iran agree to delay talks on Iraq until after formation
of an Iraqi coalition government.
Upcoming
•  Hamas’ ﬁnancial crisis will pressure its members to lean toward moderation as the group
negotiates with Fatah over how to deal with Israel on a tactical level.
•  Some semblance of an Israeli Cabinet will emerge as negotiations toward the formation
of a Kadima-led coalition government intensify.
•  Iran’s belligerent rhetoric will be balanced by more conciliatory remarks as preparations
are made for the ﬁrst public and direct talks between Iran and the United States in Baghdad.
•  Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf will ambiguously reafﬁrm his commitment to
democracy and declare that elections will occur on time and in a free and fair manner. 
 Geopolitical Diary: The United States, Pakistan and Musharraf
•  Afghan President Hamid Karzai’s ﬁve-day trip to India will increase tensions among
Afghanistan, Pakistan and India. 
•  Iraq’s Shiite political bloc could replace interim Prime Minister Ibrahim Jaafari as its nominee
for full-term prime minister, which would exacerbate rifts within the coalition. 
•  Sunni-Shiite tensions are expected to rise beyond Iraq as a result of remarks by Egyptian
President Hosni Mubarak, who accused Arab Shia in the region of being more loyal to Iran. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
April 10, 2006
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Turkmen President Saparmurat Niyazov visits China, where the two sides announce plans
to construct a natural gas pipeline.
 Turkmenistan, China: Laying the Groundwork for a Pipeline
•  Russian energy giant Gazprom raises its estimated cost for construction of the Northern
European Gas Pipeline to $10.5 billion. 
 Germany: Schroeder’s New Gig Causes Trouble at Home
•  Russian Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov visits Brazil to discuss economic and trade cooperation
and Argentina to discuss Russian accession to the World Trade Organization.
•  Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko’s Our Ukraine party, which ﬁnished third in the
March 26 parliamentary elections, announces plans for a revival of the Orange Coalition.
 Ukraine: An Orange Reunion?
•  Belarusian President Aleksandr Lukashenko is inaugurated for his third term amid international
observers’ accusations of fraud in the March 19 presidential election.
 Belarus: No Revolution Blooming this Spring
Upcoming
•  Russian natural gas monopoly Gazprom will announce its choice of partners in developing the
Shtokman ﬁeld April 15. Companies bidding include Norsk Hydro, Statoil, ConocoPhillips Co. 
and Chevron Corp.
•  Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko’s Our Ukraine party, the Yulia Timoshenko Bloc and the
Socialist Party could sign a coalition agreement by April 10 at Timoshenko’s urging.
 Ukraine: Timoshenko the Kingmaker?
•  Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili will pay a state visit to China on April 10-15
at Chinese President Hu Jintao’s invitation. 
•  South Korean Foreign Minister Ban Ki Moon will visit Russia and speak with Russian Foreign
Minister Sergei Lavrov about energy concerns and the six-party talks with North Korea.
•  Legislation regulating international nongovernmental organizations’ activities will go into
effect April 10 in Russia. The controversial law was passed after the “Spy Rock” scandal. 
 Russia: Implications of the ‘Spy Rock’ Scandal
•  Prices for natural gas delivered to Armenia by Russian energy giant Gazprom will increase
from $55 to $110 per 1,000 cubic meters beginning April 10. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
April 10, 2006
Europe
Highlights
•  Airbus investors begin divesting from the company, which could cause more problems for the
already-tense European Union.
 Political Instability in Europe’s Core
•  Italian parliamentary elections begin, and will end April 10.
 Italy: Berlusconi Likely to Glide Around Charges
 Italy: Under the ‘New’ Rules, Berlusconi Skates Toward Victory
•  French student and labor groups continue to hold strikes protesting a controversial labor law. 
The law’s architect, Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin, is increasingly politically sidelined. 
 Political Instability in Europe’s Core
 France: The Dark Horses Ride Forth
•  German Chancellor Angela Merkel hosts a national energy summit with political and business
leaders.
•  Hungary holds its ﬁrst round of parliamentary elections.
•  Turkish Kurds, primarily Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) members, escalate attacks with
a bombing in Istanbul. Eleven PKK members are found with 17 pounds of plastic explosives
and arrested. 
 Turkey: Fighting Internal and External Battles
Upcoming
•  EU ministers will meet April 10-11 to discuss and ﬁnalize sanctions against Belarus, including
banning President Aleksandr Lukashenko and at least 30 other ofﬁcials from entering the
European Union.
 Geopolitical Diary: The Elections in Belarus
 Belarus: No Revolution Blooming this Spring
•  German Unions and private companies in the state of Baden-Wurttemberg will determine
whether to end a public-sector strike that has lasted nearly two months.
 Geopolitical Diary: Merkel’s First Domestic Test
•  Chinese Vice Premier Hui Liangyu will begin a European tour, including visits to Poland, 
the Czech Republic, Albania and France. 
Latin America
Highlights
•  Venezuela begins partnerships with oil companies after negotiating for control of the joint
ventures.
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=264316"] Geopolitical Diary: Venezuela’s Oil Dreams
•  The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) steps up attacks, killing 15 Colombian
soldiers, in an effort to undermine President Alvaro Uribe Velez’s re-election bid.
 Geopolitical Diary: Uribe and the FARC
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
April 10, 2006
•  The Inter-American Development Bank reaches no solution on debt relief during a meeting
in Bolivia.
 Geopolitical Diary: Immigration Debate
•  Peru holds ﬁrst-round presidential elections. A win by Ollanta Humala would mean Peru is
following the recent Andean political trajectory of electing nationalists.
 Peru: The Crossroads of a Presidential Election 
Upcoming
•  Preliminary results from Peru’s April 9 elections will be released. If no candidate wins an
outright majority, the top two will enter a runoff, scheduled for May 7. 
 Peru: The Crossroads of a Presidential Election 
•  Mercosur and/or the International Court of Justice likely will address Uruguay’s complaint
over the resumption of Argentine roadblocks. Protesters oppose construction of two paper
mills along the border.
•  Free trade negotiations will continue between Ecuador and the United States.
•  Ecuadorian President Alfredo Palacio will decide whether to sign a new law that allows the
government to renegotiate contracts with oil companies.
•  Gas exports from Bolivia to Brazil likely will resume, following partial repairs to a damaged
gas pipeline in southeastern Bolivia. Bolivian ofﬁcials estimate complete repairs could take
a month.
Security and Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  The U.S. Embassy in the Venezuelan capital, Caracas, issues a Warden Message warning
U.S. citizens of an outbreak of measles in the city. 
•  Protesters calling for the resignation of Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo clash
with police, who use water cannons and truncheons to break up the march of about 800
people.
•  Property developer Andrew Kissel is found bound and stabbed to death in his Connecticut
home. Kissel was to appear in court on charges of defrauding banks of $6.4 million.
•  An explosion in a Tim Hortons coffee shop in Toronto kills one man. Police describe the incident
as a ﬁre, not a bombing, but say an accelerant was involved. 
•  Nepalese security forces clash with protesters and arrest more than 1,000 during the ﬁrst day
of a nationwide strike protesting King Gyanendra’s government. 
•  Iran launches a rocket-propelled torpedo during its weeklong “Holy Prophet” military exercise
in the Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman. 
 Iran’s New Weapons: More Flash than Force?
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
April 10, 2006
Upcoming 
•  The Prophet Mohammed’s birthday will be celebrated April 11, and demonstrations are
possible in Muslim countries and in European cities with large Muslim communities. 
•  April 13 is Holy Thursday in the Philippines, and militant attacks on religious processions
could occur. 
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Electric utility companies send mixed messages at a U.S. Senate Energy Committee hearing
on a potential cap-and-trade system for carbon emissions.
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=264416"] Utility Companies Want Legislation Passed Now to Eliminate Uncertainty
•  U.S. Ofﬁce of Special Counsel begins an investigation into the Federal Bureau of Prisons’ 
computer-recycling program.
 Special Counsel Launches Investigation into Prison Recycling Program
•  EU Environment Commissioner Stavros Dimas says he could delay approval of applications
to authorize genetically modiﬁed organisms, calling for independent studies of long-term
effects. 
 EU Could Put GMOs on Hold
•  Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy issues a report that warns against arsenic in chicken
and calls for a ban on its use as an antiparasitic.
 Group Warns Against Arsenic in Poultry
•  Sierra Club issues a press release to counter growing support in Congress for offshore drilling.
 Sierra Club Counters Support for Offshore Drilling
•  Greenpeace International says McDonald’s contributes to Amazon rainforest destruction
because its chicken is fed with Brazilian soy.
 Greenpeace Launches Campaign Against Europe’s Soy Supply Chain in Brazil
•  Ceres and Natural Resources Defense Council release a report on electric utility emission
trends from 1990 to 2004.
 Ceres Report Takes Aim at Coal
Upcoming
•  The United Nations Environment Program is sponsoring an Expert Meeting on Avian Inﬂuenza
on April 10-11 in Nairobi, Kenya.
•  The World Bank Institute will host the forum, “Business, NGOs and Development: Strategic
Engagement to Meet the Millennium Development Goals,” on April 10-11 in Washington.
•  The American Soybean Association will hold the Sino-U.S. Trade Conference on April 10
to discuss Chinese importation of U.S. soybeans.
•  The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation will hold a public hearing April 10-11 on the
application for deposit insurance for Wal-Mart Bank.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 7
Global Vantage
April 10, 2006
•  A National Day of Action for Immigrant Justice rally is planned for April 10 in Washington
to oppose House bill H.R.4437.
•  The Third Annual Leadership Summit on Health Disparities will be held by National Minority
Health Month Foundation and the American Medical Association on April 11-12 in Washington.
•  BIO 2006, an annual biotechnology industry conference, and the counter-event Reclaim the
Commons Convergence will conclude April 12 in Chicago.
•  The American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research will hold the discussion, 
“An Economist’s View of Mutual Fund Regulation,” on April 14.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
7
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
