Page 1
Global Vantage
May 8, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  In a blatant snub, Taiwanese President Chen Shui-bian is not allowed a stopover visit in the
United States on his way to Latin America.
 Geopolitical Diary: Diplomatic Snubs and Sino-U.S. Relations
 China, Taiwan, U.S.: Washington’s Strategic Hospitality 
•  Fiji’s weeklong election begins. The heated contest is marked by racial tensions and tensions
between the military and government. 
 Fiji: The Military’s Sway Over the Upcoming Elections
•  Singapore’s ruling People’s Action Party keeps its mandate following elections, but the party
gets 66.6 percent of the vote, down from 75 percent in the 2001 elections.
 Singapore: Pre-Emptive Snap Elections
•  Ernst & Young says China’s four large state-owned banks have an estimated $358 billion
in bad loans, a sum three times higher than China’s ofﬁcial ﬁgures.
•  Labor Day protests in Indonesia continue as protesters ﬁght proposed labor law changes they
say are disadvantageous to workers.
Upcoming
•  The Thai Constitutional Court will rule on the validity of Thailand’s April 2 elections.
 Thailand: A Protracted Political Stalemate
•  Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Wu Dawei will leave May 8 to meet with U.S. Assistant
Secretary of State Christopher Hill to discuss resuming the six-party talks on North Korea.
•  Southeast Asian defense ministers will hold their inaugural meeting May 9 in Malaysia to work
toward an Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) security community; Myanmar will
not attend.
•  South Korean President Roh Moo Hyun will visit Azerbaijan on May 10-12 to discuss energy
cooperation with Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev.
•  The heads of state of several Muslim nations will attend the D8 summit of developing nations
May 8-13 in Bali, Indonesia; two agreements on trade cooperation will be discussed.
•  Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad will visit Indonesia on May 10-13; he is expected
to bring $600 million in investment deals to develop Indonesia’s energy sector.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
May 8, 2006
Middle East
Highlights
•  Iran and Turkey join hands against the Turkish separatist group Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) 
while Iraqi Kurds distance themselves from the PKK and the separatist movement.
 Geopolitical Diary: The Pragmatism of Iraqi Kurds
•  Iran intensiﬁes its rhetoric on the nuclear issue and sends mixed signals on Israel in an effort
to bolster its negotiating position with the United States regarding Iraq.
 Geopolitical Diary: Iran’s Two-Pronged Strategy
•  Progress is made in negotiations involving the Shia, Sunnis, Kurds, Washington and Tehran
regarding the formation of the new Iraqi Cabinet. 
 Iraq: If Not Now, When?
•  Palestinian National Authority President Mahmoud Abbas tries to position himself as the
point-person on the money issue and on the future of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations.
•  Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad sends a letter to U.S. President George W. Bush
proposing new ways to ease tensions between the two countries.
Upcoming
•  The new Iraqi Cabinet will likely be unveiled in the coming week while attacks by jihadists and
other rejectionist Sunni nationalist groups will probably escalate.
•  Hamas will try to counter moves by Palestinian National Authority President Mahmoud Abbas
and seek ways to reciprocate Israeli overtures toward the group.
•  The ﬁve permanent members of the U.N. Security Council plus Germany will engage in intense
negotiations to reach agreement on a U.N. resolution against Iran. 
South Asia
Highlights
•  Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, former Afghan prime minister and leader of a rebel group allied with
the Taliban, airs a video clip in which he pledges allegiance to al Qaeda.
 Afghanistan: A Re-emerging Jihadist Alliance
•  Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh calls for the creation of a pan-Asian free trade zone
with the continent’s major economies, including China, Japan and South Korea. 
•  The separatist umbrella group All Party Hurriyat Conference meets with Indian Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh and calls on militant groups to join the peace talks.
•  Nepal forms a new Cabinet and begins negotiations with King Gyanendra as Maoist rebels
and the Nepalese government agree to a cease-ﬁre.
•  Clashes between the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and the Karuna faction continue as the
Sri Lankan government negotiates with Tamil separatists on transporting rebel commanders to
peace talks.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
May 8, 2006
•  Tensions between Islamabad and Washington emerge after a top U.S. counterterrorism ofﬁcial
says Pakistan is not doing enough in the war on terrorism.
•  An Urdu-language leaﬂet is distributed in parts of Pakistan’s northwestern tribal belt in which
Osama bin Laden supposedly says Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf should be killed.
Upcoming
•  Polls will close for Indian elections in Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Assam states and
Pondicherry territory, giving the central government greater leeway in implementing
unpopular measures.
•  Following visits by Gen. John Abizaid, U.S. Central Command chief, and U.S. Coordinator for
Counterterrorism Henry Crumpton, Pakistani-U.S. counterterrorism operations are expected
along the Pakistani-Afghan border.
•  Afghanistan will likely see a spike in jihadist violence, including suicide bomb attacks, 
following former Prime Minister Gulbuddin Hekmatyar’s announcement that he has joined
hands with al Qaeda.
•  A second key congressional hearing on the U.S.-Indian civilian nuclear deal will be held
May 11; no signiﬁcant progress is expected.
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Thirteen of Kyrgyzstan’s 17 Cabinet ministers submit their resignations, but President
Kurmanbek Bakiyev refuses to give them permission to step down.
•  U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney, speaking at a Baltic and Black Sea states’ summit, says Russia
has a choice between “returning to democracy” and “becoming an enemy.”
 China, Russia, U.S.: Washington’s Strategic Insults
 Part II: Washington’s Moves To Inﬂuence Putin’s Success
•  After visiting the United States, Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev meets with Iranian
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in Baku, Azerbaijan, as part of the Economic Cooperation
Organization summit. 
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=265677"] Azerbaijan: Balancing Tehran and Washington
Upcoming
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin will give his seventh annual address to the Federal Assembly
on May 10. Both Russian parliament houses will attend the speech, which focuses on foreign
policy.
•  South Korean President Roh Moo Hyun will visit Azerbaijan at Azerbaijani President Ilham
Aliyev’s invitation May 10-12. He will be accompanied by several members of his Cabinet.
 Azerbaijan: Balancing Tehran and Washington
•  Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko will pay an ofﬁcial visit to Poland on May 12-13 at the
invitation of President Lech Kaczynski. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
May 8, 2006
•  Ukraine’s parliament will convene May 10 for the ﬁrst time since March elections. The ruling
coalition and prime minister must be chosen within 30 and 60 days respectively. 
 Ukraine: An Orange Reunion?
•  Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov will visit China for a Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) ministerial meeting May 13-15. Participants will discuss preparations for
the June 15 SCO summit.
•  The one-year anniversary of the Andijan clashes in Uzbekistan will be commemorated May 13-14. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Monday, May 16, 2005
Europe
Highlights
•  Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi resigns and President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi announces
that he will not serve a second term, increasing the uncertainty for Romano Prodi’s new government. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Italy’s Election Drama
•  U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney says Russia has used its energy resources to bully its neighbors
and has regressed on its human rights progress; Russia denies the accusations. 
 China, Russia, U.S.: Washington’s Strategic Insults
•  British Prime Minister Tony Blair reshufﬂes his Cabinet, replacing Foreign Secretary Jack Straw
with Margaret Beckett and Home Secretary Charles Clarke with former Defense Secretary
John Reid. 
 EU: Blair’s Budget Surprise
Upcoming
•  France’s Parliament will vote May 9 on an immigration bill written by Interior Minister Nicolas
Sarkozy that will make it more difﬁcult for foreigners to work in France. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Protests and Political Impacts in Europe
•  Both houses of Italy’s Parliament will convene May 8 to begin electing a new president. Three
possible candidates are Giorgio Napolitano, Massimo D’Alema and Giuliano Amato.
 Geopolitical Diary: Italy’s Election Drama
•  Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko will visit Poland on May 12-13 to discuss issues
including bilateral trade, new energy strategies and Euro-Atlantic relations.
•  Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez will visit Pope Benedict XVI in the Vatican on May 11, 
before attending an EU-Latin American summit in Austria and then visiting the United Kingdom.
 Geopolitical Diary: Venezuela’s Oil Dreams
•  German Chancellor Angela Merkel will announce a new foreign policy initiative May 11 that
will seek closer relations with Central Asia and the Caucasus region.
 EU, Russia: An Elusive Energy Partnership
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
May 8, 2006
Latin America
Highlights 
•  Bolivia announces the nationalization of its hydrocarbon industry. La Paz also raises the
minimum wage and voids labor contracts. 
 Bolivia: Nationalized Oil and Gas
 Geopolitical Diary: Bolivia and Leftward Movement in Latin America
•  The presidents of Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia and Venezuela meet to analyze Bolivia’s oil and
gas nationalization and the future of energy agreements. 
 Bolivia’s Energy Nationalization: Opting for Short-Term Gains
•  Uruguayan President Tabare Vazquez discusses seeking closer economic integration with the
United States. 
•  Polls show right-wing candidates leading in Mexico and Colombia ahead of presidential
elections, and nationalist Ollanta Humala in second place in Peru. 
•  Uruguay and Argentina take their conﬂict over paper plants to the International Court of
Justice and the Organization of American States. 
Upcoming
•  Oscar Arias will be inaugurated president of Costa Rica on May 8. Venezuelan President
Hugo Chavez, U.S. ﬁrst lady Laura Bush and Taiwanese President Chen Shui-bian plan
to attend.
•  Rene Preval will be inaugurated as president of Haiti on May 14.
•  The Fourth EU/Latin American/Caribbean summit will take place May 12-13 in Vienna, 
Austria, focusing on trade and cooperation. Most Latin American and European heads of state
are scheduled to attend.
•  Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez will visit Rome on May 11, where he will meet with Pope
Benedict XVI. He will then visit Austria and the United Kingdom.
Security and Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  Philippine police block protesters, calling for the removal of President Gloria Macapagal
Arroyo, from reaching the presidential palace in Manila and the Mendiola Bridge. 
•  An estimated 50,000 to 100,000 people protest the government’s proposed labor reforms
in Jakarta, Indonesia. 
•  An Egyptian police ofﬁcer and six suspects are killed during a manhunt following the resort
bombings in Dahab, Egypt. 
 The Latest Trends in Jihadist Attacks
•  A land mine laid by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) kills one Turkish soldier and wounds
another taking part in an operation against the PKK in Turkey’s Hakkari province. 
 Turkey: As Tensions Escalate, Istanbul Security is Key
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
May 8, 2006
•  India sends hundreds of additional troops to the Jammu region of Indian-controlled Kashmir
following the killing of more than 30 Hindus by Islamist militants in Udhampur and Doda districts. 
•  Russia’s North Ossetia region is placed on alert after authorities receive intelligence on
possible terrorist attacks. 
•  Pakistani security forces arrest two militants accused of orchestrating a March suicide attack
that killed a U.S. diplomat and three other people at the U.S. Consulate in Karachi. 
 The U.S. Consulate Bombing in Pakistan: Getting Around Security Measures
•  Indian police clash in Shanir Akhra with Bangladeshi rioters who are protesting scarce water
and power supplies. 
•  Indian police increase security around the Mata Vaishno Devi shrine in Jammu in response
to a bomb threat.
Upcoming
•  While votes are counted following legislative elections in India’s West Bengal and Kerala
states and Pondicherry territory, minor clashes could occur between activists from rival political
parties.
•  As they have in years past, Chechen militants could attack Russian civilian and government
targets May 9 during Victory Day, which commemorates the end of World War II. 
•  Demonstrations might be staged to mark the May 13 anniversary of the shooting of student
demonstrators at Triskati University in Jakarta by Indonesian security forces in 1998.
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Amnesty International and U.N. Special Representative John Ruggie exchange letters
regarding Ruggie’s interim report on business and human rights.
 No Signiﬁcant Battle over Killing the U.N. Norms
•  Greenpeace International issues a new report on the status of the EU REACH chemical
regulations, reﬂecting growing doubt that they will meet its expectations.
 Greenpeace Releases Reports on REACH Status
•  National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences announces plans to expand its work
on toxicogenomics. Environmental health activists could use this as a tool for campaigns against
companies.
 NIEHS Plan Emphasizes Toxicogenomics
•  Center for American Progress holds a panel discussion about religious perspectives on
environmental issues.
 Center for American Progress Hosts Panel on Religion and Climate Change
•  Consumers Union and Consumer Federation of America release a report accusing major oil
companies of anti-competitive practices resulting in high gasoline prices.
 Consumer Advocates Target Oil Companies
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 7
Global Vantage
May 8, 2006
•  Seventeen shareholder activist groups announce the formation of the Investor Environmental
Health Network, a coalition seeking to change companies’ chemical-use policies.
 Shareholder Activists Groups Form Toxics Coalition
•  Natural Resources Defense Council highlights additional support for Democratic Sen. Jeff
Bingaman’s support for oil-saving legislation. 
 Energy Bill Gains Momentum
Upcoming
•  University of Maryland is sponsoring Sustainable Energy Forum 2006, May 7-9 in Washington, 
on “the implications of global oil production constraints for climate end economic stability.”
•  Americans for Democratic Action will hold a brieﬁng titled “Workers Under Siege: Protecting
Human Rights with the Employee Free Choice Act,” on May 8 in Washington.
•  Ethical Corporation will host a conference titled “Business and NGO Partnerships” on
May 9-10 in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
•  The Day of Business and Industry will focus on sustainable energy May 9 in New York at the
14th Session of the U.N. Commission on Sustainable Development.
•  The U.S. Senate Commerce, Science & Transportation Committee’s Surface Transportation and
Merchant Marine Subcommittee will hold hearings May 9 to examine Corporate Average Fuel
Economy standards. 
•  John Ruggie, U.N. special representative on business and human rights, has invited
nongovernmental organizations to a roundtable May 10 in New York and by videoconference
in Washington.
•  The Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources will hold hearings May 11 on the
Yucca Mountain Repository Project at the Ofﬁce of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management. •  May 11 will be the ﬁrst Endangered Species Day, proclaimed by the U.S. Senate.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
7
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
