Page 1
Global Vantage
May 1, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  Chinese President Hu Jintao tours Africa and signs agreements in Nigeria and Kenya giving
China National Offshore Oil Corp. rights to explore for oil. Militants detonate a car bomb
as a warning to Chinese investors.
•  Thailand’s Administrative Court cancels scheduled by-elections and says the April 2 election
could be ruled unconstitutional. Thai King Bhumibol Adulyadej says the courts need to solve the
post-election political impasse.
 Thailand: A Protracted Political Stalemate
•  A rare public debate between Singapore’s ruling People’s Action Party and the opposition
Singapore Democratic Party paves the way for more competition in upcoming elections.
 Singapore: Pre-Emptive Snap Elections
•  The Communist Party of Vietnam re-elects General Secretary Nong Duc Manh, while Vietnam’s
president and prime minister plan to resign.
 Vietnam: The Party Congress Tackles Corruption
•  South Korean President Roh Moo Hyun reasserts Korea’s claim over the disputed islets known
to Koreans as Dokdo, ending “silent diplomacy” over the matter with Japan.
 South Korea: Wagging the Dokdo Dog
•  Indonesian police ﬁnd explosives similar to those used in the Bali bombings in central Java
following an unsuccessful attempt to capture Islamist militant Noordin Mohammad Top.
Upcoming
•  The Philippines and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front separatist group will hold peace
negotiations this week.
 Philippines: Coming to Terms with the MILF
•  Solomon Islands Commerce Minister Manasseh Sogavare is expected to be sworn in as prime
minister May 1. He will likely reverse the country’s recognition of Taiwan in favor of mainland 
China.
 China, Taiwan: ‘Checkbook Diplomacy’ in the Islands 
•  Fiji’s military is preparing for potential rioting after hotly contested elections that begin May 6.
•  Singapore will hold snap elections May 6 to bolster the ruling party’s mandate as opposition
groups become more vocal.
 Singapore: Pre-Emptive Snap Elections
•  The Philippines prepares for massive Labor Day rallies and protests May 1. 
 Philippines: Is the ‘Cha-Cha’ Arroyo’s Last Dance?
•  Indonesia’s police force will be on full alert during Labor Day rallies May 1.
•  China’s transportation networks will be congested as most Chinese take off work for the
weeklong celebration that begins May 1, Labor Day.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
May 1, 2006
Middle East and South Asia
Highlights
•  Al Qaeda’s branch in Egypt launches a triple bombing attack in a tourist resort in the Sinai
Peninsula. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Al Qaeda’s Quest for Inﬂuence
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=265195"] Egypt: The Strengthening Jihadist Wave
•  A police raid targeting al Qaeda militants in Turkey reveals a jihadist strategy to use Kurdish
militant activities as a cover for al Qaeda operations. 
 Turkey: The Reappearance of al Qaeda
•  Al Qaeda in Iraq leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi issues his ﬁrst videotaped message, 
asserting his jihadist credentials.
 Iraq: Al-Zarqawi’s TV Debut
 Geopolitical Diary: Al-Zarqawi On The Small Screen
•  Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf reshufﬂes the Cabinet while Islamabad’s deputy
foreign minister meets with a U.S. representative as part of the U.S.-Pakistani strategic dialogue. 
•  A mysterious nighttime bombing and other violence in Manama, Bahrain, deliver a political message.
 Bahrain: An Explosion in Manama
 Geopolitical Diary: A Push for Shiite Rule in Bahrain?
•  The full text of Osama bin Laden’s latest audio communiqué includes a direct threat to India.
 India: Bin Laden’s Call to Kashmir’s Militants
•  Nepal comes out of a 19-day lockdown as an opposition alliance of political parties and
Maoist rebels succeeds in forcing the king to reinstate parliament. 
 Nepal: While Maoists Wait, India Plans Containment
•  Deputy al Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri claims in a video communiqué that insurgents
in Iraq have “broken the back” of the United States, and calls on Pakistanis to oust President
Gen. Pervez Musharraf.
•  Iraqi President Jalal Talabani says Washington and Baghdad are negotiating with several
Sunni insurgents groups and that he hopes the groups will agree to end the insurgency.
Upcoming
•  Iran will remain deﬁant in its nuclear showdown with the West, although no substantive
measures will be taken against Tehran as Washington moves forward in efforts to stabilize
Iraq. 
•  Iraq’s four main parliamentary blocs will ﬁnalize their negotiations, and a Cabinet could be
unveiled by the end of the week.
•  Following a visit to Iraq by U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and U.S. Secretary of
Defense Donald Rumsfeld, Sunni leaders could take a tougher stance against the insurgency.
•  After the installation of a new Cabinet, the government of Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert
will move into high gear in dealing with the Hamas-led Palestinian National Authority. 
 Israel, Palestinian Territories: The Back Channel to Hamas
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
May 1, 2006
•  Tensions between the Hamas-led Cabinet and the Fatah-dominated presidency in the
Palestinian National Authority over power-sharing and Hamas’ refusal to moderate its stance
toward Israel likely will continue.
•  Clashes between Turkish security forces and Kurdish separatist groups along the Turkey-Iraq
border will intensify. 
•  Sporadic attacks by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam against security forces in northern
and eastern Sri Lanka will continue but will not provoke major government retaliation. 
 Sri Lanka: The Karuna Wildcard in Peace Talks
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  RosUkrEnergo’s anonymous holders, represented by Austrian company Raiffeisen Investment, 
are revealed to be Ukrainian businessmen Dmitry Firtash and Ivan Fursin, who own 45 percent
and 5 percent respectively.
 Russia: Winter’s Chilling Effects on EU’s Attitude Toward Gazprom
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin and German Chancellor Angela Merkel meet in the Siberian
city of Tomsk. Several energy, banking and transportation agreements are concluded at the
summit.
 EU, Russia: An Elusive Energy Partnership
•  Construction begins on the ﬁrst leg of Russia’s East Siberia-Paciﬁc Ocean pipeline after
President Vladimir Putin orders the pipeline moved at least 25 miles away from Lake Baikal.
 Russia: Pipeline Monopolies Stymie Infrastructure Improvement
•  Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev and U.S. President George W. Bush meet and discuss
regional cooperation and energy. Aliyev previously said Azerbaijan will not be used
in attacks on Iran.
 Azerbaijan: A Pipeline to Proﬁts and Territorial Tension
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin meets his Belarusian counterpart Aleksandr Lukashenko
in St. Petersburg. The two discuss the economic and energy issues between their countries.
 Belarus: No Revolution Blooming this Spring
•  Kyrgyz President Kurmanbek Bakiyev and Russian President Vladimir Putin meet during
Bakiyev’s ﬁrst ofﬁcial visit to Moscow. Putin says Russia will reinforce its military base at
Kant, Kyrgyzstan. 
 Central Asia, U.S.: Choosing the Russian Suitor
Upcoming
•  Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad will attend the May 4-5 summit of the Economic
Cooperation Organization in Azerbaijan’s capital of Baku.
•  Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan will visit Azerbaijan on May 5. He will tour
the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline.
 Azerbaijan: A Pipeline to Proﬁts and Territorial Tension
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
May 1, 2006
•  Lithuania will host U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney and presidents from Ukraine, Moldova, 
Bulgaria, Romania, Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijan for the May 2-5 Black Sea and Baltic
states summit.
•  Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Kislyak will meet U.S., U.K., French, German and
Chinese representatives May 2 in Paris to discuss the Iranian nuclear issue.
 Russia, Iran: Moscow Gets Sidelined in Nuclear Discussions
•  Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov will participate in an informal session of the Russia-
NATO Council in Soﬁa, Bulgaria, on May 3-4. Ukraine’s NATO aspirations will be on the agenda.
 Geopolitical Diary: Ukraine Elections and an Orange Reversal?
Europe
Highlights
•  British Prime Minister Tony Blair declines to block a bid by Russian energy giant Gazprom for
the United Kingdom’s largest energy supplier, Centrica. 
 EU: Protectionism Versus Progress at the EU Summit
•  EU policymakers begin to discuss the future of energy supplies after Gazprom threatens to sell
its natural gas elsewhere unless it is allowed to expand into European distribution and retail. 
 Europe: Resisting Assimilation
•  German Chancellor Angela Merkel meets with Russian President Vladimir Putin, with talk
of energy integration high on the agenda. Poland’s defense minister likens the deal struck
to the 1939 Molotov-Rippentrop Pact.
 EU, Russia: An Elusive Energy Partnership
•  The Italian Parliament convenes for the ﬁrst time since elections; Romano Prodi’s center-left
coalition secures elections of its candidates as president of the parliament’s two houses after
multiple rounds of voting.
 Geopolitical Diary: Italy’s Election Drama
•  The European Union warns Serbia that it will cut off EU entry negotiations if war-crimes
fugitive Ratko Mladic is not turned over to face trial by April 30. 
 Serbia after Milosevic
Upcoming
•  Finland, Portugal and Spain will fully open their labor markets May 1 to the 10 EU states that
joined the union in 2004.
•  Italy’s Parliament must announce its ﬁnal decision on parliamentary groups and election whips
by May 2.
 Geopolitical Diary: Italy’s Election Drama
•  German Chancellor Angela Merkel will meet with U.S. President George W. Bush on May 3. 
•  The new Polish coalition government will ofﬁcially decide on Cabinet positions by May 5. 
 Poland’s New Twin Pillars and the Policy Changes to Come
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
May 1, 2006
•  German Chancellor Angela Merkel forces her Cabinet ministers to give up their May 1
holiday to hold emergency coalition talks following public clashes between the Christian
Democrats and the Social Democrats.
 Germany: Breaking Up in Berlin?
Latin America
Highlights 
•  Panama’s government announces a plan to widen the Panama Canal. 
•  The presidents of Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela meet to plan a South American natural gas
pipeline and discuss the status of the Mercosur trading bloc. 
 The South American Pipeline: Going Ahead Despite the Cost?
•  The Mexican presidential race tightens as candidates hold their ﬁrst debate.
•  With 99 percent of the votes counted from Peru’s April 9 presidential election, former
President Alan Garcia is set to face nationalist Ollanta Humala in a runoff.
 Peru: Heading to a Presidential Runoff
•  Violence resumes in Colombia after the sister of a former president is slain. 
 Colombia: A Slaying Threatens the President’s Re-Election
•  Conﬂict ﬂares between Venezuela’s government and the Roman Catholic Church after a priest 
is found dead in a Caracas hotel room. 
Upcoming
•  Some U.S. immigrants plan a one-day work boycott May 1 to protest proposed immigration
reforms. Despite ﬁssures in the boycott leadership, disruptions are expected in many industries
and services.
 Change to Win and the Immigration Debate
•  Union rallies and demonstrations are expected in most Latin American countries May 1 as part
of Labor Day. Such demonstrations have sometimes become violent.
•  Uruguayan President Tabare Vazquez will meet with U.S. President George W. Bush in
Washington on May 1 to discuss potential trade and investment agreements between
the two countries.
Security and Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  A videotape featuring al Qaeda in Iraq leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi is released, suggesting
an attempt to upstage Osama bin Laden and garner more support for the Iraq insurgency. 
 Iraq: Al-Zarqawi’s TV Debut
•  Militants attack the Sinai tourist resort at Dahab, killing at least 23 people. The Egyptian
government blames al Qaeda’s node in Egypt.
 Egypt: The Strengthening Jihadist Wave
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
May 1, 2006
•  Students riot in Athens, Greece, to protest U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice’s visit. 
Police ﬁre tear gas to disperse the crowds before protesters can enter Syntagma Square. 
•  A rare wave of violence hits Manama, the capital of Bahrain.
 Bahrain: An Explosion in Manama
 Geopolitical Diary: A Push for Shiite Rule in Bahrain?
•  Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta militants detonate a car bomb near
a reﬁnery in southern Nigeria, destroying ﬁve tanker trucks. The group calls the attack
a warning to foreign oil companies. 
•  Philippine police are on alert for possible attacks by the Abu Sayyaf Group during Labor
Day celebrations. In addition, anti-Arroyo demonstrations are planned for Manila during the
holiday weekend. 
Upcoming
•  An immigrant labor strike is planned for May 1 in the United States; advocates call for striking
immigrants to “paralyze” major U.S. cities.
•  Independent port truckers in Long Beach near Los Angeles also plan a May 1 strike in
conjunction with the U.S. immigrant work stoppage. 
•  Legislative elections May 3 and May 8 in India’s West Bengal and Kerala states and
Pondicherry territory could see minor clashes between activists from rival political parties. 
•  More ﬁghting can be expected in Sri Lanka between the military and the Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Eelam following a suicide bombing April 25. 
 Sri Lanka: The Karuna Wildcard in Peace Talks
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Larry Cox becomes president of Amnesty International USA at its annual meeting.
 Cox Likely to Extend Amnesty’s Role as Corporate Pressure Group
•  U.N. Environment Program Finance Initiative and U.N. Global Compact launch Principles for
Responsible Investment, a set of guidelines for institutional investors that are likely to impact
pension fund investing.
 Principles for Responsible Investment Declares CSR Issues Relevant to Financial Risk
•  3M agrees to pay a $1.5 million ﬁne to the Environmental Protection Agency over Teﬂon and
Scotchguard components.
 3M Agrees to $1.5 Million Fine
•  Social Investment Forum reports that shareholder activism is on the rise.
 Shareholder Activism on the Rise
•  Via Campesina issues a “Manifesto of the Americas: In Defense of Nature and Biological and
Cultural Diversity,” decrying alleged exploitation by capitalism, the U.S. government and
transnational corporations.
 Manifesto Connects American Imperialism and Loss of Biodiversity
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 7
Global Vantage
May 1, 2006
•  The Center for American Progress releases a report examining security measures chemical
plants have taken to mitigate the effects of terrorist attacks.
 Center for American Progress Releases Chemical Security Report
•  A summary of proceedings is released for U.N. Special Representative John Ruggie’s ﬁrst
regional consultation on human rights and transnational corporations.
 Consultation Tackles Difﬁculties of Doing Business in Disordered Countries
•  Breast Cancer Action urges supporters to promote shareholder resolutions examining Avon’s
cosmetics ingredients and fundraising practices.
 Activists Pressure Avon on Chemicals, Fundraising
Upcoming
•  Hispanic immigrants and sympathizers May 1 will celebrate “A Day without an Immigrant,”
with activity ranging from demonstrations to strikes.
•  Truckers and taxicab drivers will strike May 1 and attempt to shut down the Los Angeles and
Long Beach ports as well as Los Angeles International Airport.
•  The 14th session of the U.N. Commission on Sustainable Development will meet at U.N. 
headquarters May 1-12.
•  The second meeting of parties to the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants
will take place May 1-5, examining the implementation, monitoring and ﬁnancing of the
agreement’s programs.
•  The “Group of 77” and China, led by South Africa, could force a vote rejecting
U.N. Secretary-General Koﬁ Annan’s proposed redistribution of U.N. budget authority -- key
to larger reform.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
7
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
