Page 1
Global Vantage
May 15, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  The Indonesian government decides to pardon former President Suharto, but delays the
decision a day later, probably as a result of shaken investor conﬁdence. 
 Indonesia: Yudhoyono’s Pardon Flip-Flop
•  Fiji’s general election heats up as alleged election scandals are reported daily and former
Prime Minister Sitiveni Rabuka is charged with mutiny.
•  Thailand’s election chief allegedly ﬂees the country as an investigation into election fraud
intensiﬁes.
•  Conﬂicting reports come from Australia regarding whether it will provide India with uranium; 
Australian Prime Minister John Howard says he will seek more details on the U.S.-Indian
nuclear deal.
•  South Korean President Roh Moo Hyun signs a preliminary deal in Azerbaijan for a stake in
Azerbaijan’s Inam oil ﬁeld.
•  The U.S. Treasury Department decides not to brand China a “currency manipulator,” inciting
Congress to revisit tough rhetoric on punitive bills targeting China.
Upcoming
•  Australian Prime Minister John Howard will discuss the U.S.-Indian nuclear deal and the future
of Iraq on May 15 during a visit to the White House.
 Australia: A New Uranium Deal Done?
•  Japan and China plan to discuss disputed resources and territory in the East China Sea
on May 18; they will probably not reach a compromise.
 China, Japan: Disputing Resources Under the Sea
•  U.N. Secretary-General Koﬁ Annan will visit Asian leaders this week to promote U.N. reforms
that developing countries have blocked.
•  The results of Fiji’s elections are expected to be announced May 18; trouble will ensue no
matter the outcome because of Fiji’s racialized politics.
 Fiji: The Military’s Sway Over the Upcoming Elections
•  Investigations will continue into corruption in Thailand’s April 2 elections, focusing on Thai Prime
Minister Thaksin Shinawatra and the ruling Thai Rak Thai party.
 Thailand: Still Hope for Thai Rak Thai Party
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
May 15, 2006
Middle East
Highlights
•  Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad sends a letter to U.S. President George W. Bush
signaling that Tehran wants détente with Washington.
 Geopolitical Diary: The Iranian Letter
•  Hamas and Fatah conclude a preliminary agreement to resolve their differences and move
toward negotiations with Israel.
 PNA: Agreement With Fatah, Discord Within Hamas
•  Some progress is made among the four major Iraqi parliamentary blocs over the composition
of the Cabinet, but intra-Shiite disagreements over the Oil Ministry portfolio persist.
•  As the agreed-upon Palestinian point-person for international negotiations, Palestinian
National Authority (PNA) President Mahmoud Abbas is visiting Russia to receive substantial
backing for the PNA.
Upcoming
•  The Bush administration is expected to respond to Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s
letter with a reciprocal message that suggests a certain level of accommodation.
•  The Iraqi Cabinet should be ﬁnalized by the end of the week, during which attacks by jihadists
and rejectionist Sunni nationalists will likely increase.
•  Hamas will try to hide the split between its exiled party leadership in Syria and its leadership
in the Palestinian territories while it hammers out its pact with Fatah.
•  Fatah, Jordan and Israel will continue their efforts to drive a wedge between the two
leaderships of Hamas.
 PNA: Agreement With Fatah, Discord Within Hamas
•  EU foreign ministers will meet in Brussels, Belgium, on May 15 to discuss a possible nuclear
deal for Iran; no groundbreaking offer is expected to emerge from the exercise.
•  A meeting of the U.N. Security Council scheduled for May 19 will produce no major
developments regarding Iran’s nuclear program. 
•  Arab states in the Persian Gulf region will issue statements signaling their apprehension over
bilateral movement by the United States and Iran.
South Asia
Highlights
•  Indian security forces launch a series of raids against Lashkar-e-Taiba Islamist militants and
uncover plans for large-scale attacks in major Indian cities. 
 India: Attacks Averted -- at Least Temporarily
•  Assembly elections in the Indian states of West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Assam and the
Union Territory of Pondicherry give the communist parties a boost in power. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
May 15, 2006
•  Pakistan’s main opposition parties gear up to oust Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf.
 Pakistan: The Opposition Looks Abroad
•  A major sea battle breaks out between the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam and the
Sri Lankan army following a Tiger attack against a naval convoy. 
Upcoming
•  Though Indian security forces have been successful in rolling up Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) cells, 
there is growing evidence that a LeT attack in India is imminent.
•  Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf will attempt to undercut the opposition’s campaign
by reasserting his democratic credentials and working behind the scenes. 
 Pakistan: Musharraf’s Best Days Likely Behind Him
•  Emboldened by their election wins, India’s leftist parties will bolster their rhetoric against the
ruling Congress Party but will not pose a major threat to the ruling alliance. 
•  Pakistani Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz will travel to Greece, Libya, Morocco and Egypt on
May 15-19 to expand Pakistan’s economic ties.
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  South Korean President Roh Moo Hyun meets with Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev in
Azerbaijan. The two sign bilateral agreements, including a memorandum of understanding
on energy-resources cooperation. 
 Azerbaijan: Balancing Tehran and Washington
 Azerbaijan: A Pipeline to Proﬁts and Territorial Tension
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin delivers his annual address to the Federal Assembly. 
He discusses Russia’s demographic problems and corruption, and enigmatically responds
to U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney’s statements.
 Geopolitical Diary: Putin’s State of the State
 China, Russia, U.S.: Washington’s Strategic Insults
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin dismisses several ofﬁcials from the Federal Security Service
and the Federal Customs Service in an apparent anti-corruption shakeup. 
•  Uzbek President Islam Karimov and Russian President Vladimir Putin hold a working visit
in Sochi, Russia. They discuss trade and economic cooperation and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization’s performance.
 Central Asia, U.S.: Choosing the Russian Suitor
•  As the agreed-upon Palestinian point-person for international negotiations, Palestinian
National Authority (PNA) President Mahmoud Abbas is visiting Russia to receive substantial
backing for the PNA.
 The Middle East and Russia’s New Game
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
May 15, 2006
Upcoming
•  A delegation from Colombia will visit Moscow on May 16, where Russian negotiators hope
to sign the protocols concluding the bilateral World Trade Organization accession treaty. 
 Russia: WTO Accession Still Not a Done Deal -- From Any Point of View
•  Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov will visit China beginning May 15 for a session of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization council of foreign ministers. 
 SCO: A New Power Center Developing
•  Russia’s Gazprom will decide May 18 whether to establish the Karachaganak joint venture
with Kazakhstan. The venture could process Kazakh natural gas in Russia, but China is an
alternative.
 Circumventing the Bear 
•  France will send three Mirage ﬁghters to Tajikistan to support operations in Afghanistan. 
The aircraft and personnel will be in Tajikistan’s capital, Dushanbe, from May 19 until early
autumn.
Latin America
Highlights
•  The EU-Latin American summit is held in Vienna, Austria.
 EU, Latin America: Summit, Or Pique?
•  Venezuela announces that it will introduce a new tax for “oil exploration,” and suggests taking
majority share in heavy oil projects.
•  Brazil’s high-level delegation visits Bolivia to negotiate gas prices and terms of Bolivia’s
nationalization decree.
•  Former Peruvian President Alan Garcia increases his lead in polls over nationalist Ollanta
Humala, three weeks before the presidential runoff election.
 Peru: Heading to a Presidential Runoff
•  The Bolivian government announces that it is planning to unveil a comprehensive land reform
plan.
 Bolivia’s Energy Nationalization: Opting for Short-Term Gains
•  The International Court of Justice in The Hague sets dates for hearings on the Argentina/Uruguay
paper mills conﬂict.
Upcoming 
•  The presidents of Bolivia and Venezuela will meet May 17 to sign cooperation agreements
between the two countries’ state oil companies, including exploration in other areas.
•  Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez will visit Libya and Algeria to talk about investment and
cooperation projects in oil and gas.
•  Government services are expected to resume in Puerto Rico on May 15 after more than
10 days of government shutdown caused by a budgetary crisis. 
•  The Caracas, Venezuela, trade fair, at which more than 900 Latin American companies are
supposed to have representatives, will be held May 16-19.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
May 15, 2006
Europe
Highlights
•  The European Union announces that the eurozone’s economy expanded by 0.6 percent in the
ﬁrst quarter 2006 -- the best performance in years, but still roughly half the U.S. rate.
 EU: The Downward Spiral
•  A European-Latin American summit ends in mild disarray, with the only clear venue for future
cooperation a potential EU-Central American free trade agreement.
 EU, Latin America: Summit, Or Pique?
•  German Chancellor Angela Merkel says she will reopen debate on the European constitution
in 2007, when Germany holds the EU presidency; European Commission President Jose
Manuel Durao Barroso favors waiting until 2008. 
 EU: Rejections and Questions
•  Poland’s new government, a coalition between the ruling Law and Justice Party, far-right
League of Polish Families and far left Self-Defense Party, announces its full Cabinet.
Upcoming
•  The European Union will vote May 16 on Romania and Bulgaria’s accession bids, though the
EU Commission has leaked that the bids could be delayed. 
 EU: The Clash of Tenuous Accession Bids and French Politics
•  French political instability will crescendo as Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin’s role in
efforts to slander Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy is investigated, heightening the likelihood
of de Villepin’s resignation. 
 France: The Demise of a Youth Labor Law -- and a Prime Minister
•  Montenegro will vote May 21 on its referendum for independence from Serbia.
 Serbia After Milosevic
Security and Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  During a manhunt for the Dahab bombers, Egyptian police kill militant leader Nasser Khamis
al-Mallahi in the northern Egyptian town of El Arish, close to the Gaza border. 
•  Maoist rebels abduct nine people, including ﬁve policemen, from Nepal’s Nawalparasi and
Rautahat districts. At least 13 soldiers, policemen and civilians have been kidnapped by the
rebels since February. 
•  European intelligence agencies warn Morocco of possible terrorist attacks against government
and civilian targets. 
 The Moroccan-European Militant Connection
•  An American working for the U.S. petroleum equipment company Baker Hughes is gunned
down and three employees of the Italian oil company Saipem are abducted in Port Harcourt, 
Nigeria. 
 Violence in Nigeria: No Shortage of Usual Suspects
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
May 15, 2006
•  New Delhi police arrest two jihadists linked to Lashkar-e-Taiba in New Delhi, India, uncovering
plans to bomb several major sites in India. 
 India: Attacks Averted -- at Least Temporarily
•  Storm alerts are posted for the Philippine islands of Samar, Masbate, Leyte and Biliran as
well as parts of Mindanao as tropical storm Chanchu heads toward the islands. 
Upcoming
•  The Second Asia-Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation E-Commerce Business Alliance Forum will be
held May 18-19 in Qingdao, China. Security in the city will be tight. 
•  Demonstrations could occur in Jakarta, Indonesia, on May 21, the eighth anniversary of the
resignation of Indonesian President Suharto.
•  The World Economic Forum on the Middle East will be held May 20-22 in the Egyptian resort
of Sharm el-Sheikh, site of a deadly jihadist bombing in July 2005. 
 Assessing Risks in the Sinai
•  Violence could resume in Mindanao, the Philippines, where units of the Armed Forces of the
Philippines and the New People’s Army are reportedly squaring off.
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Environmental Working Group releases a new study showing that the body burdens of
industrial chemicals transfer through generations of women.
 EWG Releases New Body Burden Report
•  WWF International and Center for International Environmental Law issue a report that
predicts an overhaul of U.S. federal chemicals regulation. 
 Groups Predict Federal Chemicals Policy Reform
•  Former U.S. Vice President Al Gore organizes the Alliance for Climate Protection, a broad
coalition seeking to launch ad campaigns to educate the public on climate-change issues.
 Gore Organizes Broad Climate Change Coalition
•  NASDAQ launches NASDAQ Clean Edge U.S. Index for “clean energy” investing.
 Index Suggests Renewable Energy is Coming of Age
•  Environmental Entrepreneurs and Cleantech Venture Network release a report titled
“Creating Cleantech Clusters: How Innovation and Investment Can Promote Job Growth and
a Healthy Environment.”
 States Encouraged to Compete for Best Cleantech Investment Environment
•  Natural Resources Defense Council draws attention to a House resolution on climate change, 
claiming momentum is growing for federal carbon cap legislation.
 NRDC Highlights House Climate Change Resolution
•  China drops its plan to calculate a “green” gross domestic product.
 Green GDP Would Have Pitted Environmental Concerns Against Business as Usual
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 7
Global Vantage
May 15, 2006
•  International Federation for Human Rights publishes a report on the “human rights effects” 
of the North American Free Trade Agreement 10 years on.
 Report Hides Critique of Mexican Labor Policy
Upcoming
•  The U.S. Senate will resume debate on a stalled immigration bill May 15, and President
George W. Bush will deliver a primetime televised speech on immigration and border security.
•  U.S. President George W. Bush will meet with the CEOs of Ford Motor Co., General Motors
and Daimler-Chrysler on May 18.
•  National representatives from around the world will meet for a dialogue on climate change
May 15-16 in Bonn, Germany; the event is hosted by the U.N. Climate Change Secretariat.
•  Carnegie Endowment for International Peace on May 15 will hold a discussion, “Curing the Oil
Addiction: Petropolitics and the Threat to Global Security.”
•  The founders of Wikipedia and Apache will speak May 15-17 at “FM 10 Openness: Code, 
Science and Content,” a conference on Internet openness hosted by First Monday.
•  International energy representatives will examine the sustainability implications of energy
decentralization for China at the Second International Combined Heat and Power and
Decentralized Energy Conference on May 16-17.
•  National Environmental Justice Training Collaborative, a loose network of NGOs associated
with the Environmental Protection Agency, will hold a “Fundamentals of Environmental Justice” 
workshop on May 18.
•  The University of Massachusetts’ Lowell Center for Sustainable Development will host its ﬁrst
Chemicals Policy Training session May 18 to prepare businesses for stricter chemicals regulation.
•  Beyond Pesticides’ 25th Anniversary Gala Dinner and 24th National Pesticide Forum will be
held May 18-20.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
7
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
