Page 1
Global Vantage
June 12, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  China posts a record trade surplus of $12 billion for May; another report says China’s
economy is overheating, with a surge in new loans over the past year.
 An Inﬂection Point In China’s Banking Problem
•  Taiwanese President Chen Shui-bian faces a recall vote after members of Taiwan’s opposition
parties begin the recall process; the move is meant to pressure Chen to resign.
 Taiwan: Chen’s Choices
•  East Timorese Defense Minister Jose Ramos-Horta meets rebel leader Maj. Alfredo Reinaldo
to discuss resolving violence in East Timor; Reinaldo does not want Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri
involved.
 East Timor: Australia Steps In
•  The Japanese government decides to resume aid loans to China after having suspended the
loans in March.
 Japan: Reaching out to China -- and to Japanese Voters
•  Japan’s Cabinet endorses a bill to raise the Japanese Defense Agency to a full-ﬂedged
ministry, highlighting the growing role of the military.
Upcoming
•  Chinese President Hu Jintao will visit Kazakhstan on June 17 to attend the Conference on
Interaction and Conﬁdence-Building Measures in Asia, which will address Asian security.
•  Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao will visit seven African countries beginning June 17, including
Angola, China’s second-largest oil supplier, and the Republic of the Congo, its sixth-largest
oil supplier.
•  The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) will meet June 15 in Shanghai, China; 
presidents from all SCO member states will attend. 
•  Chinese President Hu Jintao will discuss the Iranian nuclear issue with Iranian President
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad on the sidelines of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization conference.
•  Philippine Independence Day on June 12 will be marked by anti-government protests.
•  U.S.-Malaysian free trade agreement negotiations begin June 12; entry into Malaysia’s
automotive sector will be the key issue.
•  The Bank of China plans to publish June 12 the prospectus for its domestic initial public
offering (IPO) after opening its June 1 IPO on the Hong Kong stock exchange.
•  Taiwan’s parliament will hold a special session June 13 to discuss a recall motion against
President Chen Shui-bian. The opposition will need to garner 36 independent or ruling party
politicians to agree with the recall to get the two-thirds necessary for a recall to succeed.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
June 12, 2006
Middle East
Highlights
•  Al Qaeda in Iraq leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi is killed in a U.S. airstrike near Baqubah, Iraq. 
Sheik Abdul Rahman, his spiritual leader, also is killed in the attack.
 Geopolitical Diary: Al-Zarqawi and the Tipping Point
 Iraq: Al-Zarqawi -- The Sunnis Deliver?
•  The Iraqi Parliament approves three new security ministers as part of a deal that likely
facilitated the elimination of al Qaeda in Iraq leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi.
 Iraq: Security Appointments and Continuing Instability
•  The United States and Iran issue conciliatory statements on the nuclear issue, spurred by Iraqi
agreement on the new security ministers.
 Geopolitical Diary: Awaiting Next Moves by Iraq and Iran
•  The Palestinian Fatah party puts Islamist movement Hamas on the defensive with a national
statehood referendum recognizing Israel, while Israeli attacks against Palestinians leads the
ruling radical Islamist movement to declare the end of the truce.
 Israel, PNA: New Attacks for Domestic Audiences?
Upcoming
•  The deal over Iraq’s top security positions could lead to a noticeable decline in the overall
level of violence in the country.
 Geopolitical Diary: What Next for Iraq?
•  Palestinian militant groups will continue rocket attacks and suicide bombings against Israel
as Fatah corners Hamas on the national referendum.
•  Iran will continue its rhetoric on the nuclear issue while crafting a response to the incentives
package offered by the permanent members of the U.N. Security Council and Germany.
•  The death of al Qaeda in Iraq leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi could lead to announcements
from al Qaeda’s apex leadership and reprisal attacks.
South Asia
Highlights
•  India test-ﬁres its Prithvi-1 surface-to-surface missile after the Indian Defense Ministry denies
Stratfor’s assessment that U.S. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Peter Pace gave
India the green light to launch a ballistic missile test.
 India, U.S.: Washington Grooms New Delhi
•  India and Malaysia hold defense talks to discuss sharing military responsibility for the security
of the Strait of Malacca, one of the most heavily traveled sea-lanes in the world.
•  India provides Nepal with a massive aid package and agrees to work on reviving defense
ties between the two countries. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
June 12, 2006
•  The Nepalese government curbs King Gyanendra’s legislative powers while negotiations
between Maoist rebels and political parties continue to stand on shaky ground.
•  India’s opposition Bharatiya Janata Party propels the Telangana independence movement
back into discussions to woo voters in the state of Andhra Pradesh away from the ruling
Congress party. 
 India: A Region’s Independence Hampered by National Interest
•  Peace talks in Norway between the Sri Lankan government and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam collapse again, prompting Norwegian mediators to reconsider their role in the peace
process. 
Upcoming
•  Business operations in India will likely be disrupted June 12-13 by nationwide protests against
a recent fuel price hike.
•  Kuwaiti Emir Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah will begin a six-day visit to India on
June 14, with energy issues headlining the agenda. 
•  Bangladeshi textile unions have threatened to strike June 12 if their wage demands are not met.
•  Indian Petroleum Minister Murali Deora will attend a meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization in China on June 15. 
•  A large Indian delegation will attend the Global Petroleum Show and the Canadian
International Petroleum Conference June 13-15 to secure investment for domestic oil exploration. 
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Russia and Australia complete bilateral negotiations on Russia’s accession to the World Trade
Organization. Russia has not completed talks with the United States, which has concerns about
Russia’s accession.
 Russia: WTO Accession Still Not a Done Deal -- From Any Point of View
•  The Group of Eight ﬁnance ministers meet in St. Petersburg, Russia, in preparation for a G-8
summit scheduled for July 15. 
•  Kyrgyz President Kurmanbek Bakiyev visits China to discuss expanding cooperation. He takes
part in a business forum and signs several agreements on the economy, public health, culture
and sports. 
•  Russian Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov visits Iceland to meet with ofﬁcials and discuss joint
geothermal energy and aluminum projects and attend the Council of the Baltic Sea States
Summit. 
•  Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov says that NATO membership for Ukraine or Georgia
could drastically alter global geopolitics. 
 Geopolitical Diary: A Russian Message For NATO
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
June 12, 2006
•  Ukraine and the United Kingdom agree to postpone their joint air force exercises called Tight
Knot 2006, originally scheduled for June 14.
 Geopolitical Diary: A Russian Message For NATO
•  U.S. soldiers, who arrive in Ukrainian Crimea for the Sea Breeze 2006 exercises, depart for
Germany after days of anti-NATO protests by the residents. 
Upcoming
•  Nissan Motor Co. will sign an agreement June 13 to build its ﬁrst factory in St. Petersburg, 
Russia. The plant will open in 2009, producing 50,000 vehicles annually. 
•  The Shanghai Cooperation Organization will hold a summit June 15 in China. Presidents of
member countries and ofﬁcials from observer countries are slated to attend. 
 SCO: A New Power Center Developing
•  U.S. Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns will visit Moscow June 13-14 for a meeting of the
political directors of G-8 countries.
•  The second Conference on Interaction and Conﬁdence-Building Measures in Asia will convene
in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on June 17. 
•  Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev is expected to sign an agreement June 17 on
shipping crude oil from Kazakhstan to the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline. 
 Azerbaijan: A Pipeline to Proﬁts and Territorial Tension
 Global Market Brief: The Geopolitics of Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan
•  Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili and Russian President Vladimir Putin will meet June 13
in St. Petersburg and likely will discuss the conﬂicts in South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
 Georgia, Russia: Edging Toward Confrontation
•  Russia and Belarus will hold command and staff military exercises, called Union Shield 2006, 
in Belarus’ training facilities June 17-25. Seven thousand Belarusians and 1,800 Russians will
participate.
 Geopolitical Diary: The Elections in Belarus
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin and Finnish President Tarja Halonen will meet June 13 in
St. Petersburg to discuss Finland’s upcoming EU presidency, an upcoming economic forum
and energy. 
Europe 
Highlights
•  EU Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson warns China to fulﬁll its promises to protect
intellectual property rights and open its markets, or face economic and political backlash
in Europe.
•  The European Central Bank raises interest rates a quarter point to 2.75 percent.
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=262221"] EU: The Downward Spiral
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
June 12, 2006
•  Italian Foreign Minister Massimo D’Alema says Italy will begin withdrawing its 2,700 troops
from Iraq in June, following the withdrawal plan created by former Prime Minister Silvio
Berlusconi.
•  Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov warns against NATO’s efforts to integrate with, 
and perhaps provide membership for, Ukraine and Georgia.
 Geopolitical Diary: A Russian Message For NATO
•  British Prime Minister Tony Blair and French President Jacques Chirac meet in Paris for their
annual summit.
Upcoming
•  Meeting with British Prime Minister Tony Blair and French President Jacques Chirac, Israeli
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert will discuss redrawing Israel’s borders and withdrawing from the
West Bank. 
 Kadima’s Win: Prospects for a Territorial Divorce
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin and Finnish President Tarja Halonen will meet June 13 in
St. Petersburg to discuss Finland’s upcoming EU presidency, an upcoming economic forum and
energy. 
•  Slovakia will hold parliamentary elections June 17. More than two dozen parties are
competing, with opposition Smer-Social Democracy party leading and the ruling Slovak
Democratic and Christian Union trailing. 
•  U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice will meet with Italian Foreign Minister Massimo
D’Alema in Rome to discuss Italy’s withdrawal of its troops from Iraq. 
•  Turkey will begin June 12 the ﬁrst of 35 negotiation chapters toward EU accession.
 EU: Austria Frustrates Turkey’s Accession
•  The European Union will hold its last heads-of-state meeting under the Austrian Presidency
on June 15-16.
Latin America
Highlights
•  High school and middle school students continue with strikes and demonstrations, paralyzing
Chile’s educational system. Chilean President Michelle Bachelet names an advisory council for
education.
•  Mexican presidential candidates attend the last televised debate before the July 2
presidential and congressional elections. Conservative Felipe Calderon and liberal Andres
Manuel Lopez Obrador are tied in polls.
 Mexico: Of Soccer and Electoral Strategy
•  Venezuela receives a shipment of 30,000 of a total 100,000 Russian-made AK-103 assault
riﬂes. Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez says Caracas could soon receive Russian-made
Su-30 aircraft.
 Washington and Caracas’ New Dogﬁght
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
June 12, 2006
•  Colombian authorities announce the capture of the top Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia explosives expert in the southwestern state of Putumayo. 
Upcoming 
•  The leaders of Ecuador, Bolivia, Colombia and Peru will meet June 13 for the Andean
Community of Nations summit. They will address the consequences of Venezuela leaving the
organization. 
•  The presidents of Argentina and Bolivia will meet early in the week to negotiate the price
of Bolivian gas exported to Argentina.
Security and Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  Pakistani militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed claims responsibility for three grenade attacks in
Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian-controlled Kashmir. Two attacks target a police bunker
and a police vehicle.
•  Al Qaeda in Iraq leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi is killed in a U.S. bombing raid near
Baqubah, Iraq. Five others are killed in the airstrike.
 Al-Zarqawi’s Death and the Security Situation
•  Police lock down the United Kingdom’s Houses of Parliament for 15 minutes after a man
sprays a powdery substance in the central lobby of the Palace of Westminster. 
•  British police arrest two men, a 16-year-old and a 21-year-old, in Yorkshire during an
operation believed linked to the recent arrests in Canada of 17 suspected al Qaeda
sympathizers.
•  Canadian authorities say at least one of 17 terrorist suspects arrested in Toronto planned to
storm Parliament and behead ofﬁcials unless Muslim prisoners were released in Canada and
Afghanistan.
 Al Qaeda: The Next Phase of Evolution?
•  Chilean high school students initiate a second wave of protests demanding reforms to the
country’s public education system; 376 people are arrested and 35 are injured.
•  Revolutionary Struggle, a radical left-wing group in Greece, claims responsibility for a
May 30 bombing attack against Greek Culture Minister George Voulgarakis. No one was
injured in the blast.
 Bicycles: Another Lethal Weapon in the Militant Arsenal
•  Five South Korean workers abducted by militants with the Movement for the Emancipation
of the Niger Delta are released after two days of captivity. 
 Nigeria: A New Threat in the Delta
•  Jordan indicts seven Libyan, Saudi and Iraqi suspects for plotting an al Qaeda-linked attack
against the resort town of Aqaba. Three of the plotters remain at large. 
 A New Terrorist Trend: Less Bang, More Destruction
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 7
Global Vantage
June 12, 2006
•  More than 1,000 protesters converge on the East Timorese capital of Dili from areas west
of the city, demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri. 
 East Timor: Australia Steps In
Upcoming
•  The World Cup soccer match between Germany and Poland on June 14 in Dortmund, Germany, 
will be particularly volatile, with a potential for violence between German and Polish neo-Nazis. 
•  The June 15 World Cup match in Nuremberg between England and Trinidad may result in
disturbances by English fans. 
•  The June 16 World Cup match between the Netherlands and Côte d’Ivoire in Stuttgart may
see violence between Dutch and German neo-Nazis, as well as attacks against African spectators. 
•  Violence against Africans is possible during World Cup matches June 13-17 between Togo
and South Korea, Mexico and Angola, and Ghana and the Czech Republic. 
•  Demonstrations could occur against the presence of Iranian Vice President Mohammad
Aliabadi at the June 17 World Cup match in Frankfurt, Germany, between Portugal and Iran. 
Public Policy
Highlights
•  British nongovernmental organizations send a letter to Prime Minister Tony Blair demanding
that corporate directors be held legally responsible for the environmental and social impacts
of their companies.
 Company Law Reform Bill Could Mandate Triple Bottom Line Reporting in U.K.
•  Nongovernmental organizations renew a call for boycotting “conﬂict resources” as a Dutch
man is found guilty of trading arms for Liberian timber. 
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=267403"] ‘Blood Timber’ Trader Convicted of Arms Dealing With Taylor Regime•  The Business Leaders Initiative on Human Rights recommends a binding international legal
framework establishing corporate obligations.
 Third Report of the Business Leaders Initiative on Human Rights Released
•  San Francisco becomes the ﬁrst city to ban children’s products that contain the chemicals
bisphenol A and phthalates. 
 San Francisco First in U.S. to Ban Two Chemicals Found in Plastic Items
•  Environmental organizations call for increased protection of ocean habitats on World Ocean Day.
 Environmental and Conservation Organizations Promote World Ocean Day
•  The Sierra Club and United Steelworkers sign an agreement to jointly address climate control, 
fair trade and toxics, while launching their “New Vision for America” tour.
 Sierra Club and USW Pledge Cooperation on Policy Agenda
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
7
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 8
Global Vantage
June 12, 2006
Upcoming
•  The Financial Times will present its ﬁrst FT Sustainable Banking Awards on June 12.
•  Take Back America 2006, intended to deﬁne the progressive political agenda, will be held
June 12-14 by Campaign for America’s Future.
•  Robert Redford and Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev., will announce June 12 the Apollo Alliance
partnership between progressives, organized labor and environmental groups to promote
energy independence and job creation.
•  A conference titled “Poverty, Prophets and Proﬁts: A Theological Challenge to the Faith
Community” will be held June 12 by Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility.
•  Former U.S. Secretaries of State Colin Powell and Madeleine Albright will co-chair the
Initiative for Global Development 2006 National Summit June 14-15 to discuss private-sector
roles in alleviating poverty.
•  The Inter-American Development Bank will host business, government and nongovernmental
organization discussions on Latin American economic transformation during the “Building
Opportunity for the Majority” conference, to end June 13.
•  Global Footprint Network will host Footprint Forum 2006 June 16-17 in Siena, Italy, to
promote the “ecological footprint” as a sustainability standard.
•  The U.S. Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources will hold hearings June 12 to
discuss implementing the Energy Policy Act of 2005’s Next Generation Nuclear Plant Project.
•  The Department of Homeland Security will hold a brieﬁng at the U.S. Capitol on June 12 to
discuss port security and cargo screening.
•  The National Commission on Energy Policy will hold a brieﬁng June 12 to release a white
paper, “Siting Critical Energy Infrastructure: An Overview of Needs and Challenges.”
•  A discussion on “Nanotechnology Oversight and Risk: It’s Your Business” will be held June 12 
at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. 
•  The “World Refugee Survey 2006: Risks and Rights” report will be released June 14 by the
U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
8
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
