Page 1
Global Vantage
July 3, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  East Timorese Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri resigns; violence continues as his supporters riot in
East Timor’s capital, Dili. 
•  Vietnam ushers in new leadership, including Nguyen Minh Triet as president, Nguyen Tan Dung
as prime minister and Nguyen Phu Trong as National Assembly chairman.
•  Taiwanese President Chen Shui-bian survives a recall vote. Opposition leaders say they are
undecided on whether to push for a no-conﬁdence vote against Taiwan’s prime minister. 
 Taiwan: Chen Survives, but Political Turmoil Continues
•  Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono meets Australian Prime Minister John Howard
to improve bilateral relations. Howard reafﬁrms that Australia recognizes Papua province as a
part of Indonesia.
•  South Korean Foreign Minister Ban Ki Moon visits Beijing to discuss North Korea. After Ban
and Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao meet, Wen warns North Korea against exacerbating
regional tensions.
 North Korea: Prolonging the Uncertainty
Upcoming
•  Song Min Soon, South Korean President Roh Moon Hyun’s chief secretary for security policy, 
will visit Washington on July 4-6 to discuss North Korea.
 North Korea, U.S.: A Game of Missile Chicken
•  China’s top advisory body will meet to discuss rural reform July 4-7. Beijing continues to
initiate enforcement of these reforms through punitive measures. 
 China: New Crackdowns on Corruption
•  A Japanese delegation will visit Beijing on July 8-9 to discuss the disputed East China Sea
gas ﬁeld.
 China, Japan: Disputing Resources Under the Sea
•  South Korea will send ships July 3 for a maritime survey near the disputed Dokdo islets, 
raising tensions with Japan.
 South Korea: Wagging the Dokdo Dog
•  The Fretilin party of former East Timorese Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri will meet
President Xanana Gusmao the ﬁrst week of July to discuss a new government. 
New elections will be held soon.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
July 3, 2006
Middle East
Highlights
•  Israel begins a calibrated yet major offensive against Hamas in the Palestinian territories
after militants afﬁliated with the ruling Islamist movement abduct an Israeli soldier.
 Israel, Palestinian Territories: The Gaza Campaign’s Message
•  Opponents of the ruling al-Sabah family in Kuwait increase their standing in the June 29
parliamentary elections, the ﬁrst in which women are allowed to vote.
 Kuwait: Parliament Dissolved During a Redistricting Row
•  A pair of audiotaped communiqués from al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden surface on the
Internet eulogizing the recently killed Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and addressing the situations in
Iraq and Somalia.
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=268499"] Osama bin Laden: Spreading the Word, Not the Image
•  As Iran prepares for public talks with the United States, it continues revamping its foreign
policy apparatus and trying to get all factions on board.
 Geopolitical Diary: Signs of an Approaching U.S.-Iranian Deal
 Iran, Iraq: Ahmadinejad in Baghdad
•  Iraq’s Shiite-dominated government continues to move toward closer alignment with Iran
while reaching out to the Arab states.
 Geopolitical Diary: Iraq and the Making of Regional Tensions
•  Sunni groups react cautiously but favorably to the Iraqi government’s national reconciliation
plan designed to contain the insurgency.
 Iraq: An Offer of Amnesty in a Complex Landscape
Upcoming
•  Israel is expected to continue strikes against Hamas while it conducts back-channel talks
with the Palestinians through intermediaries in Cairo, Egypt. 
•  Sectarian clashes in Iraq will threaten the government’s efforts to get Shiite militias to
disarm and Sunni insurgent groups to reduce the violence.
•  Tehran could begin leaking portions of its ofﬁcial response to a Western offer regarding the
nuclear standoff, and some movement is possible on public talks with Washington over Iraq. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
July 3, 2006
South Asia
Highlights
•  Pakistan beefs up its troop presence along its northwestern border with Afghanistan to
coincide with U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice’s visit to Pakistan and Afghanistan.
 Afghanistan: Increased Violence Unlikely to Stop
 Afghanistan: Karzai Speaks Out Against Pakistan’s Moves
•  The U.S.-Indian civilian nuclear deal passes a crucial markup vote to ﬁne-tune the text of the
agreement in the U.S. House and Senate.
•  India’s Oil and Natural Gas Corp. says it wants to get involved with Russian energy company
Rosneft in the Sakhalin-3 project. 
•  Afghan Foreign Minister Rangin Dadfar Spanta meets with Indian Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh in New Delhi to discuss security cooperation between the two countries.
•  Security in Dhaka, Bangladesh, is strengthened after the Indian High Commission there
receives a bomb threat from the banned Islamist group Jamaat al Mujahideen.
 Bangladesh Bombings: Responding to al Qaeda’s Call 
•  Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero arrives in India for a four-day ofﬁcial
visit to expand Spain’s economic links with India.
•  Pakistan’s two main opposition parties give President Gen. Pervez Musharraf and his
prime minister until July 31 to resign or they will launch a nationwide campaign to oust
the government.
Upcoming
•  Indian National Security Adviser M. K. Narayanan will meet with Tamil Nadu ofﬁcials
and travel to Sri Lanka to assess the situation as India increases its involvement there. 
 Sri Lanka, India: The Tigers Try to Charm New Delhi
•  The Pakistani government will continue to negotiate with opposition forces to fend off pressure
to unseat Pakistani President Gen. Pervez Musharraf in the 2007 general elections. 
 Pakistan: The Opposition Stirs
•  Narendra Modri, chief minister of the Indian state of Gujarat, will travel to the oil-rich
Russian province of Astrakhan on July 3 for a six-day visit to strike deals for oil and
gas exploration.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
July 3, 2006
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Shareholders representing 57.9 percent of Arcelor’s stock vote against the merger with
Russia’s SeverStal at an extraordinary general meeting in Luxembourg.
 Global Market Brief: Restive Shareholders and Arcelor’s Dilemma
•  Gazprom shareholders discuss strategy for domestic and import markets at the company’s
annual general shareholders’ meeting in Moscow. 
•  The G-8 foreign ministers meet in Moscow and discuss the Iranian nuclear issue, the Israeli-
Palestinian conﬂict, and Iraqi militants’ killing of Russian diplomats, among other topics.
 Geopolitical Diary: Putin’s G-8 Summit Strategy
•  Ukraine’s energy minister visits Turkmenistan to negotiate natural gas supplies and
debt repayment. Turkmenistan wants to raise natural gas prices from $60 to $100
per 1,000 cubic meters.
 Geopolitical Diary: Timoshenko, the Turkmenbashi and a Dilemma for Gazprom
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin meets with senior diplomats and calls for a study of
Russian foreign policy and talks to replace the START Treaty, which will expire in 2009. 
 Russia, U.S.: Putin’s Strategy of Persuasion 
Upcoming
•  Russian state-controlled natural gas monopoly Gazprom and state-controlled oil company
Rosneft will talk July 3 on transporting natural gas from the Sakhalin-1 project in the Far East.
•  The European Commission will meet July 4 to discuss opening negotiations for an agreement
promoting all aspects of EU-Russian relations.
•  Russian President Vladimir Putin will hold an Internet conference July 6. Russian and foreign
Web users can submit their questions online.
•  Nongovernmental organizations will meet in Moscow on July 3-4 in the run-up to the
G-8 summit in St. Petersburg, Russia, on July 15-17.
•  Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili will meet with U.S. President George W. Bush in
Washington on July 5 and discuss resolving conﬂicts in Georgia’s breakaway South Ossetia
and Abkhazia regions.
 Georgia, Russia: Edging Toward Confrontation
•  Georgian Prime Minister Zurab Nogaideli will visit Azerbaijan on July 4 to discuss Georgia’s
receiving additional natural gas from the Shah Deniz ﬁeld via the South Caucasus Pipeline.
 Azerbaijan: A Pipeline to Proﬁts and Territorial Tension 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
July 3, 2006
Europe
Highlights
•  Shareholders representing 57.9 percent of Arcelor’s stock vote against a merger with Russia’s
SeverStal at an extraordinary general meeting in Luxembourg. Separately, Arcelor’s board
accepts a rival bid from Mittal.
 Global Market Brief: Restive Shareholders and Arcelor’s Dilemma
•  Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende’s three-year-old conservative government resigns, 
following a split in the ruling coalition. Elections will likely take place by the end of 2006.
•  French President Jacques Chirac says he will make an announcement in the ﬁrst three months of
2007 regarding his future. He also defends embattled Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin.
•  The Spanish government begins peace negotiations with Basque separatist group ETA, 
which announces a permanent cease-ﬁre with the Spanish government on the same day. 
•  Slovak Prime Minister-elect and Smer-Socialist Democratic Party leader Robert Fico says he
will form a government with the far-right Slovak National Party and the People’s Party-
Movement for a Democratic Slovakia.
 Slovakia: The Winning Party’s Coalition Options
•  Italian voters reject devolving more powers to Italy’s regions in a referendum. 
Upcoming
•  The European Commission will meet with Finnish President Tarja Halonen and Prime Minister
Matti Vanhanen on July 3 to set the agenda for the Finnish presidency of the EU. 
 Finland: Assuming the EU Presidency at a Troubled Time
•  The FIFA World Cup will conclude in Berlin, Germany, on July 9. 
•  Iranian national security chief Ali Larijani will discuss the anti-enrichment incentives package
from the U.N. Security Council and Germany with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana
on July 5. 
•  German Chancellor Angela Merkel, French President Jacques Chirac and Polish President
Lech Kaczynski will meet in Weimar, Germany, under the auspices of the Weimar Triangle.
•  Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat will
meet July 3 to discuss the people classiﬁed as missing. This is their ﬁrst meeting since
Greek Cypriots rejected proposals to reunite the island in April 2004.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
July 3, 2006
Latin America
Highlights 
•  Following the killings of several people in Acapulco, Mexico, a high commander of the
municipal police of the Caribbean resort of Cancun is gunned down. 
 Geopolitical Diary: The Spread of Mexico’s Drug Wars 
•  Peru’s Congress ratiﬁes the free trade agreement with the United States. The U.S. Congress
still needs to ratify the agreement before it will take effect. 
•  About 150,000 people rally to demand autonomy for Bolivia’s state of Santa Cruz. 
•  Bolivian President Evo Morales meets with Argentine President Nestor Kirchner. 
They sign a deal adjusting the price of Argentine gas imports. 
•  Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez travels to Gambia to attend the African Union Summit
in order to obtain votes for Venezuela’s bid for a seat at the U.N. Security Council. 
•  Mexico holds presidential and congressional elections, although preliminary results indicate
the race between conservative Felipe Calderon and leftist Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador
is too close to call. Both claim victory. Congress will be divided.
 Mexico: Why the Upcoming Election Matters
 Global Market Brief Mexico’s Economic Choices in the Upcoming Election
•  Bolivia holds elections for the new Constitutional Assembly. Preliminary results indicate
that President Evo Morales’ Movement Toward Socialism Party has obtained a majority
of the seats. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Bolivia’s Bumpy Road 
Upcoming
•  Venezuela will host an extraordinary summit of Mercosur on July 4 to mark its ofﬁcial
accession to the bloc. The leaders of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay will attend.
•  Venezuela will celebrate its independence anniversary July 5 with a military parade
that could include some of the Russian SU-30 ﬁghters that President Hugo Chavez is
planning to purchase.
•  The Caribbean Community’s 27th annual summit will take place July 3-6. Haitian President
Rene Preval is to attend the summit, marking the ofﬁcial return of Haiti to the organization.
•  Colombian President Alvaro Uribe Velez is to meet with Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez
on July 8 to mark the beginning of construction on a gas pipeline between the two countries.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 7
Global Vantage
July 3, 2006
Security And Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  The U.S. Consulate General in Lagos, Nigeria, issues a warning of increased threats to U.S. 
interests in the Niger River Delta region.
•  Brazilian police kill at least a dozen people in clashes with suspected gang members on the
outskirts of Sao Paulo after a wave of attacks against police stations.
•  Four Russian Embassy workers in Baghdad, Iraq, are conﬁrmed dead three weeks after
being abducted. The Mujahideen Shura Council releases video showing the killing of three
of the workers. 
•  Algerian security forces kill 19 Islamist militants, including the regional emir, in ongoing
operations in Annaba. The raids target an afﬁliate of the Salaﬁst Group for Preaching
and Combat.
•  Sri Lankan Maj. Gen. Parami Kulatunga is killed, along with two soldiers and a civilian, 
by a suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam suicide bomber in Pannipitiya.
•  Security in Dhaka, Bangladesh, is strengthened after the Indian High Commission there
receives a bomb threat from the banned Islamist group Jamaat al Mujahideen. 
•  Fighting between Muslim rebels and Philippine security forces drives more than 1,000
people from their homes in Shariff Aguak. The government estimates up to 1,500 people
are displaced.
•  Philippine communist rebels kill two workers on a farm owned by an opposition politician who
is allegedly linked to a plot to overthrow Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo. 
•  Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero says his government will begin peace
negotiations with the Basque separatist group ETA. The group announces a permanent
cease-ﬁre with the government.
•  Moro Islamic Liberation Front rebels seize an army outpost on the southern Philippine island
of Mindanao. 
•  Turkish security forces kill a member of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party and detain another
when soldiers reportedly order the rebels to submit and then open ﬁre on them. 
•  The Sri Lankan navy says Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam rebels attacked two patrol boats
near Kalpitiya, about 86 miles northwest of the capital, Colombo.
•  Supporters and opponents of former East Timorese Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri clash in
the capital, Dili. At least 20 houses and four stores are set on ﬁre.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
7
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 8
Global Vantage
July 3, 2006
Upcoming
•  More ﬁghting can be expected in the southern Philippines among the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front, the communist New People’s Army and government troops, particularly
in Maguindanao province on Mindanao.
•  More Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam attacks against Sri Lankan military and government
targets can be expected. If negotiations between the parties halt, full-scale hostilities
could resume.
•  Disturbances could continue among fans in German cities hosting the ﬁnal rounds of the
World Cup, especially as tensions increase while the ﬁnal matches are decided. 
•  Clashes between gangs and police units in and around Sao Paulo, Brazil, are likely. 
Prison guards could continue striking, leading to riots and hostage-taking in the city’s prisons.
•  Security will be tight in St. Petersburg, Russia, as preparations for the July 15-17
G8 Summit are made. 
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Environmental lobbying groups hold a press conference to publicize their energy positions
during a weeklong congressional focus on energy.
 Environmental Groups Respond to Congressional Focus On Energy
•  Environmental Defense quantiﬁes U.S. automobile carbon emissions for each car manufacturer
in a new study.
 Environmental Strategy Will Put Pressure on U.S. Automakers
•  Warren Buffet announces that he will donate the bulk of his estate to the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation, doubling the size of the world’s largest private foundation. 
 Buffet Donation Doubles Gates Foundation Size
•  Clean Production Action releases a report that details the business case for green chemistry.
 New Green Chemistry Report Released
•  The U.S. Supreme Court agrees to hear a case that would decide whether the Environmental
Protection Agency must regulate carbon dioxide emissions to ﬁght climate change.
 Supreme Court to Hear Climate Change Case
•  Environmental Defense and Natural Resources Defense Council highlight the progress
of the California Global Warming Solutions Act.
 Environmental Groups Praise California Climate Change Bill
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
8
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 9
Global Vantage
July 3, 2006
UPCOMING
•  More than 50 activists and social justice grassroots groups will convene at the Midwest
Social Forum on July 6-9 in an attempt to build upon the World Social Forum. 
•  The Ruckus Society, Rainforest Action Network and Oil Change International will sponsor
the Freedom from Oil Action Camp on July 8-14 in southern Indiana. 
•  The Farragut Squares Collective, an anti-war network group, will organize anti-G-8
demonstrations July 9-16 in Washington. 
•  U.S. President George W. Bush will host Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper on July 6
to discuss bilateral and global issues. 
•  The U.N.-sponsored Codex Alimentarius Commission will meet in Geneva, Switzerland, 
on July 3-7 to discuss food standards and trade. 
•  The Council on Foreign Relations will hold a discussion on the upcoming G-8 summit July 7
at its ofﬁces in Washington.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
9
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
