Page 1
Global Vantage
August 21, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao warns local ofﬁcials at a State Council meeting that any
divergence from central macroeconomic policies will not be tolerated.
 China: The Five-Year Plan’s Lengthy Second Stage 
•  North Korean leader Kim Jong Il makes his ﬁrst public appearance since North Korea’s
July missile tests, visiting an army-run farm in the company of military and government ofﬁcials.
 North Korea: Kim’s Strategic Disappearing Act 
•  Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi visits the Yasukuni Shrine on the anniversary
of Japan’s World War II surrender, drawing criticism from China and South Korea.
 Geopolitical Diary: Shifting Japan’s Focus, With U.S. Approval 
•  A Russian coastal patrol ﬁres on a Japanese ﬁshing boat, killing one ﬁsherman near the
disputed Kuril Islands, which both Russia and Japan claim. Japan formally protests the killing. 
•  China Daily reports that the push by the All-China Federation of Trade Unions to unionize
Wal-Mart stores was personally ordered by Chinese President Hu Jintao.
 China: Unionizing Foreign Firms to Redirect Investment 
Upcoming
•  Communist Party of Vietnam General Secretary Nong Duc Manh and Venezuelan President
Hugo Chavez will visit China at President Hu Jintao’s invitation Aug. 22-26, probably
to discuss oil exports. 
•  Economic Ministers from Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) member states will
meet Aug. 21-26 in Malaysia to discuss further trade liberalization and consider a proposed
ASEAN economic community. 
•  Former Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad and his successor, Abdullah Ahmad
Badawi, will continue to swap vitriolic rhetoric, threatening the cohesion of the ruling United
Malays National Organization.
 Malaysia: Tensions and an Opening for Anwar 
•  U.S. reports indicate North Korea may carry out a nuclear test in the near future, 
but South Korea and Russia say there is no evidence of an imminent test. 
 North Korea: The Return of the Test Rumors
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
August 21, 2006
Middle East
Highlights
•  As a U.N.-brokered cease-ﬁre between Israel and Hezbollah goes into effect, Israeli forces
begin pulling out of southern Lebanon and Lebanese troops assume positions south of the
Litani River.
 Geopolitical Diary: Implications of a Shaky Cease-Fire
 Cease-Fire: Shaking Core Beliefs in the Middle East
•  An intense international debate ensues over the composition and command of the
U.N. peacekeeping force that will deploy in southern Lebanon in accordance with
a U.N. Security Council resolution.
•  A heated political struggle begins in Israel over the handling of the 34-day conﬂict with Hezbollah. 
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=272453"] Geopolitical Diary: Revisiting Core Assumptions
•  Despite Israeli and U.S. demands that Hezbollah be disarmed, neither the Lebanese military
nor those states contributing to the U.N. peacekeeping force accept the responsibility.
 Lebanon: Negotiating Hezbollah’s Disarmament
•  Hezbollah reaches an accommodation with the Lebanese government that allows it to evade
the demand to disarm.
 Lebanon: Nasrallah on Victory and Disarmament
•  In an effort to extract the maximum political leverage from Israel’s inability to eliminate
Hezbollah, Iran and Syria both engage in bellicose posturing. 
 Geopolitical Diary: Hoping to Ride Hezbollah’s Wave
 Geopolitical Diary: A Window for Syrian-Israeli Dialogue
•  Turkey explores the idea of contributing a sizable troop contingent to the U.N. peacekeeping
force for Lebanon.
 Lebanon: Turkey, the Potential Peacekeeper
•  Hamas and Fatah resume negotiations over the creation of a national unity government
and development of a new plan for resuming negotiations with Israel.
•  Caught between Hezbollah’s ability to withstand a war with Israel and Iran’s geopolitical push, 
some Arab countries — Egypt, for one — cautiously laud the Lebanese Shiite militant group.
•  Iraq’s national unity government suffers its ﬁrst shakeup since its formation in May as Kurdish
and Shiite blocs demand the replacement of Islamist Sunni Speaker of Parliament Mahmud
Dawood al-Mashhadani.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
August 21, 2006
Upcoming
•  Iran likely will make a counteroffer to incentives from the ﬁve permanent U.N. Security Council
members and Germany but will defy the group’s call for halting uranium enrichment.
•  Opponents of Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert will try to exploit anti-government sentiment
in the wake of the war with Hezbollah to force Olmert out of ofﬁce.
•  The U.N. peacekeeping force that will be deployed in southern Lebanon will begin to take
shape, with Turkey probably playing a major role. 
•  Hamas and Fatah will continue negotiations over a national unity government but with little
progress, since Israel is in no rush to deal with the Palestinians. 
South Asia
Highlights
•  Fighting continues between Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam rebels and the Sri Lankan military. 
The Tigers attack the Pakistani high commissioner’s motorcade, responding to Pakistan’s aid
to the government. 
 Sri Lanka: The Tigers’ Tactical Shift
•  Nepalese Maoists demand “structural changes” to the state before they will join the
government, indicating that an agreement over power-sharing, disarmament and the
monarchy will not come soon. 
•  Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh faces parliamentary criticism over the U.S.-Indian civil
nuclear agreement, successfully quelling some left-wing opposition. 
•  Indian police continue their crackdown on jihadists, arresting two Pakistani agents in
West Bengal who are suspected of plotting to bomb Mumbai. 
•  Pakistan continues to cooperate with the ongoing investigation of the London airline bombing
plot, arresting several suspected militants and giving U.S. forces the locations of some
al Qaeda planners. 
Upcoming
•  Pakistan and Bangladesh will announce troop deployments to the Lebanese peacekeeping
force. Bangladesh is expected to contribute 1,500-2,000 troops. U.N. diplomats said Nepal
might contribute a battalion.
•  India’s Hazira natural gas plant will reopen. The plant is responsible for half of the country’s
natural gas output and was closed due to monsoon ﬂooding. 
•  The lower house of India’s parliament will hold further discussions on the U.S.-India nuclear
deal. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh will be present to answer lawmakers’ questions.
•  The Pakistani parliament will table a vote of no conﬁdence on Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz
on Aug. 23.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
August 21, 2006
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  Russia hosts the Eurasian Economic Community summit. Energy cooperation and a customs union
are on the agenda. Ukrainian Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovich and Russian leaders discuss
natural gas delivery.
 Ukraine: Yanukovich and a Pro-Russian Resurgence
•  Chechen rebel leader Doku Umarov’s older brother reportedly surrenders to the Chechen
government. Earlier reports had claimed it was Umarov himself who surrendered.
 Russia: A Win in Chechnya, but Not Victory
 Chechnya: A Surrender of Questionable Importance
•  Russian Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov approves a venture between Russia and Kazakhstan
at the Orenburg natural gas processing plant. Russian state-controlled natural gas monopoly
Gazprom will export the product.
•  Russia’s draft budget for 2007 shows a 22.7 percent increase in spending on defense, police
and internal security. Total spending will increase 26.3 percent, from $161 billion to $203 billion. 
•  Uzbekistan enters the Collective Security Treaty Organization as a full member. Other
members are Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan.
•  Russian border guards open ﬁre on a Japanese ﬁshing boat poaching octopus and crab
in Russia’s territorial waters, killing one person. The Japanese government protests.
•  Ukrainian Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovich pays a “private” visit to Moscow, reportedly
for doctors’ appointments.
•  An explosion at the Cherkizovsky clothes market in Moscow kills at least eight people
and brings down part of the building’s roof.
 Russia: The Market Blast in Moscow
Upcoming
•  An Iranian delegation led by the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran’s deputy head will visit
Russia on Aug. 22-26 to discuss nuclear cooperation and visit the Kalinin nuclear power plant. 
•  Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi plans to visit Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan beginning
Aug. 28 to discuss regional security and economic and energy cooperation. 
•  Service members from Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan will conduct the
Rubezh-2006 joint maneuvers on the Caspian Sea coast Aug. 24-29 under the aegis of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization. 
•  Russia is slated to repay most of its debts to Paris Club members by Aug. 21. The $7.7 billion
saved by the early payoff will go to Russia’s stabilization fund.
•  Ukraine will celebrate the 15th anniversary of its independence Aug. 24. Ukrainians will also
have Aug. 25 off, but had to work Aug. 19 instead. 
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
August 21, 2006
Europe
Highlights
•  Following a foiled plot to blow up airplanes ﬂying from the United Kingdom to the
United States, London’s Heathrow and Gatwick airports relax their heightened restrictions
on hand luggage. Most of the remaining restrictions will be made permanent.
 U.K.: The Thwarted Airline Bombing Plot
 The U.K. Plot: Lessons Not Learned and Risk Implications
•  Russia’s state-owned Transneft says it could indeﬁnitely shut down a spur of the Druzhba
oil pipeline that serves Lithuania.
 Lithuania, Russia: Pipelines and Pretexts
•  Spain continues to ﬁght devastating wildﬁres in its Galicia region.
 Spain: Agricultural Policies Fueling the Fires
•  France pledges to send 400 troops to the U.N. peacekeeping force in Lebanon, and Italy
agrees to send an unspeciﬁed number. 
Upcoming
•  The European Union will remain on its summer vacation through the end of September.
•  Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader will meet with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica
on Aug. 21 in Belgrade, Serbia, to discuss the political stability of Southeastern Europe. 
Latin America
Highlights
•  Mining company BHP Billiton ﬁrst closes Chile’s Escondida copper mine, then raises its offer
to striking mine workers. The Chilean government is set to mediate.
 Chile: Showdown at the World’s Largest Copper Mine
•  Mexico is promoting a Central American energy industrial project that will include a reﬁnery, 
hydroelectric power station and two hydroelectric plants. 
•  Brazil’s Petroleo Brasileiro becomes involved in an eight-year natural gas exploration project
in southern Argentina. 
•  Mexican state oil company Petroleos Mexicanos announces plans to invest in natural gas
extraction in northern Mexico’s Burgos Basin. 
•  Argentina resumes natural gas exports to Chilean industries after several weeks of service
interruptions due to extremely low temperatures. 
•  Photos of ailing Cuban leader Fidel Castro and his brother, acting leader Raul, are released
in the ofﬁcial Cuban newspaper. Raul mobilizes armed forces across Cuba. 
 Cuba: The Castro Brothers Return to the Public Eye
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
August 21, 2006
•  Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez agrees to increase oil exports to Jamaica about
12 percent and announces plans to increase daily oil exports to China from 70,000
to 300,000 barrels. 
 Venezuela: Buying Alternatives
•  Results of the partial recount of the Mexican presidential election ballots are not yet released. 
Challenger Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador alleges his opponent’s party attempted to bribe
the electoral tribunal. 
•  The U.S. Coast Guard arrests Mexican drug lord Javier Arellano-Felix. The U.S. State
Department had offered a $5 million reward for his arrest. 
Upcoming
•  Mediators sent by the Chilean government will begin talks with striking miners and mine owner
BHP Billiton at the Escondida copper mine. 
•  Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez will take an international tour from Aug. 21 to Sept. 1. 
He will visit Angola, Malaysia, China and possibly North Korea.
•  Chile will join the Andean Community of Nations as an associate member and sign a free
trade agreement with Peru on Aug. 23-24. 
Security and Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  India deploys 100 additional troops to guard the Taj Mahal after police receive a letter
threatening to blow up the landmark. The writer claims links to al Qaeda.
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=270713"] Bomb Threats in India: Are Militants ‘Pinging’ the System?
•  Fighting continues between Sri Lankan government forces and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam, centered mainly on the Jaffna Peninsula. Local residents have been evacuated and
schools closed. 
 Sri Lanka: The Tigers’ Tactical Shift
•  Thai police defuse a bomb hidden in a ﬁre extinguisher under a roadside pavilion in Yala
province. The bomb targeted soldiers who were protecting teachers in the troubled region.
 Thailand: Thaksin’s Tenuous Return
•  Philippine marines arrest a man carrying 6,000 blasting caps in a backpack onboard a ferry
docked at the port in Jolo, a base for militant Islamist group Abu Sayyaf.
•  Seven foreign oil workers kidnapped in Nigeria’s delta region are released. So far in August, 
at least 17 foreign oil workers have been reported kidnapped in Nigeria. 
 Nigeria: The Growing Risk to Oil Companies in the Niger Delta
•  The U.S. Coast Guard arrests Mexican drug lord Javier Arellano-Felix off the California coast. 
Arellano-Felix controls most of the drug trade along the U.S. border with Baja California. 
 The Spread of Mexico’s Drug Wars
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 7
Global Vantage
August 21, 2006
•  Mexican federal police use tear gas against supporters of defeated presidential candidate
Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador during a protest in Mexico City.
 Global Market Brief: Ripple Effects of Mexico’s Contested Election
•  British authorities say many of the security restrictions put in place at British airports following
the discovery of a plot to blow up U.S.-bound trans-Atlantic airliners are expected to
last indeﬁnitely. 
 The Quick Fix for Airline Security
•  Workers at Terminal 18 at the Port of Seattle in Washington state are sent home early after
two suspicious containers are thought to contain explosives. No explosives are found.
•  Bombs explode in a park and a trash can outside an Internet café in Istanbul, Turkey. 
Authorities believe the blasts are the work of Kurdish militants marking the anniversary of
their separatist movement. 
 Bombings in Turkey: TAK, Not Hezbollah, Tops the Suspect List
Upcoming
•  Protests will continue by opposition candidate Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador’s supporters
against the election of Felix Calderon as Mexico’s president. The deadline for an ofﬁcial
recount is Aug. 31. 
•  Fighting will continue in Sri Lanka, with suicide attacks by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
possibly taking place in Colombo or Trincomalee. 
•  Protests in Thailand are possible if Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra attempts to delay
elections. Demonstrations in Bangkok, although unlikely to become violent, could disrupt trafﬁc.
•  Former Democratic Progressive Party chairman Shih Ming-te has scheduled a sit-in Aug. 23-
Sept. 16 in front of the president’s ofﬁce in Taipei, Taiwan, dedicated to deposing president
Chen Shui-bian.
•  More attacks by Kurdish militants in Turkey are possible as the country prepares for
Victory Day on Aug. 30.
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Environmental groups call for a federal ban on genetically modiﬁed (GM) crops for drug
production after a legal victory and the discovery of GM grass growing wild in Oregon. 
[URL: "http://www.stratfor.com/products/premium/read_article.php?id=272802"] Environmentalists Call for Federal Ban on Genetically Modiﬁed Crops
•  Apollo Alliance and Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa announce the launch of the
Apollo Green Building Initiative. 
 Los Angeles Takes on Green Building Project
•  Tenofovir, a new drug that could prevent HIV infection, dominates the XVI International
AIDS Conference in Toronto.
 Tenofovir Dominates XVI International AIDS Conference
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
7
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 8
Global Vantage
August 21, 2006
•  The World Business Council on Sustainable Development issues suggestions and scenarios
for water policy through 2025.
 WBCSD Issues Water Policy Scenarios and Suggestions
•  The Natural Resources Defense Council and the Union of Concerned Scientists express support
for Northeastern states’ participation in the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative.
 Environmentalist Groups Endorse the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative
Upcoming
•  The conference on “Public Health in a Globalized World: Breaking down Political, Social
and Economic Barriers” will be held Aug. 21-25 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
•  Dioxin 2006, a science symposium on organohalogen compounds, will be held Aug. 21-25
by the Norwegian Institute for Public Health in Oslo, Norway.
•  The International Disaster Reduction Conference will be held Aug. 27-Sept. 1 in Davos, 
Switzerland.
•  The Ceres investor coalition will hold an Aug. 22 conference call brieﬁng on climate change
and insurance.
•  The U.S. Chamber of Commerce will hold a discussion Aug. 21 on its Global Anti-
Counterfeiting and Piracy Initiative.
•  Center for American Progress will hold a discussion Aug. 22 called “Disaster: A Look at the
Response and Recovery One Year After Katrina.”
•  The Mercatus Center at George Mason University will hold a discussion Aug. 23 called
“The Crisis of Katrina: Lessons for Preparedness and Response.”
•  The Heritage Foundation will hold a discussion Aug. 24 called “Grassroots Response: Citizens
Taking Care of Citizens During Disasters.”
•  Americans for Health Care, a project of the Service Employees International Union, will hold
an “I’m a Health Care Voter” rally Aug. 22 in Dupont Circle, Washington, D.C.
•  The American Institute of Certiﬁed Public Accountants will hold its 2006 National Governmental
Accounting and Auditing Update Conference on Aug. 21-22.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
8
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
