Page 1
Global Vantage
April 3, 2006
Weekly Executive Intelligence Report
East Asia
Highlights
•  Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao visits Australia to discuss Sino-Australian political and economic
relationships with Prime Minister John Howard and sign two controversial contracts for uranium
between the two nations.
Geopolitical Diary: China’s Quixotic U.S. Strategy
•  Early indicators in Thai elections show Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra’s party in the lead, 
although a considerable number of “no vote” ballots are cast. Opposition groups boycott the
elections.
•  A bomb blamed on the Abu Sayyaf rebel group explodes on the southern Philippine island
of Jolo, killing ﬁve people and wounding 17. 
•  Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo asks the Philippine Congress to pass an
anti-terrorism law.
•  Australia warns of terrorist attacks targeting foreigners in Indonesia.
Upcoming
•  Chinese Vice Premier Wu Yi will depart Beijing to attend a meeting of the U.S.-China Joint
Commission on Commerce and Trade to address growing U.S. trade concerns April 3.
U.S.: A New Option on Dealing With the Yuan
•  EU tariffs on Chinese shoes will begin April 7 at about 4 percent and will rise to 19.4 percent
in six months.
EU: When Shoe Tariffs Don’t Fit
•  Seiji Maehara, the leader of the opposition Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ), will resign due
to an e-mail scandal when a new DPJ leader is chosen April 7.
•  A rally against Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra called by the People’s Alliance for
Democracy opposition coalition will occur April 7 in Bangkok, regardless of snap election
results. 
Middle East and South Asia
Highlights
•  A Hamas-controlled Palestinian National Authority Cabinet is sworn in while Kadima emerges
as Israel’s single largest party and Fatah-afﬁliated militants attack a Jewish settlement in the
West Bank.
Israel: Suicide Bombing in the West Bank
Kadima’s Win: Prospects for a Territorial Divorce
The Israeli Election and the Future of the Withdrawal
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
1
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 2
Global Vantage
April 3, 2006
•  Differences between the United States and Iraqi Shia intensify as U.S. troops clash with Shiite
militiamen and Shiite political leaders criticize U.S. support of their Sunni and nationalist
opponents. 
Iraq: A Sunni Militia and Iraq’s ‘Lebanization’
Iraq: Complicating the Political Fray
Iraq: Pressure From Without and Chaos Within the Shiite Alliance
•  Iran begins a major military exercise and test-ﬁres a ballistic missile as the U.N. Security
Council calls on Tehran to suspend all uranium enrichment activity within 30 days.
Iran: Reading Between the Lines of Khamenei’s Blessing
Putting Cards on the Table in Iraq
Geopolitical Diary: The Beginning of the End Game
•  Indian Foreign Secretary Shyam Saran warns of a setback in U.S.-Indian relations if the
U.S. Congress does not ratify a civilian nuclear deal between leaders of the two countries.
India: New Delhi Diversiﬁes Its Geopolitical Options
Geopolitical Diary: The Indian Nuclear Deal
•  An Afghan Christian convert gains asylum in Italy, triggering an uproar among Afghans who
believe the West is interfering in the country’s internal affairs.
•  Hamas seeks an Indian role in the Israeli-Palestinian conﬂict and says it will seek political and
ﬁnancial backing from African, Asian and Latin American countries.
•  Hizb-ul-Mujahideen, the largest Islamist separatist guerrilla alliance in Kashmir, offers to
negotiate with India and proposes a cease-ﬁre if New Delhi recognizes it and other Kashmiri 
militant groups.
•  Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa calls on Arab leaders to move toward the goal
of “entering the nuclear club” and making use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes.
•  The Musharraf government presses the Bush administration for a free trade agreement as
a way to deal with Islamist militancy and radicalism in Pakistan.
Upcoming
•  Countering U.S. efforts in the U.N. Security Council to isolate Iran, Tehran will push ahead with
its proposal to establish an international enrichment facility on Iranian soil.
•  Negotiations involving Washington, Iraqi political groups and other regional players will
continue, but a breakthrough in the formation of a coalition government in Iraq is unlikely
this week.
•  While maintaining a deﬁant attitude on the political front, Hamas will try to counter efforts
by Fatah-linked militants and others to upset the informal truce with Israel.
•  Acting Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert will negotiate to form a coalition government
between Kadima and other, smaller parties that agree with his agenda to ﬁnalize Israel’s
borders.
•  The U.S.-Shiite row in Iraq will intensify as the leaders of Iraq’s majority community seek
to counter Washington’s move to contain Shiite power.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
2
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 3
Global Vantage
April 3, 2006
•  Legislative elections in the restive northeastern Indian state of Assam will take place April 3; 
the ruling Congress Party could lose some seats to regional and national opposition groups.
•  The United Iraqi Alliance could replace Ibrahim Jaafari with an ofﬁcial from one of the
coalition’s smaller parties or an independent member as its nominee for full-term prime minister.
Geopolitical Diary: The UIA’s Dilemma
Former Soviet Union
Highlights
•  EU Transportation Commissioner Jacques Barrot asks Russia to repeal tariffs on European
airlines ﬂying over Siberia. This and other circumstances challenge Russia’s accession to the
World Trade Organization.
Russia: WTO Accession Still Not a Done Deal -- From Any Point of View
•  Former German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder formally takes his post with Russian state
natural gas monopoly Gazprom as head of the Northern European Gas Pipeline shareholders
committee.
Germany: Schroeder’s New Gig Causes Trouble at Home
•  Russian natural gas monopoly Gazprom signs an agreement with Tajikistan, creating a joint
venture to prospect for and develop Tajik oil and natural gas reserves.
•  Ukraine and Turkmenistan sign an agreement resolving their dispute on delivery of natural
gas. Ukraine will work on paying its debt to Turkmenistan, which will continue providing
energy supplies.
Geopolitical Diary: The Turkmenbashi and a New Gas Crisis?
•  Russian natural gas monopoly Gazprom says it will raise prices for natural gas sold to Belarus
to “European levels.” A gas pipeline runs from Russia to Europe through Belarus.
•  Ukraine’s pro-Russian Party of Regions wins the most votes in parliamentary elections. Factions
continue coalition negotiations.
Geopolitical Diary: Ukraine Elections and an Orange Reversal?
•  Russia enacts a ban on Georgian and Moldovan wines after it reportedly ﬁnds traces of
pesticides in the product. 
•  The head of Russia’s Federal Agency for Industry visits Brazil for a bilateral economic forum
continuing through April 7, and to discuss cooperation in car manufacturing and banking.
Upcoming
•  Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov will visit Slovakia on April 4-5 to discuss European
integration processes and cooperation on the U.N. Security Council, where Slovakia is a
nonpermanent member.
•  Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov will visit Germany on April 5-6 to discuss cooperation
in international organizations and other issues with his German counterpart and with
Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
3
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 4
Global Vantage
April 3, 2006
•  Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev will pay an ofﬁcial visit to Moscow at Russian
President Vladimir Putin’s invitation April 3-5. 
•  Kyrgyzstan will hold parliamentary by-elections April 9 amid protests calling for the
resignation of the prime minister.
Kyrgyzstan: Instability in the Wake of ‘Revolution’
•  Representatives from the U.S. State Department will visit Azerbaijan on April 5-6 to
participate in the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative conference.
Europe 
Highlights
•  Strikes occur across France, the United Kingdom and Germany to protest labor reforms. 
Geopolitical Diary: Protests and Political Impacts in Europe
France: Chirac’s Labor Law Dilemma
•  In a blow to German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s coalition, Vice Chancellor Franz
Muentefering halts progress on a labor law similar to the one sparking protests in France.
Germany: Breaking Up in Berlin?
•  The European Union threatens to re-evaluate Russia’s bid for World Trade Organization
(WTO) membership if Moscow does not reduce fees on ﬂights across Siberia. 
Russia: WTO Accession Still Not a Done Deal -- From Any Point of View
•  Former German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder becomes head of Northern European Gas
Pipeline shareholders’ committee for Russian energy giant Gazprom.
Germany: Schroeder’s New Gig Causes Trouble at Home
•  In an effort to reach a compromise over a draft statement, Germany and members of the
U.N. Security Council meet in Berlin to discuss Iran’s nuclear program.
•  EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn extends a deadline for Serbia to deliver Ratko Mladic
for war-crimes prosecution, indicating that the EU is willing to press ahead with accession talks.
Upcoming 
•  German government and business leaders will hold a National Energy Summit on April 3
to discuss Germany’s future energy strategy.
Russia, Germany: New Business Deals Strengthen Ties that Bind
EU, Russia: An Elusive Energy Partnership
•  Hoping to convince more EU states to open their labor markets, the European Commission will
send the European Parliament a watered-down version of the controversial services directive
April 4.
•  The third round of U.N.-mediated talks between Serbs and Kosovar Albanians regarding
Kosovo’s status will begin April 3, focusing on governance of Serb communities within Kosovo. 
Geopolitical Diary: Kosovo and the Implications of Independence
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
4
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 5
Global Vantage
April 3, 2006
•  Italy will hold parliamentary elections April 9, pitting current Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi’s
center-right bloc against former Prime Minister Romano Prodi’s coalition of leftist parties.
Italy: Berlusconi Likely to Glide Around Charges
•  The ﬁrst round of Hungarian parliamentary elections will take place April 9, with the
Hungarian Civic Union and the Hungarian Socialist Party vying for control over parliament. 
•  EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn will present his ﬁndings and recommendations on
Romania and Bulgaria’s accession progress April 3. 
•  Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov will meet Slovakian ofﬁcials in Bratislava on April 4-5
to discuss trade, weapons manufacturing, and bilateral relations.
Latin America
Highlights
•  The leaders of the United States, Mexico and Canada meet in Cancun, Mexico, to discuss
migration, border security and economic competitiveness.
Canada, Mexico, U.S.: The Spring Break Summit
•  Brazilian Finance Minister Antonio Palocci resigns amid a corruption scandal.
Brazil: Continuity at the Finance Ministry
•  The U.S. Senate starts debate on immigration reform and border security. 
Geopolitical Diary: Immigration Debate
•  Venezuela again postpones making a decision on American ﬂight bans.
The United States and the ‘Problem’ of Venezuela
Upcoming
•  The ﬁrst round of Peru’s presidential election will be held April 9. Nationalist Ollanta Humala
and centrist Lourdes Flores are expected to advance to a run-off.
•  The World Economic Forum will hold its annual Latin American meeting in Sao Paulo, Brazil, 
on April 5-6 to discuss competitiveness issues.
•  Salvadoran President Tony Saca will visit Colombia on April 3-4 to talk about security
and trade issues.
•  Free trade negotiations will continue between Ecuador and the United States. Ecuador will
decide whether to pass a law that allows it to renegotiate contracts with oil companies.
•  The Inter-American Development Bank will hold its annual meeting in Belo Horizonte, Brazil, 
on April 3-5. While in Brazil, Bolivian President Evo Morales will meet with his Brazilian
counterpart to discuss a potential energy agreement.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
5
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 6
Global Vantage
April 3, 2006
Security and Counterterrorism
Highlights
•  Bombs explode on a bus and in a store on the Philippine island of Jolo, killing several people. 
The attacks are thought to be linked to Abu Sayyaf. 
•  The U.S. Embassy in Turkey issues a Warden Message about possible increased activity by the
militant Kurdistan Workers’ Party. The embassy warns U.S. citizens against travel in
southeastern Turkey.
Turkey: A New Kurdish Front in the Battle Against Ankara
•  Hungarian Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany warns that a “foreign organized crime gang” 
plans to detonate bombs ahead of parliamentary elections scheduled for April 9 and
April 23. 
•  Indonesian police arrest 12 people in connection with a March 19 attack on a mining camp
on Sumbawa Island. Four suspects are shot and wounded while resisting arrest.
Violent Protests in Indonesia: A Message to Multinationals?
•  More demonstrations occur in Bangkok, Thailand, ahead of April 2 elections. Protesters have
been calling for the resignation of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, who is embroiled in a
corruption controversy.
Thailand’s Political Unrest: The Signiﬁcance for Multinationals
Thailand: Thaksin’s Problems Grow
•  Australian police arrest three men in a north Melbourne suburb on charges related to
terrorism. They allegedly are members of a group led by radical cleric Abdul Nacer
Ben Brika.
Upcoming 
•  Pro-democracy protests scheduled for April 6-10 in Nepal may result in clashes between
demonstrators and police. 
•  Security forces will be on heightened alert throughout India on April 7 during “Rising Day,”
when supporters commemorate the founding of the militant United Liberation Front of Asom. 
•  Islamist groups, especially the Front Pembela Islam in Indonesia, may attack places they
consider to be encouraging inappropriate behavior April 10, when the Prophet Mohammed’s
birthday is observed. 
Public Policy
Highlights
•  Environmental groups oppose the Bush administration’s new vehicle fuel-economy standards. 
Environmentalists Criticize Proposed Fuel Economy Standards
•  The pro-Democratic political organization MoveOn.org creates anti-oil ads that allege
Republicans are heavily inﬂuenced by oil companies. 
MoveOn.org Ads Allege Heavy Inﬂuence from Oil Companies on Republican Party
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
6
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 7
Global Vantage
April 3, 2006
•  A California State Assembly committee approves a bill that would subject most electronic
devices to EU-style chemicals regulations.
California Bill Would Expand Electronics Ban
•  A California state bill that would create a statewide biomonitoring program passes its ﬁrst
committee vote.
California Biomonitoring Bill Moves Forward
•  Campaign for Safe Cosmetics announces that 300 companies have pledged to eliminate
certain chemicals from their products within three years.
300 Companies Sign Campaign for Safe Cosmetics Pledge
•  Reports circulate of an Environmental Protection Agency investigation into allegations that
the chromium industry hid research on the health risks of hexavalent chromium.
EPA Reportedly Investigating Chromium Studies
•  The Food and Drug Administration announces that its data shows no health threats posed
by benzene levels sometimes found in soft drinks.
FDA Dismisses Soft Drink Safety Concerns
•  Little is accomplished at the Eighth Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological
Diversity in Curitiba, Brazil. Activists respond with renewed focus on the Amazon.
Activist Focus on the Amazon: Impacting Global Agriculture
Upcoming
•  The Center for American Progress will hold a discussion April 3 on “After Oil: The Economic
and Political Promise of a Post-Petroleum Society.”
•  The American Public Health Association will hold a news brieﬁng April 3 to launch National
Public Health Week.
•  The Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources will host a daylong conference
April 4 to discuss a possible greenhouse-gas emissions trading program.
•  McDonald’s Truth Tour 2006, led by the Coalition of Immokalee Workers, will end April 4
in Chicago.
•  Environmental and Energy Study Institute will hold a brieﬁng April 4 on “Flexible-Fuel Plug-in
Hybrids: Taking Charge to Reduce U.S. Oil Consumption.”
•  American University’s Washington College of Law will host a discussion with Rep. Christopher
Smith, R-N.J., on a bipartisan approach to human rights.
•  The Fourth Annual Northeast Climate Conference will be held at Yale University on April 4-9
in New Haven, Conn.
•  Resources for the Future will hold a brieﬁng April 5 titled “Natural Disasters and Policymaking: 
Whither Risk Assessment?”
•  The American Bar Association Section of International Law 2006 Spring Meeting will consider
environmental and intellectual-property issues April 5-8 in New York.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
7
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
Page 8
Global Vantage
April 3, 2006
•  Ceres, an inﬂuential coalition of socially and environmentally minded investors, will hold its
annual conference on the theme “Accelerating Sustainable Governance” in Oakland, Calif.,
on April 5-6.
•  Reclaim the Commons Convergence and Joint International GMOpposition Day on April 9
will clash in Chicago with the ﬁrst day of Bio 2006, an annual biotechnology conference.
Questions? Please contact your Briefer directly or Global Vantage Client Services at +1 512.744.4090 or gvqa@stratfor.com.
8
Strategic Forecasting, Inc. • 700 Lavaca Street, Suite 900 Austin, TX 78701 • Tel: +1 512.744.4090 • Email: gvqa@stratfor.com • www.stratfor.com
