Minutes of the Framingham Planning Board
Held on March 17, 2022 at 7:00pm
Blumer Community Room, Lower Level, Memorial Building and Via Zoom
Present: Kristina Johnson, Chair; Joseph Norton, Vice-Chair; Shannon Fitzpatrick, Clerk; Aaron
Bober and Thomas Buie. Also present: Shane O’Brien and Mollie Amaral
Kristina Johnson read the agenda into the record and called the Planning Board meeting
to order at 7:00 p.m. on Thursday, March 17, 2022. 
I.  Minutes
•  Public Hearing Meeting Minutes —March 3, 2022
Joseph Norton moved that the Planning Board approve the minutes of March 3, 
2022. Thomas Buie seconded the motion. The Planning Board voted in favor of
the motion 5-0-0. MOTION PASSED. 
II. Public Hearings
None. 
III. Other Business
•  PB-04-20, Carlson Crossing - Request for Extension for Previously Approved
Decision and Plans. 
Present for the Applicant: Paul Landers
Paul Landers, the Applicant’s representative, stated that the Applicant’s new name for
the development will be Carlson Crossing. Mr. Landers stated that the one-hundred and
twenty-five (125) units will be divided into three (3) construction phases. Mr. Landers
stated that the Applicant is aiming to begin construction on the West units. Mr. Landers
stated that construction will begin around the third week of April. Mr. Landers stated
that eighteen months (18) of construction is estimated to complete the Western units. 
Mr. Landers stated that the next phase of construction will be on the Eastern units. Mr. 
Landers stated that the city’s commitment to the project has been beneficial to the
project’s advancement. Mr. Landers stated that the new proposed landscaping plan and
exterior design are a significant improvement. Mr. Landers stated that the currently
occupied units are beginning to be emptied to begin construction. Mr. Landers stated
that recreational elements are incorporated in the Eastern portion of construction. Mr. 
Landers stated that Western construction is fully funded and the Eastern construction
funding is currently being reviewed. 
Joseph Norton moved that the Planning Board approve as presented. Thomas
Buie seconded the motion. No discussion. The Planning Board voted in favor of
the motion 5-0-0. MOTION PASSED. 
Page 2
•  PB-32-18, 665 Cochituate Road – Minor Modification to Previously Approved
Decision and Plans. Applicant is requesting the adjust layout and use the floor
area of a former tenant at the property on the first floor of the building
Present for the Applicant: Erin Gibbons
Erin Gibbons, the Applicant’s representative, stated that the Applicant is proposing a
minor interior modification. Ms. Gibbons stated that a 3D rendering illustrates how the
additional interior change will be reflected. Ms. Gibbons stated that the site currently
requires fifty-eight (58) spaces and currently has fifty-nine (59), though the change to a
retail use for the marijuana business reduces the required number of parking spaces, 
though the Applicant will maintain the original fifty-nine (59).
Thomas Buie moved that the Planning Board approve as presented. Joseph
Norton seconded the motion. No discussion. The Planning Board voted in favor
of the motion 5-0-0. MOTION PASSED. 
•  Continued discussion on changes in Newspaper process for legal ads and
potential fee schedule impacts. 
Ms. Johnson stated that raising the initial submission fees might be beneficial to allow
Staff to have a pool of funding available to pay for the newspaper advertisements on
behalf of Applicants. Ms. Fitzpatrick stated that the Planning Board doesn’t have too
much of a choice and that raising fees would be essential, or further burden would be
placed to pay for the advertisement by the applicant, up front. Mr. O’Brien stated that
Staff will look into specific numbers and provide further information to the Planning
Board. 
IV. Staff and Business Report
None. 
V. Adjournment
Thomas Buie moved that the Planning Board adjourn the meeting of March 17, 2022. 
Joseph Norton seconded the motion. No discussion. The Planning Board voted in favor
of the motion 5-0-0. MOTION PASSED. 
The Planning Board adjourned the meeting of March 17, 2022, at 7:24 p.m. 
