Minutes of the Framingham Planning Board
Held on January 6, 2022 at 7:00pm
Fully Remote Via Zoom
Present: Kristina Johnson, Chair; Joseph Norton, Vice-Chair; Shannon Fitzpatrick, Clerk; Aaron
Bober, and Thomas Buie. Also present Shane O’Brien and Mollie Amaral
Kristina Johnson read the agenda into the record and called the Planning Board meeting
to order at 7:00 p.m. on Thursday, January 6, 2022. 
I.  Minutes
•  Public Hearing Meeting Minutes —December 16, 2021
Joseph Norton moved that the Planning Board approve the minutes of December
16, 2021. Shannon Fitzpatrick seconded the motion. No discussion. The Planning
Board voted in favor of the motion 5-0-0. MOTION PASSED. 
II. Continued Public Hearings
•  1 Worcester Road, Continued public hearing for Site Centers Corp. for a
Modification to a Planning Board decision dated January 10, 1994 for Special
Permits for Site Plan Review, Off-Street Parking Plan Approval and a Special
Permit for Reduction in the Required Number of Parking Spaces, as subsequently
modified on June 25, 2002; March 19, 2015; February 22, 2016; March 22, 2018; 
July 26, 2018; April 11, 2019; and July 22, 2021, Modification to a Planning Board
Decision dated August 10, 1994 for a Sign Review Approval in conjunction with a
Special Permit Site Plan application before the Planning Board (also modifying
the above-referenced Jan 10, 1994 decision, as subsequently modified on
February 22, 2019 and April 11, 2019, a Special Permit for Land Disturbance and
Stormwater Management, and Waivers per Section III.E.10.c from Highway
Overlay District Standards and Section III.E.8.i for landscaping adjacent to
building. The applicant proposes a redevelopment at the southwest corner of
Shopper’s World including demolition of existing retail and construction of new
retail and grocery space. 
Present for the Applicant: Chris Reville
Chris Reville, the Applicant’s representative, received the third-party peer review
consultant’s report and is currently coordinating a response. Mr. Reville stated that the
Applicant should be able to respond in a few weeks. 
Mr. O’Brien stated that the third-party peer review consultant is available to attend a
following meeting as well. 
Page 2
Joseph Norton moved that the Planning Board continue the public hearing to
Thursday, January 20, 2022. Thomas Buie seconded the motion. No discussion. 
The Planning Board voted in favor of the motion 5-0-0. MOTION PASSED. 
•  138 Leland Street, Continued public hearing for Application of R.M.L. Realty
Company, LLC for Minor Site Plan Review and a Special Permit for Land
Disturbance and Stormwater Management. The Applicant proposes to use the
property for temporary storage of vehicles and off duty tow trucks as well as to
add an ADA ramp to the site. 
Present for the Applicant: Joseph Antonellis and Brian Nelson
Joseph Antonellis, the Applicant’s representative, stated that there will only be activity
on the location between seven (7) in the morning and seven (7) at night. Mr. Antonellis
stated that while there was a public concern for leaking fluid on the site, any vehicle
that is at risk of leaking fluid will have an additional device placed underneath them to
catch the fluids. Mr. Antonellis stated that there will not be further environmental
damage to the location. Mr. Antonellis stated that the Applicant is seeking a land
disturbance permit because the Building Commissioner suggested that the Applicant do
so. Mr. Antonellis stated that an easement regarding railroad access could not be
determined and the site plan has been modified to remove the site entrance that
involves the railroad. 
Brian Nelson, the Applicant’s representative, stated that Applicant will remove the
current chain-link fence and replace it with a six (6) foot high chain-link fence. Mr. 
Nelson stated surface materials have been modified to best fit recommendations
suggested during the Applicant’s technical review meeting. Mr. Nelson stated that the
overall impervious area will be reduced. Mr. Nelson stated that there a several
restrictions on the property. Mr. Nelson stated vehicles in severe accidents would be
first treated to have fluids removed prior to being stored at the site. Mr. Nelson stated
that the land disturbance permit isn’t entirely relevant to the Applicant. Mr. Nelson
stated there could be some relevancy due to the gravel brought in to the site, however
the property is less than one (1) acre. 
Mr. Norton stated that the information provided over the last week has been beneficial. 
Mr. Bober stated in agreement with Mr. Norton. 
Mr. Buie stated a concern over how the site is secured. Mr. Nelson stated that a gate
will be incorporated into the new fence design that would allow for full circulation
access to the property. Mr. Nelson stated that one (1) gate will be open at all times
during operational hours. 
Ms. Fitzpatrick stated a concern over the property being operational for seven (7) days
per week. Ms. Fitzpatrick stated that the Applicant is not proposing anything that will be
Page 3
beneficial to the city or the neighborhood. Ms. Fitzpatrick stated that the Applicant’s
proposal is not in-line with the city’s master plan. 
Ms. Johnson stated that the Zoning Board of Appeals would be the more appropriate
venue for dismissing the need for a land disturbance permit. Ms. Johnson stated that
due to current property restrictions, there are not a lot of allowed uses for the site. Ms. 
Johnson stated a frustration with the process in regards to the Applicant’s proposal. 
Mr. Antonellis stated that the Applicant filed for a land disturbance permit, but it is still
unclear as to why the permit is necessary. Mr. Antonellis stated that the Planning Board
can still approve the permit. 
Margareth Shepard, a community member, stated a concern over the Applicant’s
proposal. Ms. Shepard stated that it would be harmful to community members. Judith
Grove, a community member, stated a concern over the Applicant opening at seven (7) 
in the morning on weekends, as the noise bylaw doesn’t permit that level of noise until
eight (8) in the morning. Ms. Grove stated a concern over school bus traffic on the
adjacent street that the Applicant would be utilizing. Ms. Grove stated a concern over
the state investing in a walking trail that would be adjacent to the Applicant’s property. 
Ms. Grove stated that a better use of the property given its restrictions would be to
install solar panels. Ms. Grove stated that the land disturbance permit is absolutely
necessary. 
Ms. Johnson stated a concern over issuing a permit of non-applicability, in regards to a
land disturbance permit. Ms. Johnson stated a concern over the hours of operation. Mr. 
Norton stated that the Applicant is making a concerted effort to lessen their impact on
the community. Mr. Norton stated a similar operation that the Applicant is proposing is
occurring less than a mile away. 
Mr. O’Brien stated that given that the Planning Board can determine waiver
applicability, it can equally determine that the Applicant does not meet with permit
requirements. 
Mr. Nelson stated that the Applicant filed their land disturbance permit pursuant to the
required form, and selected that every condition was not applicable. Mr. Nelson stated
that the Applicant has continually asked for further clarification on the land disturbance
permit. Mr. Antonellis stated a concern over how the Planning Board has responded to
the process behind their land disturbance permit. Mr. Antonellis stated that the city
should have properly addressed the Applicant’s concerns regarding the eligibility for the
land disturbance permit. Mr. Buie stated that the Planning Board should reach out to
the Building Commissioner and the City Solicitor to seek clarification. 
Mr. Buie stated that the community’s disagreement with the Applicant’s proposal is
significant. Mr. Buie stated that the Applicant’s proposal may not be best for the
Page 4
neighborhood and its needs. Mr. Bober stated in agreement with Mr. Buie. Mr. O’Brien
stated that staff can reach out to Legal Council and the Building Commissioner. Ms. 
Johnson stated that the Building Commissioner should be at the next Planning Board
meeting. 
Joseph Norton moved that the Planning Board continue the public hearing to
Thursday, February 3, 2022. Shannon Fitzpatrick seconded the motion. No
discussion. The Planning Board voted in favor of the motion 5-0-0. MOTION
PASSED. 
III. New Public Hearings
•  804 Waverly Street, Application of 804 Waverly Street LLC, for Major Site Plan
Review, a Special Permit for Mixed Use, a Special Permit for Reduction in
Parking, a Special Permit for Location of Parking (front yard), and a Public Way
Access Permit. The applicant proposes to raze the existing structure and replace
it with a three-story mixed-use building containing 475 s.f. of non-residential
space on the first floor and six (6) dwelling units on floors (2-3) with parking for
12 vehicles
Present for the Applicant: Terry Morris, Ron Bourque, Charles Zammuto, and Eric
Bradnese
Terry Morris, the Applicant’s representative, stated that the Applicant has constructed
other multi-family dwellings in the city that are highly regarded. Mr. Morris stated that
the current property on the structure was built around 1912 and has been approved by
the Historic Commission to raze the structure. Mr. Morris stated that the lot has
frontage on two (2) streets due to its triangular nature. Mr. Morris stated that the
Applicant is proposing a mixed-use designation for this building. Eric Bradnese, the
Applicant’s representative, stated that the Applicant will construct a new sidewalk in the
side frontage. Mr. Bradnese stated that on one side of the property, there is an abutting
two (2) foot stonewall. 
Mr. Morris stated that residential use requirements for land usage are being used to
determine frontage and general lot guidelines, given that the proposed mixed-use is
predominately residential. Mr. Morris stated that the lot exceeds the minimum lot area
and open space required. Mr. Morris stated that the floor-to-area ratio is 0.7. Mr. 
Morris stated that the thirty (30) foot setback is met on one side, but due to the size of
the lot is not met on the other two sides. Mr. Morris stated that the Applicant will also
be before the Zoning Board of Appeals in the coming week. Mr. Morris stated that the
size and type of the lot makes it difficult to build on without seeking waivers or permits. 
Ron Bourque stated that there would be both impervious surfaces and ample
landscaping. Mr. Bradnese stated that the landscaping plan is simple. Mr. Bradnese
stated that the landscaping is fairly low in height in order to accommodate sight lines for
Page 5
drivers. Mr. Bourque stated that the first floor will have a residential lobby and a
commercial space, along with four (4) parking spaces. Mr. Bourque stated that
additional parking is available below the building. Mr. Bourque stated that fencing will
be incorporated as well to allow for further screening. Mr. Bourque stated an outdoor
seating area will be incorporated. Mr. Bourque stated that the residential units are
within the ground floor footprint of the building. Mr. Bourque stated that the one (1) 
bedroom apartments will be approximately seven-hundred and fifteen (715) square feet
and two (2) bedroom apartments will be approximately eight-hundred and sixty (860) 
square feet. Mr. Bourque stated that elevations presented display a residential feel to
the building design. Mr. Bourque stated that rendered models of the proposed building
fit into the design of the neighborhood. 
Mr. Bradnese stated that the Applicant received feedback from Planning Board staff and
DPW. Mr. Bradnese stated that the Applicant responded to the feedback and provided
additional utility and construction notes as DPW’s request. Mr. Bradnese stated that
nothing has been changed on the presently submitted plans. 
Mr. Norton stated a concern over what the non-residential use will be. Mr. Morris
stated that it will not be for food use. Mr. Morris stated that it could be a service use for
a professional occupation. Mr. Norton stated a concern over what type of fencing would
be utilized. Mr. Morris stated that a synthetic material would be utilized. Mr. Norton
stated a concern over street parking. Mr. Morris stated that there is a current bicycle
lane that prohibits street parking on one of the abutting streets. 
Councilor John Stefanini, stated that the neighborhood in which the Applicant is
proposing to build has an organized neighborhood association. Mr. Stefanini stated that
the Association is not opposed or in support of the project. Mr. Stefanini stated that the
type of mixed-use proposed would be beneficial. Mr. Stefanini stated a concern over on-
street parking on an abutting street. Mr. Stefanini stated that the Association has invited
the Applicant to give a presentation at their neighborhood meeting which should occur
at the end of January or beginning of February. Ed Kross, a community member, stated a
concern over on-street parking on an abutting street. 
Charles Zammuto stated that the Applicant would consider putting solar panels on the
roof. Mr. Zammuto stated that in other properties that the Applicant owns, blinking
lights were placed at the parking entrances and exits. 
Mr. Buie stated that parking for this lot is particularly challenging. Mr. Buie stated the
Applicant’s proposal seems strong. Mr. Bober stated in agreement with Mr. Buie. Ms. 
Fitzpatrick stated a concern over the number of units in the building. Ms. Fitzpatrick
stated a concern over the number of parking spaces in a small space. 
Page 6
Mr. Zammuto stated that a firewall be placed between the units in the building, 
preventing noise to bleed into the apartments. Mr. Zammuto stated that the floor plan
is not a construction plan and therefore subject to change. 
Mr. Norton stated that aesthetically the Applicant’s design looks great. Ms. Johnson
stated that the mixed-use proposal is beneficial for the neighborhood. Ms. Johnson
stated that a traffic study looking to the abutting street might be useful. Ms. Johnson
stated that aesthetically the Applicant’s design looks great. 
Mr. Morris stated that the Applicant is looking forward to meeting with Mr. Stefanini
and the neighborhood Association. Mr. Morris stated that the Applicant is open to being
flexible in regards to parking. Mr. Morris stated that rental agreements signed with
individual tenants will also specify how many parking spaces each unit can access. Mr. 
Morris stated that increasingly apartment tenants are expecting only having access to
one (1) parking space. Mr. Zammuto stated that the Applicant intends to take advantage
of the adjacent bicycle lane to incorporate bicycle racks. 
Mr. O’Brien stated that Planning Board staff sent Planning Board members a report with
staff concerns. Mr. O’Brien stated a concern over locations of curb cuts and primary
access to parking spaces. Mr. O’Brien stated a concern over people making tight turns
on the ground level parking spaces. Mr. O’Brien stated a concern over the location of
utilities meters. Mr. Zammuto stated that Mr. O’Brien’s concerns can certainly be
incorporated. Mr. Morris stated that fire vehicles would park on the street, not on the
site. 
Ms. Fitzpatrick stated a concern over the number of parking spaces. Ms. Fitzpatrick
stated that removing one (1) of the units and reducing relevant parking spaces would be
beneficial. 
Ms. Johnson stated that the Applicant needs to seek their variances from the Zoning
Board of Appeals and to meet with the neighborhood. 
Mr. Stefanini stated that at the end of January the Applicant will attend the
neighborhood Association meeting. Mr. Stefanini stated that the Association has been
thinking through a mixed-use building for several years. Mr. Stefanini stated that off-
street parking and traffic will be the community’s primary concerns. 
Joseph Norton moved that the Planning Board continue the public hearing to
Thursday, February 3, 2022. Thomas Buie seconded the motion. No discussion. 
The Planning Board voted in favor of the motion 5-0-0. MOTION PASSED. 
IV. Other Business
V. Staff and Business Report
•  100 Worcester Road
Page 7
Mr. O’Brien stated that Planning Board staff have reached out to the representative of
the lot owner and have also followed up, but have heard no response. Ms. Johnson
stated that a potential next step would be to send a certified letter. 
VI. Adjournment
Thomas Buie moved that the Planning Board adjourn the meeting of January 6, 2022. 
Joseph Norton seconded the motion. No discussion. The Planning Board voted in favor
of the motion 5-0-0. MOTION PASSED. 
The Planning Board adjourned the meeting of January 6, 2022, at 9:34 p.m. 
