Article: #12
Sponsor: CFO
FY18 General Fund Operating Budget
Background Materials
FRAMINGHAM PUBLIC SCHOOLS
FY18 BUDGET BOOK
Our School Committee Letter ……………………………………………………………
Our Superintendent Letter ………………………………………………………………
Our Budget Goal……………………………………………………………………………
Our Budget Guidance ……………………………………………………………………
Our Budget Structure ……………………………………………………………………
Our Budget Process ………………………………………………………………………
Our Enrollments …………………………………………………………………………..
Our FACE/PIC Department …………………………………………………………….
Our Bilingual Education Department ………………………………………………..
Our Special Education Department …………………………………………………..
Our Sage Department …………………………………………………………………….
Our Health and Wellness Department ………………………………………………..
Our Buildings ……………………………………………………………………………….
Our Reorganization Plans for Educational Operations/Central Office/FHS …
Our Grants…………………………………………………………………………………...
Our Future ………………………………………………………………………………….
ATTACHMENTS
Superintendent’s Proposed FY18 Budget……………………………………………
FY18 Increases…………………………………………………………………………….
FY18 Budget Analysis by Category……………………………………………………
15-Year Historical Data – Per Pupil Cost …………………………………………….. 
3
4
5
6
7
9
9
11
14
16
19
20
22
24
24
31
35
36
38
40
1 | P a g e 
Page 2
FY18 Budget Memorandum October 6 and October 20 ………………………….
FY18 Budget Memorandum dated December 2, 2016 ……………………………
FY18 Capital Project Requests ………………………………………………………….
School Facility Statistics………………………………………………………………….
Facility General Information……………………………………………………………..
FPS Demographic Snapshot …………………………………………………………….
2017 Bilingual Students, Programs and Staffing Report …………………………
NESDEC Historical Enrollment ………………………………………………………...
NESDEC Projected Enrollment …………………………………………………………
Historical Kindergarten Enrollment …………………………………………………...
Entrance/Exit rate summary ………………………………………………………
Registrations: October 1, 2015 – March 8, 2016……………………………………
Withdrawn: October 1, 2015 – March 8, 2016 …………………………………….
DESE 2016 Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives LEP Students ……..
Attendance letter to parents dated August 11, 2016 ……………………………..
Chart: Students with 2 or more absences ………………………………………….
Chart: Students with 5 or more absences ………………………………………….
FPS Employee Benefit Usage……………………………………………………………
Collective Bargaining Units……………………………………………………………..
DESE Per Pupil Expenditure Summary FY14-FY16 ………………………………
DESE Per Pupil Expenditure Details ………………………………………………….
Total PK-12 Operating Expenditures FY09-FY15 ………………………………….
Dollar Change in School District Spending FY09-FY15 ………………………….
Public PK-12 School Expenditures FY09-FY15, All Funds ………………………
DESE Direct Special Education Expenditures …………………………………….
Comparison of Estimated SPED Costs, FY14-24 …………………………………
FY18 School Responsibility Center (Departments and Schools) Report……… 
41
44
46
47
48
58
59
65
67
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
83
84
85
86
87
88
2 | P a g e 
Page 3
Framingham Public Schools
Dr. Robert A. Tremblay, Superintendent of Schools
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
Heather A. Connolly, Chair • Jim Kelly, Vice Chair • Richard A. Finlay, Clerk 
Michelle Brosnahan • Cheryl Gordon • Beverly Hugo • Scott Wadland 
73 Mount Wayte Avenue, Second Floor, Framingham, MA 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9121 Fax: 508-877-4240
April 4, 2017
Dear Town Meeting Members: 
The Framingham School Committee appreciates your time and due diligence in
deliberating the FY18 Budget for the Town of Framingham. 
The School Committee is committed to providing the highest quality education for all
students it serves and strives to do so while staying within its Town Meeting
appropriation. We continue to advocate for more funding for the Framingham Public
Schools at the state and federal level. 
We have seen our enrollment increase over the course of each month this past year. 
Meeting the social and emotional needs, as well as language needs, providing support
for students who struggle due to the effects of poverty, homelessness, lack of mental
health services, as well as those students who have interrupted or limited formal
education are some of the reasons for our advocacy for our students. 
We urge you to support the proposed funding of $128,065,471 for next year’s Operating
Budget. This will allow us to continue to build a strong foundation of high 21st century
quality instruction with a fully aligned and engaging curriculum that will promote and
interact with our students and help them prepare for college and careers. 
We look forward to continuing to work with all stakeholders and elected Town Meeting
members, we thank you for your service and support to the Town in general and of the
students the School Department specifically! 
Very truly yours, 
Heather Connolly, Chair 
3 | P a g e 
Page 4
Framingham Public Schools
Robert A. Tremblay, Ed.D., Superintendent of Schools
73 Mount Wayte Avenue, Suite #5
Framingham, Massachusetts 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9117 Fax: 508-877-4240
April 4, 2017
Dear Town Meeting Member: 
We are pleased to present the FY18 School Department Operating Budget for your review. 
The figures contained within are our best estimate of what we will need to operate the Framingham
Public Schools next year. The salaries are for all existing staff moved ahead one year. Thus, salaries
for those individuals who are eligible for a step increase have been increased accordingly. This
budget assumes that anyone currently on staff will remain on staff, but will likely change once the
new fiscal year begins. There have been many other positions that district administrators and
principals have identified as important, but given the realities of available funding, we have only
included those that are critical to school district operations, as we continue our efforts to move the
district and our students to even higher levels of achievement. 
The Additional Salaries budgets are our best estimate of what it will actually cost for these existing
staff as they take on additional duties (stipends), work overtime (for our hourly staff), require
substitutes for teachers who take sick or personal time off, etc.. The expense budget assumes a level
service approach (no new programs or services) and funds increases that we know we will have. 
We hope that you find all of this information useful as you review the attached documents. Given
the amount of information, we have scheduled our Public Hearing (April 11th) as well as other
opportunities between now and Town Meeting (April 25) to have the public share their thoughts
with the School Committee. I believe that the proposed budget is a good one and that if funded, it
will provide the financial and human resources that we need to keep our district moving forward. 
I look forward to speaking more about our budget as we proceed toward Town Meeting in April. 
Thank you for taking the time to be a part of this important process. 
Very truly yours, 
RAT/np 
Robert A. Tremblay
Superintendent of Schools 
4 | P a g e 
Page 5
OUR BUDGET GOAL FOR FY18
Meeting the needs of ALL learners in the Framingham Public Schools
We live in a rapidly changing world of complexity, diversity and uncertainty. The
challenges all of our students face in the Framingham Public Schools (FPS) are not
unique to Framingham. They mirror what is happening locally, nationally and
globally. 
District data reveal: 
  22% of our students receive Special Education services 
  34% of our students are defined as economically disadvantaged by the state
  66% of our students are identified as “high needs” as defined by Massachusetts
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) 
  26% of our students are identified as English Learners (EL) 
  For 44% of our students, English is not their first language 
  There are over 400 students identified as homeless currently enrolled in FPS 
  There is also a transient nature to a percentage of our population, with
students moving in and out of the school system throughout the year that will
be detailed further in our budget data as a significant challenge, especially in
some schools
  Since July 2016, 450 new students have enrolled in the FPS system
Since 2006, the MetroWest Adolescent Health Survey has monitored trends in health
and risk behaviors among youth in the communities served by the MetroWest Health
Foundation. As evidenced in the most recent survey conducted: 
  18% of middle school youth and 22% of high school youth report depressive
symptoms (feeling sad or hopeless for more than two weeks) 
  15% of high school youth seriously considered suicide and 6% attempted
suicide in the last 12 months. For middle school students the numbers are 12% 
and 4% respectively
  An increasing number of students are being hospitalized for serious behavioral
health issues - 30 students last year and over 25 students so far this year
  13% of middle school students and 35% of high school students report life is
very stressful during the past 30 days
  One in three students attend school with a medical issue
  One in five students attend school with a mental health diagnosis
Meeting the needs of all our students, and particularly those who fall into one or more
of the groupings above, requires significant investment of staff, services and funding. 
The Town of Framingham’s state legislative delegation has done a tremendous job in 
closing the gap in Framingham’s Chapter 70 funding, and the Town of Framingham
and its Town Meeting have been very supportive of the Framingham Public Schools, 
particularly over the past 5 years, but we understand and appreciate that this level of
5 | P a g e 
Page 6
funding is not sustainable and we must continue to explore ways to maximize our
support for our students with reduced financial resources. 
The District Management Group, a firm that is a leader in helping school districts
nationwide “address their most pressing and important challenges” has looked at
educational funding in the United States over the past 109 years. They have found
that except for 2 years during this time (one year during World War II and another
year during the Depression), per pupil funding for education, adjusted for inflation, 
has not risen at all. They estimate that a student entering Kindergarten in 2009 will
actually have less funding per pupil upon graduation than today’s graduates. Their
research clearly indicates that districts must respond by “shifting the use of existing
funds” as the only way that districts can continue to meet the emerging needs of their
students given the historical reality that education funding is, and will continue to be
“flat” and increases like we have seen here in Framingham are simply not sustainable
(from presentation by Nate Levenson, DMG President to TEC Superintendents, March
2017).  Thus, our focus in developing our FY18 budget is on making the best use of
the funding that is available to us and ensuring that we seek sustainability as well as
effectiveness in our use of budget resources as we work to meet the needs of all our
learners. 
OUR BUDGET GUIDANCE
We began our FY18 Budget process in October, 2016 when we were advised that the
CFO told the Town Meeting that she estimated that the Town’s overall budget for FY18
might be able to support a 4.5% increase for the School Department. Memorandum
(see attached – memorandum of October 6, 2016 and memorandum of October 20, 
2016, pages 41-43) was then sent out to all schools and departments that the FY18
School Department Budget would be a level-service budget with no funds available for
any new positions except those that are needed to address the growing school
population. This was a change from the past where the district asked the schools and
departments to submit requests for new positions in priority order, and these requests
were then combined into three levels (1-3) based on their respective priorities. As the
memo indicated, our Business Office created a model for the FY18 budget and it
affirmed that we would need to develop a level-service budget in order to stay within
the Town guideline, which we committed to do. Thus, our guiding principle for this
FY18 budget remains the development of a level-service budget with the
understanding that we would review and reassess the investments that we have made
over the past 5 years while we were receiving significant increases (5.9% average), and
we would seek to repurpose funds in order to meet emerging or unforeseen needs
whenever we can. 
We are actively and aggressively seeking opportunities to meet the needs of our
students from our existing budget resources, and we will continue to do that
throughout the year since our student population continues to grow as do their needs. 
Our “theme” for our FY18 budget is meeting the needs of ALL learners in the
Framingham Public Schools.  Our budget materials will detail the challenges that we
6 | P a g e 
Page 7
face in our growing student population that is both dynamic and increasingly diverse
in terms of their educational and social-emotional needs. 
The Town of Framingham has good reason to be proud of their schools and the
achievements of the students in them. The ongoing support for the School Department
budget is a major factor in our ability to continue making the Town proud of its
schools, and we are very grateful for the clear statement that this support makes to
our students, our teachers and our staff that they are truly valued and appreciated by
the community. With new leadership of the School Department, we view the future
with great excitement and optimism, and we look forward to continued success for our
students. 
OUR BUDGET STRUCTURE
The School Department Operating Budget is organized into three major components: 
Salaries
Additional Salaries (such as stipends, overtime, etc.)
Expenses
In addition to this “Operating Budget”, the School Department submits a “Capital
Budget” that is separate and distinct from the Operating Budget and is not structured
or developed in the same way. 
For the Operating Budget, the salaries portion of the budget is based upon two main
factors – the number/types of staff (teacher, aide, secretary, etc.) and the related
Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) that covers those staff.( see attached Collective
Bargaining Unit General Information sheet on page 78).  The district currently has six
Collective Bargaining Agreements in place, all of which expire at the end of the coming
fiscal year (June, 2018).  Thus, negotiations will commence soon for successor
agreements for all of the contracts that are now in place. In total, over 75% of all
School Department staff are covered by a CBA with the remaining, non-bargaining
staff increases subject to budget availability. For the FY18 budget, the only increase
in the number of staff is for new teachers required for new classrooms, positions that
were authorized in FY17 but funding was deferred, or positions needed to meet
compliance under Special Education and Bilingual Education regulations. The
Business Office then takes this staffing and applies the related CBA increases to arrive
at a salary figure for the FY18 budget. 
The additional salaries portion of the budget is made up of several discreet items, the
largest of which is the cost for substitute teachers, and that has proven to be our most
challenging item in this portion of the budget. We now have the ability to carefully
track teacher absences and the reasons for those absences, so we will be judicious in
our use of substitutes for such things as professional development and personal days. 
As we analyze the data that we get from AESOP, which is the on-line reporting tool
used by the Human Resources Department, we will continue to work with the
7 | P a g e 
Page 8
Framingham Teachers Association (FTA) to explore ways in which we can better
manage our use of substitute teachers so that we maximize the time our teachers
spend with their classes while also respecting the need for teachers for time off. In
FY18, we are increasing this line item alone by $172,500 and we still may be over
budget next year. This is due in large part to the district’s use of Aesop, the system
used to provide substitute teachers. The good news is that Aesop has allowed the
district to raise its “fulfillment” rate to over 80%, a dramatic improvement from a few
years ago when that rate was often 60% or less. However, Aesop has also made it
easier for teachers to take days off (sick, personal and professional development days),
so we have seen a “spike” in teacher absences, which increases our need for
substitutes. The district has brought this to the attention of the Framingham
Teachers Association as a concern, but until we have a resolution, we must continue
to increase the budget for substitutes (see attached FPS Employee Benefit Usage
chart, page 77).
The expense portion of the budget is driven primarily by contractual increases for
transportation (both in district and out-of-district) and student placement in out-of-
district schools through Special Education and Occupational Education. There is also
a restoration of the reduction in curriculum materials that was implemented in FY17. 
Otherwise, the expense budget is virtually level funded, and for the schools, this level
funding is now in its fifth year (since 2013),  which is a real challenge for our
Principals. However, salaries and additional salaries always take precedence over
expenses except those that are fixed or related to student placement in out-of-district
schools. Thus, we continue to chronically underfund expenses in order to meet our
budget goal. 
The Capital Budget is developed in a very different manner and on a very different
timeline than the Operating Budget. The guidance that we receive from the Town only
relates to the types of projects that can be included in our capital budget request, and
those are defined by the CFO. We do not receive a dollar value as a goal, but rather
the district, through its Director of Buildings and Grounds, Matt Torti, creates a list of
building projects that emanate from his department’s Long Range/20 Year Capital
Projects Plan, which his department maintains. Mr. Torti will also seek input from
Principals for items or projects that may be building-based. There is no specific
capital budget structure except that all town departments are asked to prioritize their
item or project requests from highest to lowest. This list is approved by the School
Committee’s Buildings and Grounds Committee as well as the full School Committee
before being submitted to the CFO in October, which is several months earlier than
requests for the Operating Budget. The Capital Budget request is usually accompanied
by quotes or estimates and all supporting materials for each specific item or project. 
The CFO aggregates all the capital budget requests and then informs each town
department as to its list of recommended projects that are ultimately voted on by Town
Meeting in the spring. This year, the School Department’s Capital Budget request, as
recommended by the town CFO, consists of eight (8) projects with a value of
$2,182,000 (see attached FY18 Capital Project Requests, page 46). 
8 | P a g e 
Page 9
OUR BUDGET PROCESS
The FY18 budget process began in October following Fall Town Meeting and we have
taken a very different approach than we have in the past to building our budget for the
coming year. In December (see attached memorandum of December 2, 2016, pages
44-45), we established an FY18 Budget Work Group consisting of several Directors, 
Principals and Senior Leaders and given the charge of assessing the success of our
past investments while also seeking efficiencies or opportunities for repurposing
existing funds to meet our growing or emerging needs. This Budget Work Group has
met many times since December and has identified potential areas for budget
reductions or reinvestments to help us develop a level service budget. This Work
Group will continue to meet and make recommendations for FY18 and beyond
because we know that sustainability of programs and services is, and will continue to
be, an important element in this and future budget processes. In fact, it may be that
this group continues its work even after the FY18 budget is adopted because we know
that our students’ needs will continue to challenge us to find new and creative ways to
use our budget resources to meet those needs. Thus, we plan to keep this Work
Group intact as we seek ways to serve our students in effective, efficient and
sustainable ways. 
This Work Group has already initiated conversations with Principals and Directors
around budget items related to the types and use of certain categories of staff (aides, 
behaviorists, etc.)  and their recommendations have been and will continue to be
considered as we explore ways to more efficiently manage our financial resources now
and into the future. 
We hope to be aided in this evaluative process by the work of Harvard Intern, Jessica
Rose, who has created a program evaluation tool that is currently being piloted at the
High School for the Phoenix Program, Thayer Academy and Resiliency for Life
Program. We believe that this tool will help us in other similar areas as we attempt to
evaluate the effectiveness and impact of programs and their relative cost and value for
our schools. 
In addition, we have been able to work with our new Superintendent to review the
structure of the Central Office of the district and we will be implementing changes to
improve our efficiency and effectiveness as a Central Office, but also redirecting some
of our resources out to our schools where they are most needed and will do the most
good. Once again, we will be repurposing existing funds to help meet the growing
needs of our schools for support and effective leadership. 
OUR ENROLLMENTS
The single most challenging aspect to building our FY18 Budget is our enrollment. 
Since 2007, Framingham’s PK-12 enrollment has been steadily increasing (8,038 in
2007 to 8,478 in 2016, an increase of 440 students – see attached NESDEC Historical
Enrollment, pages 65-66).  In response, the district reopened the King Elementary
School in 2014 that helped address the growing number of elementary aged students. 
9 | P a g e 
Page 10
The middle school increase has been accommodated by the availability of space at
Fuller Middle School, formerly Framingham South High School. However, Framingham
High School has continued to grow beyond its design capacity, so the district is
exploring alternatives that will allow the building to accommodate its current and
projected enrollments. Our Buildings and Grounds Department has also worked with
the Town to redesign the school parking lot to help alleviate the chronic problems of
accommodating the growing number of vehicles coming to the High School. 
However, while we may have addressed and planned for many of the space challenges
that our increasing enrollments have and will present, we are still challenged to meet
the educational and social-emotional needs of our students, particularly those newly
arrived here in Framingham. It is safe to say that almost all of the discretionary
budget increases that we have had in the past five years have gone to meeting the
challenges of our enrollment increases and the needs of these newly arrived students, 
and this will continue to be the challenge that we face as a district and as a town. All
of the staff increases we seek to add in FY18 (approximately 15 “new” positions) are
related directly to our increased enrollment or the needs of our newly enrolled
students whom, as you will see, are presenting with significant educational as well as
social-emotional needs. 
The district relies on the New England School Development Council (NESDEC) for its
enrollment projections and we recently commissioned them to do a demographic study
for us related to the Fuller School project to replace that aging building with help from
the Massachusetts School Building Authority. In their Demography and Enrollment
Projections study (see attached Projected Enrollment, pages 67-68) done last spring, 
they projected continuing growth for Framingham through 2023 when they project we
will hit our peak projected PK-12 enrollment (9,179 or another 467 students more
than they have projected for 2017 – 8,712).  Thus it is clear that enrollments in our
schools will continue to grow, which is one challenge, but that growth will also be
populated by students who need additional supports as evidenced by our past several
years of experience. This will mean that great pressure will be placed on all of our
schools as well and in particular on four of our departments as we seek to meet the
needs of all our learners. Those four departments are: 
The Family and Community Engagement Department and the Parent Information
Center within it: 
The Bilingual Education Department; 
The Special Education Department; 
The Health and Wellness Department
These are departments that provide essential supports and services to our schools, 
their students and their families, and when schools see their student population
changing during the school year, these departments are stretched and stressed due to
the entrance/exit rate in our schools (see attached chart, page 70) In the first six
months of this school year, the district had an 8% entrance/exit (percentage of
students either coming to or leaving the district) with a total of 620 students - 345
arriving and 275 leaving the district. From a district perspective, this is critically
10 | P a g e 
Page 11
important to understand because we know that most of students (75%) leaving the
district are in “general education” (i.e., not requiring services or programs) while 59% 
of the incoming students are general education. Conversely, only 25% of the students
leaving the district are students requiring services or programs while 41% of the
students entering the district are those who require additional supports. The mobility
of families thus has a significant impact on our district’s ability to get to know our
students and to support them appropriately representing a serious challenge to our
district schools. 
OUR FAMILY AND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
PARENT INFORMATON CENTER
The Department of Family and Community Engagement serves to support our
students’ first and most important teachers- their families and communities. To be
truly committed to the success of our students, we must support their families and
their communities to play an active role in the learning process. The department
consists of four divisions that support our families and communities to engage their
children in lifelong, enriching, social, emotional, and educational development. They
are: 
•  The Parent Information Center (PIC) 
•  Framingham Adult ESL Plus (FAESL+)
•  The Early Childhood Alliance of Ashland and Framingham (ECAAF) 
•  The FPS Attendance Office
Together, these components of the Family and Community Engagement Department
demonstrate the district’s deep commitment to community outreach and involvement. 
Overall, the divisions of FACE worked with more than 3500 families in SY 15-16. 
The Parent Information Center (PIC) is the first stop for all families new to the
Framingham Public Schools. PIC provides the following services: 
•  FPS registration for Grades K-12
•  School Placement
•  In District Transfer Requests
•  Transportation Requests
•  School Assignment 
•  Re-activations (for returning students) 
•  McKinney-Vento Homeless Designation and State Reporting
•  Enrollment Reports and Projections 
11 | P a g e 
Page 12
•  Track change of Language and Special Education Programs and student
withdrawals
•  Notary Services for Residency Affidavit
•  Change of Address for elementary grades in the summer
On March 4, 2017, there were 8,460 students enrolled in The Framingham Public
Schools in grades PK-12 (NOTE: does not include students enrolled in out-of-district
Special Education schools or Occupational Education schools).  Each of these
students came through the Parent Information Center at some time. From October 1, 
2016 through March 8, 2017, The Parent Information Center registered 345 new
students. During the same period of time, 275 students withdrew from FPS creating a
net increase of 70 students. Coupled with the 587 incoming kindergarten students for
next school year who have either registered or pre-registered, it is apparent that the
district’s enrollment is dynamic and not static (see individual school data on
Registered and Withdrawn students, pages 71-72) and PIC is, obviously, a very
important and busy place. 
There are five PIC staff members plus a Director. One staff member acts as the point
person for transportation requests. Another is also the district’s McKinney-Vento
(Homeless Students) liaison. Four of the five plus the Director are bilingual or tri-
lingual. 
We are very excited about the FY18 budget’s inclusion of funding for a new Online
Registration System for School Year 2017-2018 that will allow us to streamline new
registrations and re-enrollments and ensure that when a registration is done at PIC, 
all documents are easily and readily accessible by all parties involved at the school
and departmental level. 
This new online registration system will: 
•  Cut student registrar’s data entry time. From July 1, 2016 until March 10, 
2017 PIC registered over 1,100 students. A savings of 10 minutes in each
registration could equal to 183 less hours devoted to student registrations
allowing more time for PIC staff to devote to the other critical tasks listed above. 
•  Provide immediate time savings by digitizing the student registration process
•  Automatically integrate with our Student Information System (SIS) – Aspen X2
•  Key student registration documents will be accurately scanned, routed and
shared
•  Missing documents will be book marked and reminders sent out to parents 
•  Will automate kindergarten student lottery (still done with paper) 
We have also introduced some service improvements at PIC that will enhance our
efficiency and provide better service as well. In School Year 2016-2017, PIC extended
12 | P a g e 
Page 13
its hours on Mondays to 8:00 am – 6:00 pm during the school year to better serve
families, and on Tuesdays-Fridays, the office is open from 8:00 am – 4:00 pm. 
Extended hours are available on regular school days and the office is open year round. 
Free and Reduced Meal forms are now handed out to families at the time of
registration for those families that indicate a need. A majority of PIC staff are Bilingual
and native speakers in either Portuguese or Spanish which makes serving our families
much more efficient and welcoming. PIC now has a temporary receptionist to help out
at the busiest weeks of kindergarten registration due to large influx of phone calls and
appointments in order to ensure better customer service to families. 
Framingham Adult ESL Plus has been serving adults in the Framingham area since
1984. 
Framingham Adult ESL Plus currently offers: 
•  7 MORNING English classes
•  25 EVENING English classes
•  4 EVENING High School Equivalency classes
•  1 EVENING Citizenship class
•  37 total classes + 9 volunteer-led Prep classes 
•  42 Nations
•  26 Languages
There are now 716 students in classes and an additional 100+ students in Prep
Classes each semester. Of the 716 current students, 157 are parents of Framingham
Public School students. There are also 1,400 people waiting for classes, more than at
any other time in the program’s 33 year history. 
Two-thirds of the program’s funding comes from a DESE grants. The remainder is
provided by the Metrowest ESL Fund (a business and community partnership), private
donations, and administrative support from the Framingham Public Schools. This
support is critical in maintaining the required state match and remaining within state
mandated administrative limits. It is also critical to providing the support and
coordination necessary for such a large program. 
The Early Childhood Alliance conducts: 
•  Play, Learn and Grow Together (PLGT) Play Groups
•  Family Education Workshops focused on early literacy, socialization, and school
readiness skills. 
•  Weekly groups such as Stroll and StoryWalk , Brain Building for All Ages, Let’s
Go to Kindergarten, Motor Time, Dads and Donuts, and Baby Talk. 
13 | P a g e 
Page 14
•  The Parent-Child Home Program (PCHP), a nationally recognized early literacy
program, providing home visits to teach early literacy activities to families with young
children ages 18 months to 3 years old and serving 20 families each year. 
The Framingham site at the Fuller Middle School conducted approximately 45 groups
with 268 families and 453 children attending in the fourth quarter of last year. 
This program is completely grant funded through the Massachusetts Department of
Early Education and Care. 
The Attendance Officer meets with the majority of the elementary schools on a
monthly basis to review attendance data. The Attendance Officer performs home visits
to those students who either refuse to come to school or may be out of school and
their whereabouts are unknown because a parent has not called to report the absence. 
There can be several of these per week. The attendance officer also assists in cases
where residency may be unclear. The attendance officer is a critical member of the
district’s attendance policy team,  which has been meeting regularly to update
attendance policies and to provide schools with important resources and tools to help
improve attendance across the district. 
OUR BILINGUAL DEPARTMENT
The number of students, who are learning English as a second language (ESL) and
require direct instruction, has increased at twice the rate as the general education
population within the last three years. According to the Massachusetts Department of
Elementary and Secondary Education “Over the 10-year period from 2005-06 to 2015-
16, K-12 English learner (EL) enrollment increased nearly 66 percent…” Title VI of the
Civil Rights Act of 1974 requires districts to take appropriate steps to address the
language barriers that prevent ELs from accessing curriculum. Further, No Child Left
Behind Act (NCLB) of 2001 and its successor, the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 
each address specific requirements for supporting ELs access to education. In 2011-
2012, Massachusetts created and implemented the RETELL (Rethinking Equity and
Teaching for English Language Learners) which is a comprehensive approach to
addressing the needs of ELs and is designed to provide effective instruction to close
proficiency gaps. The regulatory requirement was that all core academic teachers of
ELs, and administrators who supervise and/or evaluate core academic teachers of ELs
have or obtain the SEI endorsement. Almost 100% of Framingham teachers and
administrators have earned this endorsement. Ms. Gen Grieci, Bilingual Education
Director for Framingham, is recognized throughout the state for her work as a DESE
trained and authorized instructor in RETELL. Massachusetts did not stop there, with
its implementation of RETELL, and in 2012-13, it joined the World-Class Instructional
Design and Assessment (WIDA) English language proficiency standards and
assessment framework to extend educator and administrators skills and knowledge
related to educating ELs. 
Today, 40% of our students speak a language or languages in addition to English at
home. Twenty percent of our student population are identified as English Language
14 | P a g e 
Page 15
Learners and require additional services in their acquisition of English. Initial
identification of ELs is a federal mandate and required by districts. The majority of
our students are born in the United States, while others come from various parts of
the world at any time during the year. Some of our students are also identified as
having limited or interrupted formal education (SLIFE) and require an individualized
plan of education. As contributing members of our community, these families are
committed to their children’s education and in becoming an integrated part of our
society. 
As per federal and state laws, our English Learners require direct service instruction
in English as a second language (ESL) that accelerates their rapid acquisition of
English. The increase of time on learning for ELs as per recent DESE guidelines
(August 2015) has put added stress on already limited staff resources in the district. 
Recent findings of DESE’s Coordinated Program Review of 2014-2015 found FPS out
of compliance in consistently supporting all English Learners in and out of their
classroom. Strengthening successful program models SEI (Sheltered English
Immersion), TBE (Transitional Bilingual Education), and TW (Two-Way) promotes the
academic achievement of linguistically diverse students. This enables them to develop
academic skills while learning English and makes the best use of district and
community resources. In order to narrow the achievement gap, meet the
recommended guidelines of direct service to ELs and support the social and emotional
needs of our students, additional resources must be in place at each of our district
schools, including our pre-school program to support this work. 
Some notable facts and challenges for the Bilingual Education Department are: 
•  Current active, non-outplaced K-12 enrollment is 1,764 
o FLEPs (Former Limited English Proficient) is 530 
A total of 26.8% of the district total enrollment is either current EL status or
monitoring status: 
•  By comparison, we served 1,153 students in 2009, a 60% increase in 7 years; 
•  The central office staffing consists of 2 administrators and two support staff, 
only adding the second administrator 2 years ago. 
•  The Department is also responsible for: 
o  supporting district translation needs; 
o  intake and initial identification of students needing Bilingual services; 
o  curriculum development and support (including materials with
significant challenges to providing Portuguese materials especially);
o  parent outreach including a newly organized home visit program; 
15 | P a g e 
Page 16
o  SEI support especially through working with Coaching Staff; 
o  testing of 3 year old students as a Title III district, which has been a real
challenge for the Department in providing testers; 
o  Seal of Bi-literacy program that celebrates our students who achieve high
standards of bilingualism. 
•  Challenges for the Department: 
o  Regulatory compliance for providing adequate ESL services to K-5 school
o  Adequate Coaching staff for Middle Schools, especially Fuller that has
only one Coach (cited in DESE Comprehensive Program Review/CPR) 
o  Inadequate staffing for SLIFE (Students with Limited/Interrupted Formal
Education) at Fuller (1.0 FTE) and the High School (1.0 FTE) 
•  The “Good News” resulting from significant budgetary investments over the past
5 years: 
o  State “Report Card” indicates that Framingham growth of Bilingual
students has outperformed the state average (see attached DESE report, 
page 73) 
o  For the first time ever, the district has exceeded the goal set by the state
for attainment in English language acquisition by our students
o  The district has been able to develop summer programs to address the
“summer slide” of Bilingual students since 2010 
Attached is a snapshot of bilingual students, programs and staffing for this current
year (see 2017 Bilingual Students, Programs and Staffing Report, pages 59-64).  There
is more work to be done, but as a district, we are much farther along than three years
ago thanks to the budgetary support we have received from the Town. 
OUR SPECIAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
Special Education, a federal mandated program for students with disabilities is
regulated through the Individuals with Disability Education Act. Students ages 3 – 22, 
depending upon eligibility, receive specialized services that meet the legal standards of
Free Appropriate Public Education (FAPE) in the Least Restrictive Environment (LRE).
Each student has an Individualized Education Program (IEP) that identifies the types of
services and special education he/she requires in order to make effective progress
effectively in the general education setting without specifically designed instruction or
is unable to access the general curriculum without related services. IEPs are legally
binding contracts between the school district and the family. 
Individualized Education Plans written by a former school district and accepted by the
parent are to be met by the receiving school district without delay and until a new IEP
16 | P a g e 
Page 17
is developed and accepted by the family. If the student has been found eligible in
another state and moves to Massachusetts, the new district is to provide the student
with a FAPE, including special education services comparable to those in the IEP from
the former state until the receiving district determines if it will accept the finding of
eligibility. If it finds the IEP to be represents the needs of the student accurately, then
it must continue to implement the IEP. If it determines that a new evaluation is
necessary, the district is to immediately provide written notice to the parents as
required by Massachusetts law. 
Currently there are approximately 2,038 students receiving special education services, 
including therapy only, partial inclusion, full inclusion and substantially separate. 
While the total percentage of special education students has slightly decreased this
year, the complex social and emotional needs of our students continue to increase. 
Specifically, building leaders are seeing students at a much younger age, including as
young as preschool age, exhibiting significant emotional disabilities. To the extent
possible, Framingham Public School strives to meet the academic needs of its students
within the district. Some students, due to the severity of their disability, are not able to
have their educational needs meet through district schools. Last spring, Framingham
was financially responsible for 236 out-of-district (ODD) students. This year, there are
246 students in out-of-district schools. The increase of 10 students can yield
additional costs between $700,000-1,000,000 for both tuition and transportation costs. 
603 CMR: Department of Elementary and Secondary Education 28.05: “If regular
transportation is noted on the student’s IEP and the student is placed by the school
district in a program located at a school other than the school the student would have
attended if not eligible for special education, the student is entitled to receive
transportation services to such program.”
Out of the 246 students placed in out-of-district schools, 24% are under the age of 12, 
including pre-school age students. Just four years ago in June, 2013, 18% or our out-
of-district students were under the age of 12. This notable spike supports the
increased social and emotional need that principals are reporting. Unfortunately, FPS
and the town will continue to feel the financial impact of the out-of-district tuitions. 
Every year we experienced cost increases that are beyond our control. Some of these
increases include private special education school reconstruction costs1 and private
special education school cost of living adjustment (COLA) increases. Currently the
SY18 Reconstruction increases total $85,000 and the SY18 COLA increase is estimated
at $275,000. These are two examples of unpredictable costs that significantly impact
the budget each year. Since July, 2016, we have also experienced a $500,000 increase
in tuition costs due to students moving into Framingham who are already in either a
collaborative or private out-of-district school placement. Another important piece of
1 Reconstruction is the process used by private special education schools to appeal to DESE for increases in their
tuition charges attributable to new programs, services, or facilities. Once approved by DESE, these tuition
increases are retroactive to the beginning of the school year and such approvals do occur throughout the academic
year. 
17 | P a g e 
Page 18
data to look at regarding OOD placements is the range of tuition cost. Last year at this
time, 28 students were in placements that were more than $100,000 and 2 students
were in placements that were more than $200,000 per year. One year later, we have
39 students in programs that cost more than $100,000 and 4 students who are in
programs that cost more than $200,000. 
In an effort to mitigate the increasing costs of out-of-district placements, we continue
to develop internal programs to support our students. Next year, we are starting a
middle school classroom for students with multiple disabilities. Typically these
students would be placed in out-of-district schools after 5th grade. We are excited that
the students will continue to be a part of our school community. 
The information below provides a breakdown of our 39 out-of-district placements with
a tuition greater than $100,000. 
Currently our 246 out-of-district placements cost $18.2 million ($73,984 average).
The tuition for 39 placements totals $5.4 million (30% of the tuition budget for a
$138,462 average).
Therefore, the other 207 student placements total $12.8 million ($61,836 average).
Autism In-District and Out-of-District Comparison
There are 210 students in Framingham with an Autism disability receiving special
education services
Of the 210 students, 55 require an out-of-district setting. 
The highlighted tuitions listed below reflect the cost of 29 of our students with Autism
who require an intensive level of service. 
We have an additional 26 students with Autism placed in out-of-district schools that
have a tuition lower than $100,000. 
The Special Education Department has worked very hard to improve and enhance our
internal Autism programming from pre-school through the high school. As a result of
those efforts, 155 of the students with Autism are receiving supports in our public
schools in the Least Restrictive Environment (LRE). 
18 | P a g e 
Page 19
On the transportation side of these out-of-district placements, the district now has an
annual “assessment” from our Special Education transportation provider, Accept
Collaborative, based on prior year’s actual usage. While this helps with the
development of our annual budgets, those costs continue to rise and we also must
absorb any excess transportation costs for our students that were not covered by the
assessment in the prior year. In FY17, that amount from the prior year (FY16) is
$135,000. In addition, the district has to pay separately for summer transportation
and for monitors and these costs fall outside the assessment for special education
transportation. The special education department has continued to build its summer
programming given the fact that such programming helps our special needs students
to maintain their academic growth going into the subsequent school year (prevents
“summer slide”). 
OUR SAGE DEPARTMENT
As of March 9, 2017, the number of Identified Sage students is as follows: 
19 | P a g e 
Page 20
263 students at the elementary level
122 students at the middle school level
179 students at the high school
The total number of identified students represents 15% of the student population
As of school year 2015-2016, the Sage Department implemented a Universal Screening
Procedure in first grade at selected focus schools. The purpose of Universal Screening
is to assist in the teacher training for identification of gifted learners as well as to
increase access to program services for all students, especially those in typically
underrepresented populations. Focus schools change each year to allow for the
training of all first grade teachers. Please note that due to the Universal Screening
Pilot, the percent of identified students is slightly elevated as compared to national
percentages. 
Elementary services are provided by specialists in gifted education who serve as
itinerant teachers traveling between two buildings. Programming consists of a targeted
direct-service intervention for identified students to support social, emotional, 
behavioral and academic needs associated with giftedness. Services are also provided
within the classroom setting (push-in).  Integrative in nature, push-in services
incorporate critical and creative thinking for all students and promote methods of
differentiated instruction to meet the varied learning styles of our students. 
At the middle level, there is a Sage teacher in each of the three buildings. Sage
teachers deliver services in multiple ways: providing direct service intervention during
grade level extension blocks; teaching a specific content area such as ELA, social
studies and mathematics, and; attending team and curriculum meetings to monitor
student growth and provide strategies for meeting the academic and behavioral needs
of identified students. When teaching specific subject matter, Sage teachers are
assigned a group of students of mixed learning abilities. Their classrooms are open for
peer observation where differentiated practices are modeled. As member of a subject
matter department, as well as part of the support team, Sage teachers are essential to
the overall schedule with specific teaching responsibilities that are imperative when
planning the necessary number of sections for placement of all students. 
Working with guidance counselors, parents and students, the Sage Department
provides advocacy services at the high school pertaining to acceleration, habits of
study and social-emotional learning. In addition, the department facilitates
connections between identified Sage students of all ages with similar interests and
passions related to independent investigations. 
OUR HEALTH AND WELLNESS DEPARTMENT
All children in our schools are dealing with an increase in everyday stressors. 
Stressors include academic pressure, pressure to succeed, peer relationships, family
20 | P a g e 
Page 21
issues, poverty and impact of social media. As a result, we are seeing students with
feelings of significant emotional stress, anxiety, depression, and behavioral problems. 
Evidence also suggests a higher incidence of children exposed to trauma, which can
impact, among other things, academic progress, behavior and school attendance. This
changing problem is further exacerbated by the acute lack of outside clinical
providers, psychiatric hospitals and crisis centers. The lack of resources in this time of
critical need has extended the wait for students in need of psychiatric intervention. 
These students remain in school and the school often becomes the “default” for the
mental health system. Recent changes in student discipline regulations have often
required schools to maintain students who do not possess the social-emotional skills
to be successful or even to negotiate the stimulation of the traditional school
environment. 
Thus, we must think strategically if we are to address the increasing complexity and
needs of all of our students, developing and providing strong social-emotional learning
(SEL) programming. The principles of social-emotional development and learning-
continuity over time, interconnectedness with academics, supportive relationships, 
importance of culture and climate all highlight the need for SEL approaches to be
integrated and embedded in ways that are both deep and wide. Support is necessary
to implement professional development across all disciplines and integrate SEL
programming throughout all schools, Pre-K-12. Our efforts to date have been
fragmented and have met with mixed results as the student need continues to grow. 
Support for a more focused approach to this work is critical. We must strike a balance
between the quest for high academic standards with the importance of maintaining a
safe, supportive and positive school culture. We have an obligation to develop students
who are socially, emotionally, and academically competent and successful. At the
same time, we must be attentive to supporting the social-emotional needs of the staff
so that they can create the conditions necessary for all students to achieve this
objective. The health and success of our schools and the Framingham community at
large depend on it. 
Each school in the district is staffed by school counselors who support students in the
areas of academic achievement, personal/social development and college and career
readiness; psychologists who provide services such as assessment, consultation, 
evaluation, intervention, prevention, and planning; social workers whose work involves
bridging school, home, and community in an effort to assist students be as successful
as possible and school nurses provide high quality comprehensive school health
services. The department is committed to supporting all aspects of our students’ 
health and wellbeing. Supporting our students’ physical  social, emotional and
behavioral needs through the creation of supportive learning environments is essential
to their school and life success. 
Our district-wide adolescent health nurses work with a diverse population of students
and staff to ensure that everyone in the Framingham Public Schools (FPS) has the
opportunity to learn in safe and supportive environments. The adolescent health
nurses have arranged for professional development for the entire FPS staff to learn
21 | P a g e 
Page 22
best practices for teaching and working with transgender and gender-expansive
students. They were instrumental in developing school committee policy in
collaboration with administration to support students navigating their gender identity
to ensure they have necessary supports for academic progress. It is important to note
that the Framingham School Committee was the first school committee in the
Commonwealth to adopt Policy JBD: Gender Identity Support. Additionally, the
adolescent health nurses collaborated with staff from the Health and Physical
Education department to ensure the sexual health curriculum is current, evidence- 
based, and contains appropriate language to support LGBTQ students. 
Two years ago, the adolescent health nurses reviewed the MetroWest Adolescent
Health Survey data and responded to the increase in stress noted for adolescents with
the introduction of a Mindfulness program. This program targeted the highest risk
groups of students experiencing stress. The district has partnered with the
Massachusetts General Hospital – Benson Henry Institute to provide an evidence-
based curriculum and experiential learning opportunities staff and students. The
program is a train the trainer model and funded through a two year MetroWest Health
Foundation grant. 
In August of the current school year, the district established school attendance as a
priority objective for the coming year (see letter addressed to parents dated August 11, 
2016, page 74).  The district firmly believes that student attendance is critical to
student achievement, which is why we have placed an emphasis this year on
attendance. “Starting as early as preschool and kindergarten, students’ chronic
absence – missing 10 percent of school days in an academic year for any reason, 
excused or unexcused – is a primary cause of low academic achievement and a
powerful predictor of which students will eventually drop out of school,” Framingham
School Committee Policy JH-R: Attendance. See attached student attendance charts
(pages 75-76).
The needs associated with our increasingly complex school community create
significant barriers to learning. Failure to directly address these barriers ensures that
too many of our students will continue to struggle in school. Educators are forced to
divert precious instructional time to dealing with behavior and other problems that
can interfere with classroom engagement for all students. We are committed to, and
passionate about, continued collaboration across our school and other town
departments in ensuring the success of all of our students. 
OUR BUILDINGS
Framingham currently operates one pre-school (BLOCKS at Juniper Hill),  nine
elementary schools, 3 middle schools, an alternative high school program at Thayer
Campus, and Framingham High School. The attached School Facility Statistics (page
47) and the FPS Facilities General Information (pages 48-57) provide detailed
information on each building along with their enrollment as of December 1, 2016. 
Three of our schools were built in the 1950’s and have not been renovated; King
(1957), Juniper Hill (1959) and Fuller (1958).  Both King and Juniper Hill have had
22 | P a g e 
Page 23
some updating done, but Fuller is the one school that has reached the end of its
useful life as a school having served the district first as Framingham South High
School and more recently as Fuller Middle School. We are pleased to report that the
Massachusetts School Building Authority (MSBA) has invited us into their process so
that we can begin to plan for a new Fuller Middle School hopefully available by 2019-
2020. This partnership with MSBA will mean that approximately 57% of the costs for
the new Fuller School will be reimbursed by the state. Of the remaining schools, those
built in the 1960’s (Dunning-1965, Hemenway-1961, Potter Road-1966, and Walsh-
1969), Hemenway (at 56 years old) stands out as the school most in need of renovation
or replacement, and we fully expect to submit another Statement of Interest to MSBA
in the very near future to repair or replace the Hemenway School. 
The remaining schools have either had significant repairs done or additions added that
will extend their useful life. The district has a 20 year Capital Plan for all of its
schools and we will be guided by that plan as well as by the conditions that exist or
emerge in our buildings. The district has been supported in its efforts to maintain and
upgrade all of our buildings through the Town’s Capital Budget process. The Capital
Budget for the schools has allowed the district to extend the useful life of our
buildings as evidenced by the number of schools that are 50 years old or older that
have not been renovated or added on to excluding modular (8 in total built prior to
1967 – Brophy, Dunning, Fuller, Hemenway, Juniper Hill, King, Potter Road, and
Thayer Campus).  This year’s Capital Budget request (see attached page 46) continues
our efforts to keep our buildings functional and sound. 
The district reopened King Elementary School in 2014 in response to our growing
district enrollment. The original plan was to grow the King School enrollment slowly
due to its smaller size (24 classrooms). However, enrollment pressures forced a faster
growth for King and we are now having to reduce incoming Kindergarten classes to
manage the overall enrollment of the school. Enrollment will be closely watched to
insure that the school can accommodate a full K-5 enrollment as it continues to grow
and reach its full enrollment in 2019. 
At Framingham High School, enrollment (2,091) pressures there have caused the
school to exceed its design capacity (2,086) sooner than was projected. As a result, we
are in the process of reviewing the building’s current use of space to see if there are
measures we can take to maximize the use of existing space. The High School
Administration is working with a consulting architect on this effort, but should this
not yield relief for the building, we are investigating the possibility of adding modular
classrooms to the High School campus. Another growing problem at the High School
has been the adequacy of parking. The School Department is working with the Town
to develop a plan to redesign the existing parking lot so that we can create additional
parking for the High School. Funding for this expansion will come from parking lot
fees charged to students as well as some insurance recovery funds that are being
made available for this project. 
The enrollment projections that we have indicate that the elementary “bubble” that
began almost 6 years ago may have reached its maximum as evidenced by the fact
23 | P a g e 
Page 24
that Kindergarten enrollments have plateaued in 2016-17 (see Historical Kindergarten
Enrollment, page 69).  If that is indeed a fact and enrollments for 2017-18 do not
exceed last year’s total, then we feel confident that we can accommodate our current
enrollment into the future as we add a new Fuller Middle School in 2019-20, and we
continue to explore ways to alleviate the pressure on the High School through dual
enrollment in college, distance learning, and many other ways to insure that we
provide our high school students with a 21st century education. 
OUR REORGANIZATION PLANS FOR
EDUCATIONAL OPERATIONS •  CENTRAL OFFICE •  HIGH SCHOOL
With the arrival of our new Superintendent of Schools, Dr. Robert Tremblay, we
thought it was an opportune time to review and possibly restructure our Central Office
to not only meet our collective objective of using our financial resources more
effectively and efficiently, but also to help address the growing and emerging needs of
our schools since they are the ones on the “front lines” of our battle to improve
student achievement. Once again, we called upon the resources of NESDEC to look
closely at our Educational Operations Department as well as our Central Office to see
if there were options that we could consider to achieve our goal of helping the district
meet the needs of ALL our learners. In consultation with our new Superintendent and
with his full support, we will be reorganizing our Educational Operations (Ed Ops) 
Department and our Central Office that will allow us to push more resources into
those areas where we believe they will yield the most benefits for our schools. Several
existing positions in the Ed Ops Department will be consolidated into a Director of
Elementary Education and a Director of Secondary Education who will work directly
with Principals and Directors to ensure efficient and effective support for the
curriculum. 
The Central Office restructuring will replace the current “interim” structure that was
put in place during the transition and search for a new Superintendent. Dr. Tremblay
will now have key administrators and department heads reporting directly to him, 
relying on the Directors of Elementary and Secondary Education to provide
supervision and evaluation to all building Principals. This restructuring will decrease
the number of Ed Ops and Central Office positions to help the district repurpose some
of those savings on behalf of our schools and departments. 
Framingham High School is also undergoing some administrative change as both the
Principal and the Associate Principal will be leaving their positions at the end of this
school year. The district is actively searching for a new Principal and will await the
arrival of that individual to review and possibly restructure the administrative
organization of Framingham High School given its dramatic growth in enrollment and
all the related issues that the school faces both now and in its near future. 
OUR GRANTS
The district receives grants from both state and federal sources that total $6,365,395
and are broken into four categories: Entitlement, Allocation, Continuation, Other Non-
24 | P a g e 
Page 25
Competitive and Competitive grants. These grants fund an additional 166.2 FTE’s to
serve specific needs for the district in addressing the needs of all our different learners
here in Framingham. Almost half of these staff (80.41) are funded by Entitlement
Grants while most of the remaining positions (72.55) are funded through Continuation
Grants. 
The district maintains a Grants Office that not only ensures that the district receives
these grants, but also monitors the various levels of compliance that each grant brings
with it. In FY17, the Grants Office worked with Principals and Directors to address
the chronic problem being created related to the non-supplanting provision of the
districts’ Title I grant. As a result, the district has successfully reallocated the Title I
funds so that there is no further supplanting by the district. 
The Grants Office also explores other potential sources of funding that the district may
wish to pursue. However, the Office is careful to remind grant managers that they
must have an “exit strategy” so that when funding ceases, there is no obligation on the
district to absorb the staff or services that may have been made possible by the
temporary funding from a grant. So, as disappointing as this is, it is a reality that
makes us realistic in our approach to such grant opportunities. 
The district also receives another “grant” from the Department of Education that is not
truly a “grant”, and that is our Circuit Breaker funding. We do not list this as a grant, 
even though the Commonwealth does, but it is reported as such in the district’s End
of Year Report that we submit to the state. The Circuit Breaker funds are generated
by the costs for out-of-district tuition that the district pays in the prior fiscal year
(FY16 in this case).  The state calculates an average cost per pupil for each city or
town and then funds up to 75% of any amount of tuition that exceeds four times the
average per pupil costs for a district. In FY17, the amount we projected for Circuit
Breaker was $4,699,000 based on 70% reimbursement. 
The following is a listing of all our grants in FY17: 
Last updated: 03/16/17 by KF 
ENTITLEMENT GRANTS
Entitlement grants are awarded to recipients on the basis of formulas set forth in laws or
regulations. Recipients are entitled to receive funds if they comply with the programmatic
requirements outlined in the RFP. 
Grant Name: Title II - Teacher Quality (Fund 2140) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
Federal - entitlement -
from DESE 
$344,375.00  5  3.26
Grant Name: Title III - Language Proficiency LEP (Fund 2180) 
Grant Award Amount Staff Count
Federal - entitlement -
from DESE 
$291,866.00  8 
FTE
6.50
25 | P a g e 
Page 26
Grant Name: Title III - Summer Support (Fund 2184) 
Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
Federal - entitlement -
from DESE 
$5,779.00  N/A - this grant paid for Stipends 
Grant Name: Title III - Immigrant Support (Fund 2186) 
Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
Federal - entitlement -
from DESE 
$21,000.00  N/A - this grant paid for Stipends 
Grant Name: SPED Supplemental/94-142 Continuum (Fund 2240) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count
Federal - entitlement- 
from DESE 
$2,196,810.00  51 
FTE
48.00
Grant Name: SPED Secondary Transition Systemic Improvement (Fund 2243) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
Federal - entitlement- 
from DESE 
$25,000.00  N/A - this grant paid for Stipends 
Type of Grant 
Grant Name: SPED Early Childhood Alloc (Fund 2262) 
Grant Award Amount Staff Count
Federal - entitlement -
from EEC 
$55,276.00  1 
FTE
0.51
Grant Name: SPED Program Improvement/Prof Dev (ACCESS) (Fund 2274) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
Federal - entitlement -
from DESE 
$65,288.00 
N/A - this grant pays for Contractual
Services and Stipends 
Grant Name: E.C. SPED Program Improvement) (Fund 2298) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
Federal - entitlement -
from DESE 
$4,150.00 
N/A - this grant pays for Contractual
Services and Stipends 
Grant Name: Title I - Distribution (Fund 2305) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count
Federal - entitlement -
from DESE 
$1,825,273.00  28 
FTE
22.14
Type of Grant 
Grant Name: Occ. Ed - Vocational Skills (Fund 2400) 
Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE 
26 | P a g e 
Page 27
Federal - entitlement -
from DESE
Total for Entitlement
Grants 
$63,546.00
Total Award Amount
$4,898,363.00 
N/A - No staff paid by this grant
Staff Count Total FTE's Total
93.00  80.41
ALLOCATION GRANTS
Allocation grants are awarded to recipients based on formulas developed to promote
Department priorities. The programmatic requirements outlined in the RFP must be met
before the grant will be awarded. 
Total for Allocation
Grants 
$0.00  0  0.00
CONTINUATION GRANTS
Continuation grants are those in which the recipients of grants in one year are awarded funds
at the same level for the following year. These are grants that were initially competitive and
are funded for multiple years on a continuation basis. 
Grant Name: McKinney After Sch Homeless (Fund 2310) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
Federal - continuation -
from DESE  $39,998.00 
1  0.42
Grant Name: CFCE - Coordinated Family & Comm. Eng. Grant (Fund 4237) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
State - continuation -
from EEC 
$150,000.00  6  4.53
Type of Grant 
Grant Name: Adult Ed Learning Center (Fund 4345) 
Grant Award Amount Staff Count
State - continuation -
from DESE 
$761,078.00  68 
FTE
67.60
Total for Continuation
Grants 
Total Award Amount
$951,076.00 
Staff Count Total
75.00 
FTE's Total
72.55
OTHER NON-COMPETITIVE GRANTS
Other Non-Competitive grants are awarded on a first come, first served basis, or to a limited
number of recipients based on certain eligibility criteria, or on a continuation basis to the same
recipients but at a higher level of support. 
Grant Name: Title 1 - Schools Support Fund (Fund 2323-B) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE 
27 | P a g e 
Page 28
Federal - Other non-
competitive - from DESE 
$113,199.00 
N/A - this grant pays for Contractual
Services and Stipends 
Grant Name: Adolescent Health and School Success (Fund 2649) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
Federal - Other non-
competitive - from DESE 
$4,400.00 
N/A - this grant pays for Contractual
Services and Stipends 
Total for Other Non-
Competitive Grants 
Total Award Amount
$117,599.00 
Staff Count Total
0 
FTE's Total
0.00
COMPETITIVE GRANTS
Competitive grants are open to applicants that meet eligibility criteria listed in the RFP. 
Reading teams and rating sheets are used in the review process to ensure a fair and open
competition among eligible applicants. 
Grant Name: 21st Century for Fuller (Fund 2647) - RC 921
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
Federal - Competitive -
from DESE 
$94,569.00  3  3
Grant Name: 21st Century for High School (Fund 2647) - RC 950
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
Federal - Competitive -
from DESE 
$65,809.00  3  3
Grant Name: Systems for Student Success Action Plans (Fund 4220-S) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
State - Competitive -
from DESE 
$24,000.00 
N/A - this grant pays for Contractual
Services and Stipends 
Type of Grant 
Grant Name: Enhanced School Health (Fund 4238) 
Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE
State - Competitive -
from DPH 
$131,200.00  8  6.50
Grant Name: SPED Inclusive Preschool Learning Env. (Fund 4391) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count
State - Competitive -
from EEC 
$80,279.00  2 
FTE
0.74
Grant Name: MA Treasurer Financial Education Fund (Fund 4927) 
Type of Grant  Grant Award Amount Staff Count  FTE 
28 | P a g e 
Page 29
State - Competitive -
from MCC 
$2,500.00  N/A - this grant pays for Stipends
Total for Competitive
Grants 
Total Award Amount
$398,357.00 
Staff Count Total
16 
FTE's Total
13.24
Total for all Grants 
Total Award
Amount
$6,365,395.00 
Staff Count Total
184.00 
FTE's Total
166.20
Kate Fiore - Grants Financial Manager for Framingham Public 
Report created by: Schools
ENTITLEMENT GRANTS
Entitlement grants are awarded to recipients on the basis of formulas set forth in laws or
regulations. Recipients are entitled to receive funds if they comply with the programmatic
requirements outlined in the RFP. 
Total Award Amount Staff Count Total  FTE's Total
Total for Entitlement
Grants 
$4,898,363.00  93.00  80.41
ALLOCATION GRANTS
Allocation grants are awarded to recipients based on formulas developed to promote
Department priorities. The programmatic requirements outlined in the RFP must be met before
the grant will be awarded. 
Total for Allocation
Grants 
$0.00  0  0.00
CONTINUATION GRANTS
Continuation grants are those in which the recipients of grants in one year are awarded funds at
the same level for the following year. These are grants that were initially competitive and are
funded for multiple years on a continuation basis. 
Total Award Amount Staff Count Total  FTE's Total
Total for
Continuation Grants 
$951,076.00  75.00  72.55
OTHER NON-COMPETITIVE GRANTS
Other Non-Competitive grants are awarded on a first come, first served basis, or to a limited
number of recipients based on certain eligibility criteria, or on a continuation basis to the same
recipients but at a higher level of support. 
Total Award Amount Staff Count Total  FTE's Total
Total for Other Non-
Competitive Grants 
$117,599.00  0  0.00 
29 | P a g e 
Page 30
COMPETITIVE GRANTS
Competitive grants are open to applicants that meet eligibility criteria listed in the RFP. Reading
teams and rating sheets are used in the review process to ensure a fair and open competition
among eligible applicants. 
Total Award Amount Staff Count Total  FTE's Total
Total for Competitive
Grants 
$398,357.00  16  13.24 
30 | P a g e 
Page 31
OUR FUTURE
Per Pupil Expenditures Summary
This chart (see Per Pupil Expenditures Summary, FY14-FY16 see page 79) details
how Framingham has expended its budget over the three year period (FY14 to FY16) 
using the 10 different DESE categories as required for the annual End of Year Report. 
This report does NOT include out-of-district expenditures; those will be captured and
detailed in a subsequent report. However, they are included for the calculation of the
district’s Total Per Pupil Expenditure (TTPP) at the bottom of the page. 
The total per pupil expenditure includes all eleven categories of spending, and
combines both groups of students, in-district and out-of-district. 
Framingham’s expenditures are also compared to the state average providing a third
column that shows Framingham’s expenditures as a percentage of the state’s average. 
Clearly, Framingham continues to fund its schools at a higher rate than the state
average, and at a consistently higher rate for in-district per pupil expenditures as well
as for total per pupil expenditures. 
Per Pupil Expenditure Details
These calculations (see Per Pupil Expenditure Details page 80) show all school
operating expenditures including those outside the general fund such as grants, 
private donations, and revolving accounts. They also include payments for local
resident pupils who are being educated in schools outside the district. In addition to
showing the overall cost per pupil, they provide detail about how much Framingham
spends in specific functional areas such as administration, teaching, and
maintenance. 
The first ten functional categories are for services provided within the school district. 
In those categories, per pupil calculations are limited to the pupils enrolled at the
district. An in-district per pupil expenditure is calculated for these functions and
measures what is spent on the pupils enrolled at the district. 
The eleventh category (Out-of-District Expenditures) includes expenditures made on
out-of-district tuitions and transportation. 
The following funding sources are all included in the functional expenditure per pupil
measure: 
  School Committee appropriations
  Municipal appropriations outside the school committee budget that affect
schools
  Federal grants
  State grants
  Circuit breaker funds
  Private grants and gifts
  School choice and other tuition revolving funds 
31 | P a g e 
Page 32
  Athletic funds
  School lunch funds
  Other local receipts such as rentals and insurance receipts
Typically, school committee and municipal school appropriations, approved annually
by town meetings and city councils, account for seven out of every eight dollars spent
upon education. Spending categories that are not included in the per pupil
expenditure calculations are: Community services (6000 series), fixed assets (7000
series), and debt service (8000 series).
A “deeper dive” into the percentage change in both per pupil expenditures as well as
school district spending from prior years (FY09-FY15) reveals a pattern of shifting
investments as districts rebuild their systems following the recession that hit cities
and towns particularly in FY09, FY10 and FY11. The chart listed as Public PK-12
Operating Expenditures FY09-FY15 State Totals (page 86) shows that virtually all
of the progress made in the past 6 years has been funded by local appropriations and
not by grants and other funds. Such is the case in Framingham as our grant and
other funds total has been fairly constant at approximately $10 million including
Circuit Breaker. 
In looking at where districts have invested their funds over this same time period, it is
evident that certain expense areas (e.g., Classroom Teachers, Payments to Out-of-
district Schools and Pupil Services) have benefitted from the additional funding that
districts have. Conversely, there are other areas where there has actually been a
disinvestment (Professional Development) and many areas that continue to lag
(Operations and Maintenance, Instructional Materials and Guidance and Counselling).
Framingham’s expenditures for FY16 tend to show a somewhat different pattern of
investments over the past three years (see Per Pupil Expenditures Summary, FY14-
FY16 page 79) with larger gains in some areas (Administration, Instructional
Leadership, and Operations and Maintenance) that were particularly hard hit during
the recession years when a conscious decision was made to reduce these areas in
order to preserve the teaching and learning assets of the district and balance the
budgets. Thus, many of these “gains” were actually restorations of funding that was
cut during the recession years (see Public PK-12 School Expenditures FY09 to
FY15, All Funds, (page 85) particularly FY09-FY12 when cuts were most severe).
However, there remain some areas of genuine concern as this report indicates; the
district continues to lag the state average for investments in Instructional Materials, 
Equipment and Technology (despite a $5 million capital investment by the Town in
Technology from FY13-FY17) and in Professional Development, which is an area that
has been chronically underfunded even before the recession and unfortunately
remains so. 
Hopefully, we can begin to redirect some of our future funds to these two critical areas
as we reach our reinvestment goals in those areas that have now received adequate
funding. Looking ahead, this will be the work of the Budget Work Group and our new
Superintendent. 
32 | P a g e 
Page 33
In-District and Out-of-District Spending and Pupils
Most school spending goes toward educating local resident pupils in local public
schools. Still, school districts do pay tuition for pupils at special education and
vocational education schools, and lose Cherry Sheet funding to regional vocational
schools, to charter schools, and to other out-of-district placements such as choice
schools (surrounding towns who have accepted Framingham students under the state
choice program). Transportation costs often add significantly to the expense for out-of-
district special education students, for in-district charter school students and other
in-district private school students. 
Measuring enrollment: the concept of full-time equivalent average membership
The per pupil spending calculations published compare spending, which occurs
throughout the school year, to the average number of pupils, which normally
fluctuates over the school year. The enrollment statistic used is called full-time
equivalent average membership or FTE. 
Full-time equivalency refers to the percentage of time that students are enrolled
during the school year. A pupil who arrives on November 1 and is still enrolled at the
end of the year, for example, would be assigned full-time equivalency of somewhere in
the range of eight-tenths. 
Special Education Funding, FY06-FY15
The Town Finance Committee has continually expressed concern about the escalating
costs of special education particularly as a percentage of the district’s overall budget. 
The district has developed a model for projecting out what our costs might be should
the district’s overall budget increase at a lesser amount than the special education
budget itself increases. This model (see Comparison of Estimated SPED Costs, 
FY14-24, page 87) indicates that if the district’s Operating Budget increases by 4.5% 
annually and the SPED Budget increases by 8% (both used in CFO’s modeling), 69% 
of every available “new” funding dollar in the budget will need to go to Special
Education. Clearly, this is unsustainable as it raises the prospect of either
underfunding other parts of the budget or underfunding Special Education, neither of
which is acceptable. The attached chart (see Direct Special Education Expenditures
as a Percentage of School Budget, FY06-FY15 page 86) supports the notion that our
Special Education budget is much higher than the state average and is growing faster
than the state average as well (columns G and H).  The “good news” in this chart
relates to the fact that we have been successful in developing and building programs
within the district (column A) so that we can more appropriately serve our students
with special needs at lower costs as evidenced by the fact that we serve the vast
majority of our students with Autism here in district schools. However, the Special
Education Department struggles to find adequate space in our very crowded schools
for the placement of such programs that could save us from outplacing students at
either collaborative programs (column C) or private special educations schools (column
D). 
33 | P a g e 
Page 34
As we look to the future, we believe that our best hope to “control” special education
costs rests with the need for additional space in our schools for program development
and placement, but also with our continuing effort to not “over-identify” students who
may not need special education services and support. This latter challenge will
require the district to develop strong and effective measures at the regular education
classroom level to serve students who may appear to need special education, but really
need effective interventions and social-emotional supports to remain successful in
their regular education classrooms. To this end, Special Education works closely with
our Health and Wellness Department and with our regular education classroom
teachers to help them better understand when students truly do need special
education to help them achieve and succeed and when they do not need special
education, but rather another intervention or support in their classrooms. 
34 | P a g e 
Page 35
FRAMINGHAM PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Superintendent's Proposed FY18 Budget
Staffing: FTEs by Bargaining Unit:
Unit A: Teachers
Unit B: Administrators
Unit C: Custodians/Maintenance
Unit P: Principals
Unit S: Secretaries
Unit T: Teacher Aides/Assistants
Unit V: Non-Bargaining
Total Staff FTE's
Salaries by Bargaining Unit:
Unit A: Teachers
Unit B: Administrators
Unit C: Custodians/Maintenance
Unit P: Principals
Unit S: Secretaries
Unit T: Teacher Aides/Assistants
Unit V: Non-Bargaining
Total Salaries 
FY 2016
805.12
39.45
72.00
12.00
59.10
214.44
70.63
1,272.75 
FY 2017
854.84
43.56
73.00
13.00
60.18
230.06
72.41
1,347.05 
FY 2018
870.78
43.80
73.00
13.00
60.02
229.10
72.28
1,361.98 
$62,121,224
$4,046,935
$3,541,155
$1,426,211
$2,447,006
$6,337,202
$4,079,884
$83,999,617 
$64,767,230
$4,782,664
$3,662,796
$1,626,413
$2,768,759
$6,980,760
$4,761,013
$89,349,635 
$67,767,361
$5,055,237
$3,734,722
$1,688,779
$2,902,915
$7,193,293
$4,960,554
$93,302,861
Additional Salaries
Expe nse s
Expense Offsets:
Circuit Breaker Funds
Bus Fees
SPED Tuition Revolving
Total Offsets 
$3,610,910
$33,861,177
($4,579,065)
($275,000)
($100,000)
($4,954,065) 
$3,731,285
$34,169,535
($4,699,765)
$0
$0
($4,699,765) 
$3,889,500
$35,572,875
($4,699,765)
$0
$0
($4,699,765)
Net Expenses
Total Budget 
$28,907,112 $29,469,770
$116,517,639 $122,550,690 
$30,873,110
$128,065,471
35 | P a g e 
Page 36
FY18 INCREASES
Salaries
New Positions:
King - 3 grade 3 teachers
King - 2 specialists
Barbieri Vice Principal
Barbieri - 5th grade teacher
HS 3 Newcomer positions
Blocks- SPED aide
Blocks - SPED teacher
Native Language Tutors
Tutors
Contractual Increases 
FY17
$89,349,635
3
2
1
1
3
1
1
12 
FY18
$93,302,961
$180,000
$120,000
$100,00
$60,000
$180,000
$23,388
$60,000
$50,000
$50,000
$3,000,000
$3,723,388 
Increase
$3,953,226
Difference due to other small
increases
Additional Salaries
Major Changes:
Human Resources
Technology aides
SPED Therapy and Evaluations
Athletic Coaches 
$3,731,285 $3,889,500
$172,500
$8,500
$11,000
$20,000
$212,000 
$158,215
Difference due to other small
decreases
Expenses  $29,469,770 $30,873,110  $1,403,340 
36 | P a g e 
Page 37
Major Changes: 
Transportation
SPED Tuition & Transportation
Curriculum
PIC Software
Legal Fees
HR Hardware/Software
King Instructional Supplies
Total Increase
Difference due to other small
decreases 
$163,353 
$1,035,864 
$91,000 
$70,000 
$25,000 
$25,000 
$10,000 
$1,420,217 
$5,514,781 
37 | P a g e 
Page 38
FY18 BUDGET ANALYSIS BY CATEGORY 
The school department budget is divided into eight (8) categories as follows: 
Budget % of Total
Elementary Schools  $45,801,825 35.76% 
Barbieri 
Brophy 
Dunning 
Hemenway 
King 
McCarthy 
Potter Road 
Stapleton 
Wilson 
Blocks 
Middle Schools  $20,649,717 16.12% 
Cameron 
Fuller 
Walsh 
High School  $19,953,395 15.58% 
FHS 
Thayer 
Athletics 
Special Education  $18,322,738 14.31% 
Special Education 
Tuitions 
SPED Services 
Occupational ED 
General Operations  $13,718,947 10.71% 
Buildings & Grounds 
Transportation 
Technology 
Copy Services 
School Administration $5,373,295 4.20% 
Superintendent 
Asst Superintendent 
Human Resources 
Grants Development 
Business Operations 
Undistributed 
Educational Services  $2,783,247 2.17% 
38 | P a g e 
Page 39
Bilingual Education
Curriculum Development
Educational Operations
Adult ESL
Gifted & Talented
Fine Arts
General School
Health Services
School Committee
Community Resources
Psychology Services
Parent Information Center 
$1,462,307 1.14% 
Total  $128,065,471 100% 
39 | P a g e 
Page 40
15-YEAR HISTORICAL DATA 
PER PUPIL COST
Year
2002 
Town Meeting Total
Allocation Enrollment
$67,851,161 8528 
Bilingual
1443 
Out of
Special District
Education Placement*
1338 163 
Cost per
pupil
$7,956.28 
CPI
1.60% 
Adjusted for
Inflation
$8,083.58
2003 $73,837,904 8289 1042 1409 174 $8,907.94 2.30%  $8,269.50
2004 $71,739,672 8236 1216 1505 154 $8,710.50 2.70%  $8,459.69
2005 $73,182,753 8331 1275 1644 167 $8,784.39 3.40%  $8,747.32
2006 $75,533,887 8229 1189 1709 186 $9,178.99 3.20%  $9,027.24
2007 $78,216,178 8248 1201 1760 189 $9,483.05 2.80%  $9,280.00
2008 $82,952,631 8362 1200 1641 182 $9,920.19 3.80%  $9,632.65
2009 $87,146,829 8431 1252 1601 194 $10,336.48 -0.40%  $9,594.11
2010 $86,346,829 8372 1676 1631 197 $10,313.76 1.60%  $9,747.62
2011 $88,679,969 8376 1069 1643 197 $10,587.39 3.20% $10,059.55
2012 $91,927,241 8432 1475 1734 198 $10,902.19 2.10% $10,270.80
2013 $97,596,855 8511 1551 1747 204 $11,467.14 1.50% $10,424.86
2014 $102,115,427 8455 1813 1786 210 $12,077.52 1.60% $10,591.66
2015 $109,368,801 8740 2055 1830 227 $12,513.59 0.10% $10,602.25
2016 $115,731,953 8890 2179 1776 234 $13,018.22 1.30% $10,740.08
2017 $122,550,690
*Out of District Placements are not included in the Special Education numbers but are in addition to
the Special Education general enrollment number.
NOTE: Total per pupil increase from 2002 to 2016 is $5,151.94 or an average of $343.46 per year which equals
4.3% increase. 
Total per pupil adjusted for inflation from 2002 to 2016, the total increase is $2,278.14 or $151.87 per year which
equals 1.9% increase.
Source: District October 1 reports 
40 | P a g e 
Page 41
Framingham Public Schools
Edward J. Gotgart, Ed.D., Superintendent of Schools
73 Mount Wayte Avenue, Suite #5
Framingham, Massachusetts 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9117 Fax: 508-877-4240
Date: 
To: 
From: 
RE: 
MEMORANDUM
October 6, 2016 
Directors and Principals
Dr. Edward Gotgart, Acting Superintendent of Schools
FY18 Budget 
Over the past five years (FY13-FY17), the Town has been very supportive of the School Department
Budget adding almost $30 million to our budget, from $92 million to $122 million, an average annual
increase of 5.9%.  This significant investment in our schools has resulted in the addition of 223 new
positions, with 124 (55%) of those being teachers and 51 (23%) being teacher aides/assistants. During
this same time, our district’s enrollment (based on October 1st enrollments) has increased from 8,433
(October 2012) to 8,890 (October 2016), an increase of 457 students (+5.4%).
As we look ahead to building our FY18 budget, we must not expect these same levels of financial
increases to continue as they are simply not sustainable given the Town’s financial projections. Our
enrollment is projected to continue increasing, but at a modest 1.24% annual increase (around 110
students per year) according to our NESDEC projections. Thus, we will be challenged to use our existing
resources as wisely and effectively as we can and not rely upon large budget increases as we have in the
past. 
If we use a modest 4.5% increase in our budget for FY18 ($5.5 million) as our guide, we can see that such
an increase will only allow us to provide level services with no additional staffing except those needed to
staff the King School where will again be adding an additional grade as we build that school to K-3 from
its current K-2 configuration. We will be honoring the FY17 commitments to Barbieri School for a
second Vice Principal and to the High School for its “newcomer” staffing (3.0 FTE’s) as these positions
were deferred for the current school year only due to budget constraints. Both schools have seen
significant enrollment increases and these positions will be necessary to meet the needs of the students at
these schools. 
The Business Office has created a model for the FY18 Budget that underscores the fact that we must
develop a level service budget. Collective bargaining increases alone will require $3.4 million of the $5.5
million that we hope to have available. That leaves but $2.1 million for all other needs including
contractual increases for transportation ($466,000) and Special Education tuition increases ($457,000 just
from FY17 alone that must be added to the FY18 increases yet to be calculated).  Thus, a “level service” 
approach to our FY18 budget is essential and will require us to look inward for efficiencies and
economies. 
This model assumes that we will level fund expenses wherever we can even though we know that we
remain at an expense level that has been relatively unchanged since FY13. The only increases that we
can support will be those that are contractual in nature; all other expense items will be level funded. The
model does adjust additional salaries slightly, but once again not to the level that we would hope to see it
increase. Thus, we will again be holding fast to the standards that were issued recently regarding the use
41 | P a g e 
Page 42
of substitutes, an area of the budget that has grown dramatically and must be managed much more
closely. 
Our budget goal is to meet the Town’s budget guideline for the schools so that we can anticipate a
reliable, positive response by Town Meeting. We must demonstrate that we can continue to provide a
quality educational program for all our students with the resources that the Town has and will continue to
provide for us. It will be a challenge, but we have been challenged before and we have been able to keep
our schools safe, healthy and academically sound. Framingham continues to be an attractive location for
our families, as evidenced by our increasing enrollment, because our schools and the programs we offer
are excellent. The fact that we could receive a 4.5% increase in our budget while some of our
neighboring school systems are cutting their budgets is clear proof that Framingham values its schools
and the work that we all do. Thank you for all that you do to make this support possible. 
EJG/ak 
42 | P a g e 
Page 43
Fr  FRAMINGHAM PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Edward J. Gotgart, Ed.D., Superintendent of Schools
73 Mount Wayte Avenue, Suite #5
Framingham, Massachusetts 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9117 Fax: 508-877-4240
MEMORANDUM
Date: 
To: 
From: 
RE: 
October 20, 2016
All Directors and Principals
Dr. Edward Gotgart, Acting Superintendent of Schools
FY18 Budget 
There is good news on the FY18 Budget front; the Chief Financial Officer has confirmed publically
in her Long-Range Financial Projections to the Town a 4.5% increase for the School Department’s
FY18 Operating Budget. Effectively, this means that we will be a building “Level Services Budget” 
for FY18. 
The Business Office has run the calculations of the impact of our collective bargaining agreements
on the FY18 budget, and, not surprisingly, the funds needed for those agreements will absorb the
vast majority of this increase. The remainder of the increase will be allocated to cover fixed costs
and provide the additional staffing that is required to expand King Elementary School by another
grade. There are also a small number of positions that were deferred from FY17 to the FY18
budget; those will be honored. The end result of the Business Office’s projection is that there are no
additional funds available for anything other than those items listed above. Principals and Directors
are encouraged to use this as an opportunity to consult with each other, look within your buildings
or departments, critically re-assess your needs, and determine how best to meet those needs without
the addition of any new positions. 
The Office of Human Resources requests to be invited when discussions as to staffing changes are
contemplated. This will ensure contractual compliance and provide additional information about the
qualifications of current staff members. 
The Business Office will make the necessary adjustments in the salaries and additional salaries
budget line items, as appropriate. It will also adjust expense budgets to reflect contractual or other
unavoidable fixed increases. 
We are most fortunate that the Town has, once again, supported the School Department. The
burden now falls on us to demonstrate that we can and will continue to build a stronger public
school system for all the students in Framingham. 
43 | P a g e 
Page 44
Framingham Public Schools
Edward J. Gotgart, Ed.D., Acting Superintendent of Schools
73 Mount Wayte Avenue, Suite #5
Framingham, Massachusetts 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9117 Fax: 508-877-4240
MEMORANDUM
DATE: December 2, 2016
TO:  All Principals and Vice/Assistant Principals
All Directors and Assistant Directors
FROM: Dr. Edward J. Gotgart
Superintendent of Schools
RE:  FY18 BUDGET
As we look ahead toward the coming year and the development of an FY18 budget, I am proposing
a different approach than we have used in the past. Part of this recommendation is based on the
fact that we have been given a 4.5% increase target by the Town for FY18 and I believe that we can
develop a responsible “level service” budget within that increase. So, rather than focusing our time
and efforts on a number, I am recommending that we submit our FY18 Budget to the Town on
December 19th as a “level service” budget and spend our time looking at how we have used our
budget increases over the past five years to hire staff and develop programs to assure ourselves that
we have used these funds wisely and in the best interest of our students. 
As you know, our recent test scores have not indicated that the investments that we have made have
any positive impact on our test scores (MCAS and PARCC) despite 5 years of significant growth in
our budget. In fact, we have lost ground in some schools, so we need to know why we have not
met our goal of bringing our district up from Level 3 as we had planned. In order to conduct an
assessment of our use of funds, we will need to develop some processes to evaluate our programs
looking at our planned goals, the design of strategies to accomplish those goals, and ultimately the
data that we use to measure our results. Our hope is that we can then make informed decisions
about continuing or changing our use of resources to better achieve our goals. 
We will begin this review of our use of resources by organizing a budget work group consisting of
representatives from schools and departments as well as central office staff. I will ask specific
individuals to be a part of this group and I hope that you will trust that I will make sure that we have
many different perspectives on this group. This work group will develop a methodology for
assessing our schools and programs and report out their recommendations to all of us so that we
can review the data and make any changes that we feel we should make for our FY18 budget detail. 
I would also expect that some of our choices may require a multi-year commitment to change or
reinvest in a different program that may only begin in our FY18 budget, but will need to continue in
44 | P a g e 
Page 45
future year budgets. Again, our goals need to be aligned with the resources that we have or will have
in subsequent years, so please view this initiative as a multi-year effort perhaps starting in FY18. 
The budget work group will be asked to commit to a half day on Friday, December 16th to begin this
important work. In the meantime, you are urged to ask questions and seek advice from your
colleagues concerning thoughts and ideas that you might have about improving our use of resources. 
As always, we welcome any thoughts that you might have about cost savings, but please remember
that this is not an exercise to cut the budget; it is entirely focused on improving our budgetary
effectiveness and impact on student achievement. We will be sharing some data that we have been
collecting in preparation for developing the FY18 budget that we hope will prompt conversations
between and among us all as we move through this process. Please do not hesitate to ask questions
or suggest ways that we can best use our resources in the service of our students. 
Thank you. 
45 | P a g e 
Page 46
2/9/2017 
FRAMINGHAM PUBLIC SCHOOLS
FY18 – CAPITAL PROJECT REQUESTS -
DRAFT
PRIORITY DESCRIPTION
1 
Removal of FHS Fuel Storage
Tank
2  Roof Repairs 
3  Asbestos & Floor Tile
4  Furniture 
5  Athletics 
SCHOOL(S) 
DESIGNATED ITEMS
Framingham High School 
AMOUNT
$50,000.00 
Hemenway, King, Barbieri, Wilson, 
Potter Road, Dunning & Cameron
Asbestos Abatement/Replace
Floor Tiles, Ceiling Tiles, Pipe
Insulation - King 
King & District - Furnish new and
Replace Unsafe or Damaged
Furniture
FHS - Turf Field Removal and
Replacement 
$225,000.00 
$415,000.00 
$150,000.00 
$350,000.00 
6  Playground  Barbieri  $100,000.00 
7  Paving/Storm Water/Site Work Dunning
8
TOTAL 
HVAC - Upgrades 
Rooftop AHU's and Ventilation
Supply Units and Design 
$562,000.00 
$330,000.00 
$2,182,000.00 
46 | P a g e 
Page 47
SCHOOL FACILITY STATISTICS
Date 
Built 
Renovations
/Additions 
TotalInterior Square 
Feet 
Number 
of 
Classrooms
/Total 
Number 
of 
Rooms 
Site 
Acres 
of 
Land 
Playgrounds  Football 
/
Soccer 
Field 
Baseball 
Field 
Lacrosse 
/
Field 
Hockey 
Field 
Tennis 
Court 
Basketball 
Court 
Number 
of 
Parking 
Stalls 
Current 
Enrollment 
as 
of 
2
/1
/2017 
Elevators 
Handicap 
Chair 
Lift 
SCHOOL
Barbieri Elementary 1974 112,000 31 / 64  18.71  x  x  x  x  124 689 2  1
100 Dudley Road
Brophy Elementary 1966  66,000 26 / 41  28.13  x  x  x  x  80  523  2
575 Pleasant Street 2004  2,000
Cameron Middle 1973 114,000 33 / 73  30.75  x  x  88  551 1
215 Elm Street  2000
Dunning Elementary 1965  61,500 24 / 37  22.16  x  s  s  s  oos  69  485  1
48 Frost Street
Farley Middle  1973 112,000 31 / 64  30  s  s  220 n/a  1
19 Flagg Drive
Framingham High  1961 356,000 90 / 194 44.35  x  x  x  x  350+ 2,091 2  1
115 A Street  2005  40,000
Fuller Middle School 1958 196,000 50 / 98  30  s  s  150 477
31 Flagg Drive
Hemenway Elementary 1961  56,500 28 / 39  14.42  x  x  x  70  575  2
729 Water Street  2004  5,000
Juniper Hill Elementary 1959  44,300 21 / 28  17.94  x  x  80  274  1
29 Upper Joclyn Avenue
King Elementary 1957  50,000 24 / 33  18+ x  x  x  x  110 248 1
454 Water Street
McCarthy Elementary 1952  88,936 29 / 68  20.43  x  x  88  552 1
8 Flagg Drive  1994  6,000
Potter Road Elementary 1966  63,600 24 / 39  12.75  x  x  x  x  x  80  520  2
492 Potter Road
Stapleton Elementary 1922  59,600 23 / 39  3.4  x  xx  102 390 1  1
25 Elm Street  1972
Thayer Campus of FHS 1905  10,800 5/19  2  44  44  1
50 Lawrence Street
Walsh Middle  1969 201,000 50 / 102 22.46  s  s  s  oos  130 722 1  1
301 Brook Street
Woodrow Wilson Elem. 1924 40,000.00 31 / 73  5.02  x  110 582 1
169 Leland Street  1988 100,695.00
Transportation 1,440.00 N/A  0
Fountain Street - no land
Tuition Out/ACCEPT  227
DISTRICT Totals
February 1, 2017 Enrollment 
1,787,371  303  1,545 8,950 11  13
47 | P a g e 
Page 48
FACILITY GENERAL INFORMATION
Barbieri Elementary School 
Currently used as an elementary school, the Barbieri Middle School was built in
1974 using a replicated floor plan that matched the Cameron Middle School and
the Farley Middle School. All three facilities were constructed within the same
three-year time period. 
Located at 100 Dudley Road, the building contains 112,000 square feet and is situated
on 18.71 acres of land. The grounds contain a playground, baseball field and a
soccer/football field. The parking lot has been expanded and currently houses 124
vehicle-parking stalls. 
The building was designed with multi levels, an open floor plan concept and few
exterior windows. There are two elevators in operation, but they do not meet with
current ADA code dimensional requirements. The building housed a swimming pool
that has been converted to general warehouse space. The cafeteria is small for a
building of its size. At 4,370 square feet, multiple lunch periods are required for
larger student populations and would be problematic if the building was filled near
capacity. Barbieri currently has 31 full classrooms and has a design capacity of 748
students. 
The main roof was replaced 1998 and has a twenty-year life expectancy. The
heating system was converted from electric to natural gas fired boilers with a
hydronic system and utilizes the electric perimeter heat as a supplemental heat
source. The building is cooled via roof top air handlers. A new emergency back-up
generator was installed in 2009. 
Some recent capital improvements include replacement of gas burners with new
energy efficient burners, replacement of roof top air handlers with new efficient
units and replacement of the existing copper roofs at all stairways and entrances. 
The building is in good general condition, but requires a major bathroom
renovation to comply with ADA requirements. 
Brophy Elementary School 
Currently named Brophy Elementary School, the Belknap Road School was
constructed in 1968 using a replicated design plan from the Potter Road School, which
was built two years earlier in 1966. Two modular classrooms housed in one mobile
unit in were added to the building via a connector corridor in 2004. 
Located at 575 Pleasant Street, the building contains 66,000 square feet plus over
2,000 square feet of modular space and is situated on 28.13 acres of land. The
grounds contain a playground, two baseball fields, a lacrosse field and a soccer field. 
The parking lot houses 80 vehicle-parking stalls. 
The building was designed with a two-story classroom wing, a single story
administration, café and gymnasium wing and a central courtyard. There are two
chair lifts within the building that provide handicap access to the stage and classroom
48 | P a g e 
Page 49
wing level as required by ADA. Brophy has 26 general classrooms. 
The roof was replaced in 2002 and has a twenty-year life expectancy. The heating
system was upgraded and new boilers and gas burners were installed in 2006. There
is no central cooling within the building. There are several window unit or split cooling
systems in the administrative offices. A new emergency back-up generator was
installed in 2009. 
The building is in good general condition and has received replacement walkways and
sidewalks in compliance with ADA mandate and funded by capital expenditure. The
paving in the parking and driveway areas requires replacement in the near future. 
Cameron Middle School 
The original Cameron Middle School was constructed in 1973 and was one of three
school buildings built over a three year time period using a replicated design. Major
reconstruction replacing over 80% of the existing structure took place and was
completed in 2000. At the time of completion Cameron School was considered to be
“state of the art” in design, technology and furnishings and continues to be a jewel of
the community today. 
Located at 215 Elm Street, the building contains 114,000 square feet and is situated
on 30.75 acres of land. The grounds contain a baseball field, a football field and a
soccer field. There is no playground on site. The parking lot houses 88 vehicle-parking
stalls. 
The building was designed with a two-story classroom and administration wing and a
renovated gymnasium wing along with a new café and auditorium. There is one
elevator that complies with current ADA access, building and fire code requirements. 
Cameron has 33 full classrooms. 
The heating plant is natural gas fired with air handlers that supply a VAV, or variable
air volume system and supplemental hydronic perimeter heat. The cooling system is a
centrifugal chiller equipped with an exterior water-cooling tower. Although the heating
and cooling systems provide for efficient climate control, they are costly to operate. 
Especially during the peak, or summer cooling season. 
The building is equipped with an emergency back-up generator, an acid neutralization
plant that provides treatment for lab waste when required by science labs and a
duplex sewage ejector system. 
The building is in very good general condition with all mechanical systems and general
architectural furnishings in excellent condition. 
49 | P a g e 
Page 50
Dunning Elementary School 
Currently named Charlotte Dunning Elementary School, the Frost Street School was
constructed in 1965 using a replicated design plan from the Hemenway School that
was built four years earlier in 1961. 
Located at 48 Frost Street, the building contains 61,500 square feet and is situated on
22.16 acres of land. The grounds contain two separate playgrounds, a baseball field
and a lacrosse/soccer field with a walking track. The parking lot houses 69 vehicle-
parking stalls. 
The building was designed with a single-story and is rectangular in shape. There are
three classroom wings, an administration and café wing and an enclosed courtyard. 
There is one chair lift at the stage for handicap access as required by ADA. Dunning
has 24 general classrooms. 
The roof was replaced in 1996 and has a twenty-year life expectancy. The heating
system was converted from oil to natural gas and new boilers and gas burners were
installed in 2001. There is no central cooling within the building. There are several
window unit or split cooling systems in the administrative offices. A new emergency
back-up generator was installed in 2009. 
The building is in good general condition and has received replacement walkways and
sidewalks in compliance with ADA mandates funded by capital expenditure. The
paving in the parking and driveway areas requires replacement in the near future. 
Farley Middle School 
Currently leased to Massachusetts Bay Community College until June, 2019, the
Farley Middle School was built in 1973 using a replicated floor plan that matched the
Cameron Middle School and the Barbieri Middle School. All three facilities were
constructed within the same three-year time period. 
Located at 19 Flagg Drive, the building contains 112,000 square feet and is situated
on 30 acres of land along with the Fuller Middle School. Also shared with the Fuller
School are the football/soccer fields as well as the baseball field and the adjoining
parking area. The parking lot has been expanded and currently houses 220 vehicle-
parking stalls. 
The building was designed with four levels, an open floor plan concept and few
exterior windows. There is one elevator in operation, but it does not meet with current
ADA code dimensional requirements. The building houses a swimming pool that has
been taken out of service. Farley has the potential for housing 31 full classrooms. 
The main roof was replaced 2005 and has a twenty-year life expectancy and the roof
over the pool area was replaced in 2016. The heating system was converted from
electric to natural gas fired roof top units and utilizes electric perimeter heat as a
supplemental heat source. The building is cooled via roof top air handlers that were
upgraded in 2008. The building is equipped with an emergency back-up generator. 
50 | P a g e 
Page 51
The building is in fair condition. It is unknown at this time of any long range plans for
the building. 
Framingham High School 
Originally constructed in 1961 the Framingham North High School shared two wings
of the building named the Winch Park Secondary School. In 1992 one single
Framingham High School was created combining two high schools into one. The
district moved the South High School students and faculty from Flagg Drive into the
North High School at 115 A Street. Then in 2001 and through 2007, a major
renovation and construction project was undertaken. Additions to the building added
library, science wings and a mechanical room to the existing structure. The project
ran over a year beyond the original completion date. The original contractor filed for
bankruptcy and an insurance bonding company had to complete the last 5% of the
construction project. As a result, As-built drawings and some equipment start-up data
was not provided to the district as per job specifications. 
The building contains 396,000 square feet of space and is situated on 44.35 acres of
land. The grounds contain a synthetic football/soccer field, a field hockey field a
tennis court, and multiple ball fields at the front of the school that is owned and
maintained by the Parks and Recreation Department. The parking lot house over 350
vehicle parking-stalls. 
The building was designed on multiple levels with a two-story spread footprint and
three enclosed courtyards. There are two elevators that comply with ADA, fire and
building code requirements. Framingham High School has 90 full classrooms. 
The building is equipped with two separate boiler rooms, two generator rooms and
multiple mechanical rooms. Duel fuel gas fired boilers and water heaters, diesel fired
generators and #2 oil stored in an underground tank for firing boilers on oil in an
emergency situation. Roof to air handlers and cooling provide cooling for half of the
building. The other half is piped and has the ability to be expanded with cooling if a
chiller and cooling tower is installed. 
The building is in good general condition, keeping in mind that the structure is 56
years of age. Framingham High School is listed as a qualified MEMA shelter because
underground fuel storage tanks provide for an independent fuel source for the back-
up generators and boilers. 
Fuller Middle School 
Constructed in 1958 as the Framingham High School, the building is currently used
as Fuller Middle School. Fuller is also home to the Town of Framingham Board of
Health Department that occupies 5,000 square feet of building space. In addition, the
Buildings and Grounds Department houses its operations and storage for vehicles and
equipment occupying approximately 15,000 square feet of building space. Also, there
are several offices the occupy additional space; the ESL program and the Vision
Center that take up approximately 8,000 square feet of building space and the Parent
Information Center which occupies approximately 3,000 square feet of building space. 
51 | P a g e 
Page 52
Located at 31 Flagg Drive, the building contains 196,000 square feet and is situated
on over 30 acres of combined property along with the Farley Middle School, currently
occupied by the Massachusetts Bay Community College. Also shared with the college
are the football/soccer fields as well as the baseball field and the adjoining parking
area. 
There is no playground on site. The Fuller School has roughly 150 parking stalls
available for all of its occupants. 
The building was designed on one level with four classroom wings and two closed
courtyards. Fuller has the capacity for over 50 full classrooms. 
The building was originally equipped with many sky lights that were removed during
roof replacement resulting in limited natural light throughout the main corridors. The
heating system was converted from oil to natural gas and new boilers and gas burners
were installed in 2005. The building is not equipped with central cooling. There are
several window unit or split cooling systems in the administrative offices. The building
is not equipped with an emergency back-up generator. 
The building was constructed on structural piles and caissons with a crawl space and
a dirt floor beneath the entire building. This causes a musty odor at times within the
building. Air quality testing was performed in 2007 when mold spore count, carbon
dioxide, oxygen and carbon monoxide measured levels were reported to be within
allowable limits. The structural concrete floor is suspended and is showing signs of
wear. 
Some recent upgrades include: auditorium stage curtains and lighting; a new
auditorium ceiling; a new handicap access ramp and an exterior brick wall
replacement on the north face or rear of the building. 
The building is in poor condition and the roof is at the end of its useful life. The
building also has structural issues where temporary shoring has been installed. 
We have been accepted into the Massachusetts School Building Authority program for
the construction of a new middle school. A Feasibility Study will begin in FY18 that
will provide the district with a model for the new school. 
Hemenway Elementary School 
Constructed in 1961, the Hemenway Elementary School is the elder sister school of
the Charlotte Dunning School that utilized the same layout design when constructed
in 1965. Other than location and age, the only main difference between the two
buildings is Dunning does not have modular classrooms additions such as does 
Hemenway. 
Located at 729 Water Street, the building contains 61,500 square feet plus over 5,000
square feet of modular space and is situated on 14.42 acres of land. The grounds
contain a playground, a baseball field and a small soccer/lacrosse field. The parking
lot houses 70 vehicle-parking stalls. 
The building was designed as a single story with a rectangular shape. There are three
52 | P a g e 
Page 53
classroom wings, an administration and café wing and an enclosed courtyard. There
are two modular buildings with connectors at the rear of the building that house four
classrooms. There are 2 chair lifts for handicap access as required by ADA. Hemenway
has 28 general classrooms. 
The roof was replaced in1996 and has a 20-year life expectancy. The heating system
was converted from oil to natural gas and new boilers and gas burners were installed
in 2005. There is no central cooling within the building. There are several window unit
or split cooling systems in the administrative offices. A new emergency back-up
generator was installed in 2009. 
The building is in good general condition and has received replacement walkways and
sidewalks in compliance with ADA mandates funded by capital expenditure. Paving
in the parking lots and driveways is in poor condition and is need of replacement. 
Juniper Hill Elementary School 
Constructed in1959, the Juniper Hill School is currently used to hose the BLOCKS
Preschool Program. 
Located at 29 Upper Joclyn Avenue, the building contains 44,300 square feet of space
and is situated on17.94 acres of land. The grounds contain two new playgrounds and
a small multipurpose ball field. The parking lot houses 80 vehicle-parking stalls. 
The building was designed as a single story with three classroom wings and an
Administration, café and gymnasium wing. Juniper Hill has 21 general classrooms. A
modular library addition was built in 2000 when 2,800 square feet of interior open
space was added to the school building. 
The roof was replaced in 2001 and has a twenty-year life expectancy. The heating
system was converted from oil to natural gas when one new boiler and natural gas
burner was replaced in 2000 and the second boiler and burner were replaced in 2001. 
There is no central cooling system within the building. All classrooms and offices are
equipped with window cooling units and the library is cooled via two roof top mounted
units. A new emergency back-up generator was installed in 2008. 
Several items have been upgraded or installed such as new playgrounds, replacement
of furnishings, window blinds, p.a. system, phones and data. 
The building and parking lot are in good condition. 
King Elementary School 
Originally named the Brook Water School, the George P. King Elementary School was
constructed in 1957. 
Located at 454 Water Street, the building contains 50,000 square feet and is situated
on over 18 acres of land. Administrative offices occupy roughly 40,000 square feet of
building space. The grounds contain a playground, baseball field and soccer/lacrosse
field. The parking lot houses 110 vehicle-parking stalls. 
53 | P a g e 
Page 54
The building was designed with two classroom wings connected by an enclosed walk
bridge with a café and gymnasium on separate lower levels. There is one chair lift and
one elevator within the building that provide handicap access to all levels as required
by ADA. King has the capacity for 24 full classrooms. The café or Desmarais room is
utilized for school functions and School Committee Meetings. 
The roof was replaced in 1998 and has a twenty year life expectancy. The heating
system was converted from oil to natural gas and new boilers and gas burners were
installed in 2001. The building is cooled via roof top air handlers on the front main
wing and the rear wing is equipped with portable air conditioner window units. The
building is equipped with and emergency back-up generator installed in 2011. 
The building is in good general condition and the parking lot is in excellent condition. 
McCarthy Elementary School 
Originally constructed in 1952 the McCarthy Elementary School received major
reconstruction and expansion in 1994. 
Located at 8 Flagg Drive, the building contains 94,936 square feet and is situated on
20.43 acres of land. The grounds contain two playgrounds and a baseball field. The
parking lot houses 88 vehicle-parking stalls. 
The building was designed as a two-story “L” shaped structure with two wings. One
wing houses the administration and café centrally and a gymnasium at one end with
classrooms to the rear and the other is a full two-story classroom wing. There is one
elevator that complies with current ADA access, building and fire code requirements. 
McCarthy has 29 full classrooms. 
One wing, or 50% of the roof was replaced in 1999 and the remaining 50% in 2007. 
Each wing has a twenty-year roof life expectancy. The heating system was converted
from oil to natural gas and new boilers and gas burners were installed in 2003. 
Selective areas within the building have central cooling such as administration, café, 
library, computer and head-end room. The building is equipped with an emergency
back-up generator and houses a large part of the districts major technology network
system. 
The building is in very good condition and requires no major upgrades at this time. 
The parking lot is in fair condition and repaving should be considered in the long
range plan. 
Potter Road Elementary School 
Constructed in1966 Potter Road School is the elder sister school of Brophy School that
utilized the same layout design when constructed in 1968. Other than location and
age, the only other main difference between the two buildings is Potter Road does not
have added modular classrooms such as the Brophy School does. 
Located at 492 Potter Road, the building contains 63,600 square feet of space and is
located on 12.75 acres of land. The grounds contain a playground, baseball field, 
basketball courts and a multipurpose field. The parking lot houses 80 vehicle-parking
stalls. 
54 | P a g e 
Page 55
The building was designed with a two-story classroom wing, a single story
administration, café and gymnasium wing and a central courtyard. There are two
chair lifts within the building that provide handicap access to the stage and classroom
wing level as required by ADA. Potter Road has 24 general classrooms. 
The roof was replaced in 1996 and has a twenty-year life expectancy. The heating
system was upgraded from oil to natural gas when one new boiler and natural gas
burner was installed in 1999 and the second boiler and burner was replaced in
2006.There is no central cooling within the building. There are several window unit or
split cooling systems in the administrative offices. The building is equipped with an
emergency back-up generator. 
The building is in good general condition and has received reconstruction and
replacement of a handicap ramp, curb cuts and new concrete walkways in compliance
with ADA mandates and funded by capital expenditure. 
Stapleton Elementary School 
The Stapleton Elementary School was originally constructed in 1922 and major
additions were constructed in1956 for added classrooms and then again in 1972 when
the library and gymnasium wings were added to the existing school. Originally named
the Saxonville School, it is listed as a historical building. 
Located at 25 Elm Street, the building contains 59,600 square feet of space and is
situated on 3.4 acres of land. The grounds contain a small out building, (2 car garage) 
a playground and a small multi-use ball field. The parking lot currently houses
roughly 102 parking stalls. 
The building is three stories and has a rectangular shape layout with a large interior
vehicle accessible courtyard. The Building is equipped with an elevator and chair lift
for stage access. Stapleton currently houses 23 full classrooms. 
The roof was replaced in 2007 and has a twenty-year life expectancy. The heating
system was converted from oil to natural gas and new boilers and gas burners were
installed in 2002. It is equipped with an antiquated steam heating system, unit
ventilators and roof mounted exhaust fans. The building is not equipped with central
cooling. There are several window unit air conditioners in the administration offices. A
new back-up emergency generator was installed in 2011. 
The entire building has been upgraded with new window and door replacements
throughout the exterior and capital funding for exterior brick mortar joint repointing is
being requested next year. Other recent capital investment upgrades include new
sidewalks and curbing at the main entrance plaza in compliance with required ADA
improvements. The entire parking lot, ball field, courtyard, and rear parking area have
all been upgraded. 
The building is listed as a historical building and is in fair condition. 
55 | P a g e 
Page 56
Thayer Campus /Lawrence Street School 
Currently used as an alternative high school, the Eugene Thayer Campus was
originally constructed in 1905 and was named the Lawrence Street Elementary
School. Besides housing an elementary school, the building has seen many uses over
its 105-year life. It was home to school administration offices, youth coordination
office, and from 1982 through 1994 the Visiting Nurses Association leased the
building from the school department. In 1995 it became home to the alternative high
school. 
Located at 50 Lawrence Street, the building contains 10,800 square feet of space and
is situated on roughly 2 acres of land. The grounds contain a parking lot that house
44 vehicle-parking stalls, but is need of repair and resurfacing. 
The building was designed with two stories and a basement that houses the
mechanical and boiler room. The building has 5 classrooms. There is a handicap chair
lift that provides access to all levels in accordance with ADA requirements. 
The heating system was converted from oil to natural gas. One new boiler and gas
burner was installed in 2005. There is no emergency back-up generator in the
building. The office and classrooms are cooled via portable wall cooling units. 
The exterior of the building was upgraded with roof repairs, new windows, new trim, 
gutters downspouts and minor landscaping as a capital improvement in 2008. The
roof is slate tiles. 
The building is in fair condition. There are no major upgrades planned at this time. 
Walsh Middle School 
Originally named the Frost Street Junior High School, the Walsh Middle School was
constructed in 1969. 
Located at 301 Brook Street, the building contains 201,000 square feet of space and is
situated on 22.46 acres of land. The grounds contain a baseball field, antiquated
unused tennis courts and a soccer/lacrosse field. The parking lot houses 130 vehicle-
parking stalls. 
The building was designed with two-stories. Walsh has four classroom wings, a central
administration wing with an auditorium, gymnasium cafeteria and large kitchen to the
rear of the building. There are two large enclosed courtyards. There is an elevator and
handicap chair lift that complies with current ADA accessibility requirements. Walsh
has the capacity for over 50 classrooms. 
The roof was replaced in 2005 and has a 20-year life expectancy. The heating system
was converted from oil to natural gas and new boilers and gas burners were installed
in 2003. The building has a steam piping distribution system that is in need of
constant service and repair. The building is not equipped with a central cooling
system. There are several window unit or split cooling systems in the administrative
offices. A new emergency back-up generator was installed in 2009. 
Some architectural items need to be addressed such as, window glass replacement, 
56 | P a g e 
Page 57
interior floor tile replacement, toilet partition replacement and both interior and
exterior painting. 
The building is in good condition. Some of the site paving should be considered for
replacement in the near future. 
Woodrow Wilson Elementary School 
Originally built in 1924 the original Woodrow Wilson School was demolished and
replaced with a new school building on the same site in 1998. At the time of
completion the Wilson School was considered to be “state of the art” in design, 
technology and furnishings and continues to be a jewel of the community today. 
Located at 169 Leland Street, the building contains 100,695 square feet and is
situated on 5.02 acres of land. The grounds contain two playgrounds and a small
multi-purpose ball field. The parking lot houses 110 vehicle-parking stalls. 
The building was designed with a two-story classroom wing and a two-story
administration wing that houses the café, gymnasium and library. There is one
elevator that complies with current ADA access, building and fire code requirements. 
Wilson has 31 full classrooms. 
The heating plant is natural gas fired with air handlers that supply a VAV, or variable
air volume system and supplemental hydronic perimeter heat. The cooling system is a
centrifugal chiller equipped with an exterior water-cooling tower. Although the heating
and cooling systems provide for efficient climate control, they are costly to operate, 
especially during the peak, or summer cooling season. The building is equipped with
an emergency back-up generator. 
All mechanical systems and general architectural furnishings are in good condition. 
The site, however, has been impacted by underground contamination that was caused
by a chemical treatment facility that adjoins the property. The Town Board of Health
has been monitoring the condition at the site and has worked with the School
Department to ensure safe occupancy for the staff and students at the school. 
57 | P a g e 
Page 58
58 | P a g e 
Page 59
FLNE: First Language Not English 
59 | P a g e 
Page 60
60 | P a g e 
Page 61
61 | P a g e 
Page 62
62 | P a g e 
Page 63
SGPA: Student Growth Percentile Access 
63 | P a g e 
Page 64
64 | P a g e 
Page 65
65 | P a g e 
Page 66
66 | P a g e 
Page 67
67 | P a g e 
Page 68
68 | P a g e 
Page 69
HISTORICAL KINDERGARTEN ENROLLMENT
School Years: 2007- 2016
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016 
643
648
709
706
784
782
804
725
742
693
Source: DESE October 1 reports 
69 | P a g e 
Page 70
Barbieri
Brophy
Cameron
Dunning
FHS
Fuller
Hemenway
King
McCarthy
Potter
Stapleton
Thayer
Walsh
Wilson
Gen Ed
As % 
STUDENTS ENTERING/EXITING FPS
October 1, 2016 – March 8, 2017
Total
IN  OUT Exit/Entrance ENROLL RATE
4  15  19  690 3% 
45  32  77  500 15% 
9  12  21  525 4% 
10  4  14  488 3% 
92  76  168  2031 8% 
45  28  73  443 16% 
15  6  21  557 4% 
2  7  9  154 6% 
21  17  38  584 7% 
35  12  47  492 10% 
14  12  26  428 6% 
3  13  16  24  67% 
11  10  21  695 3% 
39  31  70  562 12% 
345 275  620  8173 8% 
202 205 
59% 75% 
70 | P a g e 
Page 71
REGISTRATIONS FROM OCTOBER 1, 2016 to MARCH 8, 2017
Bil- Bil- Opt
School Name Gen Ed Port Span Out
In registration process 71  4  7
Barbieri Elementary 
Brophy Elementary 3  33
Cameron Middle  8
Dunning Elementary 4
Framingham High  28  26  25
Fuller Middle  10  17  8
Hemenway Elementary 11  1
King Elementary  2
McCarthy Elementary 11
Out-placed  11
Potter Road  3
SPED Referral  4
Stapleton Elementary 12  1
Thayer Campus of FHS  3
Walsh Middle  10
Woodrow Wilson Elementary 13  24
Grand Total  202 73  73  2 
2 Way
Eng 2 Way
Non Span
SEI LEP LEP Total
4  4  90
1  3  4
9  45
1  9
6  10
13  92
10  45
3  15
2
9  1  21
11
32  35
4
1  14
3
1  11
2  39
92  5  3  450
71 | P a g e 
Page 72
WITHDRAWALS FROM OCTOBER 1, 2016 to MARCH 8, 2017
2 Way
2 Way Eng 2 Way
Bil- Bil-  Eng Non Span
School Name Gen Ed Port Span SEI LEP LEP LEP Total
In un-registration process 8  1  2  11
Barbieri Elementary 2  1  8  4  15
Brophy Elementary 19  8  5  32
Cameron Middle  12  12
Dunning Elementary 4  4
Framingham High  48  8  3  17  76
Fuller Middle  16  6  4  2  28
Hemenway Elementary 5  1  6
King Elementary 6  1  7
McCarthy Elementary 17  17
Out-placed  12  12
Potter Road  7  5  12
Stapleton Elementary 9  3  12
Thayer Campus of FHS  13  13
Walsh Middle  9  1  10
Woodrow Wilson Elementary 18  7  6  31
Grand Total  205 21  16  42  1  9  4  298
72 | P a g e 
Page 73
73 | P a g e 
Page 74
Framingham Public Schools
Dr. Edward J. Gotgart, Acting Superintendent of Schools
73 Mount Wayte Avenue, Suite #5
Framingham, Massachusetts 01702
Telephone: 508-626-9117 Fax: 508-877-4240
August 11, 2016
Dear Parent/Guardian: 
One of our school-wide goals this year will be to ensure that every student attends school
regularly. 
Showing up for school has a huge impact on a student’s academic success starting in
kindergarten and continuing through high school. School attendance is so important for success
in school and in life. We realize some absences are unavoidable due to health problems or other
circumstances. But, we also know that when students miss too much school, regardless of the
reason, it can cause them to fall behind academically. Your child is less likely to succeed if he/ 
she is chronically absent - which means missing 18 or more days over the course of an entire
school year. Research shows: 
  Children chronically absent in kindergarten and 1st grade are much less likely to read at
grade level by the end of 3rd grade. 
  By 6th grade, chronic absence is a proven early warning sign for students at risk for
dropping out of school. 
  By 9th grade good attendance can predict graduation rates even better than 8th grade test
scores. 
Absences can add up quickly. A student is chronically absent if he or she misses just two days
every month! 
We want to partner with you to support you and your children so that they can show up for
school on time every day. We want your children to be successful and are dedicated to their 
academic achievement! In the next several weeks and months, you will be hearing more about
how we will work together to make sure every student is in school every day! 
Very truly yours, 
Dr. Edward Gotgart 
Acting Superintendent of Schools
74 | P a g e 
Page 75
75 | P a g e 
Page 76
76 | P a g e 
Page 77
FRAMINGHAM PUBLIC SCHOOL
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT USAGE
SICK DAYS  SICK, PERSONAL, COMP
DAYS 
ALL ABSENCES 
Number of
Days 
10 or more 
5 to 10 
1 to 5
0 
Number of
Staff 
33 
186 
802 
144 
3% 
16% 
9% 
12% 
Number of Number of
Days Staff 
10 or more 
5 to 10 
1 to 5
0 
47 
332 
737 
49 
4% 
28% 
63% 
5% 
Number of Number
Days of Staff 
10 or more 
5 to 10 
1 to 5
0 
87 
447 
590 
27 
7.50% 
38.50% 
52% 
2% 
Number of  Number of 
Staff  Staff 
Members Coverage Members Coverage 
Month Out Per Day Rate Month Out Per Day Rate 
Sep-16  67  84% Sep-15  63  83% 
Oct-16 
Nov-16 
Dec-16 
91  83% Oct-15 
99  77% Nov-15 
116  73% Dec-15 
109  76% 
108  82% 
127  75% 
Jan-17  99  81% Jan-16  105  76% 
First 95 days 94  80% First 95 days 102.5  78% 
77 | P a g e 
Page 78
FRAMINGHAM PUBLIC SCHOOL
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING UNITS
Framingham Teachers Association (Unit A): This unit consists of teachers and
school nurses (1,138) 
Framingham Administrators Association (Unit B): This unit consists of all
assistant principals, vice principals, directors and assistant directors and coordinators
(51).
Framingham Education Support Personnel (Unit T): This unit consists of all
assistant teachers, interventionists and aides (340).
Framingham School Custodians (Unit C): This unit consists of school custodians
and maintenance workers (73).
Framingham Food Services (Unit N):  This unit consists of cafeteria employees (70).
Framingham School Department Secretarial Unit (Unit S): This unit consists of all
10 and 12 month secretaries, administrative secretaries, executive secretary, office
managers, accounts payable specialists, head accounts payable specialist, food
services specialist, head food services specialist (69). 
78 | P a g e 
Page 79
79 | P a g e 
Page 80
80 | P a g e 
Page 81
81 | P a g e 
Page 82
82 | P a g e 
Page 83
83 | P a g e 
Page 84
84 | P a g e 
Page 85
85 | P a g e 
Page 86
86 | P a g e 
Page 87
COMPARISON OF ESTIMATED SPED COST GROWTH AS PERCENTAGE OF ESTIMATED TOTAL OPERATING BUDGET GROWTH, FY14-24
Operating at 4.5%/SPED at 8%*
FY13 ACTUAL FY14 ACTUAL FY15 ACTUAL FY16 ACTUAL FY17 BUDGET FY18 REQUEST FY19  FY20  FY21  FY22  FY23  FY24
Ope r. $97,574,458 102,344,644 109,499,299 115,731,953 122,550,690 128,065,471 133,828,417 139,850,696 146,143,977 152,720,456 159,592,877 166,774,556 
Inc. $ 4,672,657 $  4,770,186 $ 7,154,655 $ 6,232,654 $ 6,818,737 $ 5,514,781 $ 5,762,946 $ 6,022,279 $ 6,293,281 $ 6,576,479 $ 6,872,421 $ 7,181,679 
4.89%  6.99%  5.69%  5.89%  4.50%  4.50%  4.50%  4.50%  4.50%  4.50%  4.50%
SPED $34,076,026 $ 35,578,860 $ 36,255,481 $ 38,182,511 $ 38,933,940 $ 42,048,655 $ 45,412,548 $ 49,045,551 $ 52,969,196 $ 57,206,731 $ 61,783,270 $ 66,725,931 
Inc. $ 1,800,000 $  1,502,834 $  676,621 $ 1,927,030 $  751,429 $ 3,114,715 $ 3,363,892 $ 3,633,004 $ 3,923,644 $ 4,237,536 $ 4,576,538 $ 4,942,662 
%  39%  32%  9%  31%  11%  56%  58%  60%  62%  64%  67%  69%
OOD  225  230  224  242 
*CFO estimated growth in Long Range Financial Forecast 2018-2023
Operating at 5%/SPED at 8%**
FY13 ACTUAL FY14 ACTUAL FY15 ACTUAL FY16 ACTUAL FY17 BUDGET FY18 REQUEST FY19  FY20  FY21  FY22  FY23  FY24
Ope r. $97,574,458 $102,344,644 $109,499,299 $115,731,953 $122,550,690 $128,065,471 $134,468,745 $141,192,182 $148,251,791 $155,664,380 $163,447,599 $171,619,979 
Inc. $ 4,672,657 $  4,770,186 $ 7,154,655 $ 6,232,654 $ 6,818,737 $ 5,514,781 $ 6,403,274 $ 6,723,437 $ 7,059,609 $ 7,412,590 $ 7,783,219 $ 8,172,380 
4.89%  6.99%  5.69%  5.89%  4.50%  5.00%  5.00%  5.00%  5.00%  5.00%  5.00%
SPED $34,076,026 $ 35,578,860 $ 36,255,481 $ 38,182,511 $ 38,933,940 $ 42,048,655 $ 45,412,548 $ 49,045,551 $ 52,969,196 $ 57,206,731 $ 61,783,270 $ 66,725,931 
Inc. $ 1,800,000 $  1,502,834 $  676,621 $ 1,927,030 $  751,429 $ 3,114,715 $ 3,363,892 $ 3,633,004 $ 3,923,644 $ 4,237,536 $ 4,576,538 $ 4,942,662 
%  39%  32%  9%  31%  11%  56%  53%  54%  56%  57%  59%  60%
**Estimate using 5% growth in School Department Budget 
87 | P a g e 
Page 88
Page 89
Page 90
Page 91
Page 92
Page 93
Page 94
Page 95
Page 96
Page 97
Page 98
Page 99
Page 100
Page 101
Page 102
Page 103
Page 104
Page 105
Page 106
Page 107
Page 108
Page 109
Page 110
Page 111
Page 112
Page 113
Page 114
Page 115
Page 116
Page 117
Page 118
Page 119
Page 120
Page 121
Page 122
Page 123
Page 124
Page 125
Page 126
Page 127
Page 128
Page 129
Page 130
Page 131
Page 132
Page 133
Page 134
Page 135
Page 136
Page 137
Page 138
Page 139
Page 140
Page 141
Page 142
Page 143
Page 144
Page 145
Page 146
Page 147
Page 148
Page 149
Page 150
Page 151
