Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2015-12-07
Keywords: Sports injury epidemiology,Socioecological frameworks,Systems thinking,Agent-Based Modelling,Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics
CrossMarkDomains[1]: springer.com
ModDate: 2015/12/08 14:13:33+01'00'
Subject: Injury Epidemiology, 2015, doi:10.1186/s40621-015-0064-1
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Title: From monocausality to systems thinking: a complementary and alternative conceptual approach for better understanding the development and prevention of sports injury
CrossMarkDomains[2]: springerlink.com
doi: 10.1186/s40621-015-0064-1
CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
Author: Adam Hulme
CreationDate: 2015/12/07 18:30:33+08'00'
xmp:crossmark:DOI: 10.1186/s40621-015-0064-1
xmp:crossmark:MajorVersionDate: 2015-12-07
xmp:crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:crossmark:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Sports injury epidemiology,Socioecological frameworks,Systems thinking,Agent-Based Modelling,Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2015-12-07
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:pdfx:doi: 10.1186/s40621-015-0064-1
xmp:pdfx:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:prism:url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40621-015-0064-1
xmp:prism:doi: 10.1186/s40621-015-0064-1
xmp:prism:issn: 2197-1714
xmp:prism:aggregationType: journal
xmp:prism:publicationName: Injury Epidemiology
xmp:prism:copyright: Hulme and Finch.
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s40621-015-0064-1
xmp:dc:publisher: Injury Epidemiology
xmp:dc:description: Injury Epidemiology, 2015, doi:10.1186/s40621-015-0064-1
xmp:dc:subject: Sports injury epidemiology; Socioecological frameworks; Systems thinking; Agent-Based Modelling; Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics
xmp:dc:title: From monocausality to systems thinking: a complementary and alternative conceptual approach for better understanding the development and prevention of sports injury
xmp:dc:creator: Adam Hulme; Caroline F. Finch
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2015-12-08T14:13:33+01:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2015-12-07T18:30:33+08:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2015-12-08T14:13:33+01:00
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:ae118a8c-3881-4820-b048-c5fa55b51f6d
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:1774f25a-9453-451e-8e1e-6561f821832a
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:5a44cd1e-32e2-4442-af02-69209d221fb0
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2015-12-07T18:40:04+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://www.aiim.org/pdfa/ns/id/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfaid
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/A ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Part of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: part
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Integer
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Amendment of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: amd
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: conformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer ORCiD Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springer.com/ns/xmpExtensions/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: springer
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCiD (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCiD is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springer.com/ns/xmpExtensions/1.0/authorinfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrosMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkMajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://crossref.org/crossmark/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: crossmark
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: crossmark
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Usual same as prism:doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The date when a publication was published.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://prismstandard.org/namespaces/basic/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: prism
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Prism
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The aggregation type specifies the unit of aggregationBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Review
The roots of causal concepts in the modern scientific era
  The evolution of causal thinking in epidemiology
Causal concepts in injury epidemiology
Causal concepts in sports injury epidemiology
Proposing a complementary research agenda for sports injury aetiological research
  The current state of sports injury aetiological research
  Forwards to a systems paradigm
    Thinking in ‘systems’
  System thinking theory and principles
  Principles in practice
  A brief overview of available system-based methods
  A case in point from the sports injury literature
Conclusion
Abbreviations
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Authors’ information
Acknowledgements
References
Page 1
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31
DOI 10.1186/s40621-015-0064-1
REVIEW  Open Access
From monocausality to systems thinking: a
complementary and alternative conceptual
approach for better understanding the
development and prevention of sports
injury
Adam Hulme* and Caroline F. Finch
Abstract
The science of sports injury control, including both its cause and prevention, has largely been informed by a
biomedical and mechanistic model of health. Traditional scientific practice in sports injury research has routinely
involved collapsing the broader socioecological landscape down in order to analyse individual-level determinants
of injury - whether biomechanical and/or behavioural. This approach has made key gains for sports injury
prevention research and should be further encouraged and allowed to evolve naturally. However, the public health,
Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, and injury epidemiological literature more broadly, has accepted the value
of a socioecological paradigm for better understanding disease and injury processes, and sports injury research will
fall further behind unless it does the same. A complementary and alternative conceptual approach towards injury
control known as systems thinking that builds on socioecological science, both methodologically and analytically, is
readily available and fast developing in other research areas. This review outlines the historical progression of causal
concepts in the field of epidemiology over the course of the modern scientific era. From here, causal concepts in
injury epidemiology, and models of aetiology as found in the context of sports injury research are presented. The
paper finishes by proposing a new research agenda that considers the potential for a systems thinking approach to
further enhance sports injury aetiological understanding. A complementary systems paradigm, however, will require
that sports injury epidemiologists bring their knowledge and skillsets forwards in an attempt to use, adapt, and
even refine existing systems-based approaches. Alongside the natural development of conventional scientific
methodologies and analyses in sports injury research, progressing forwards to a systems paradigm is now required.
Keywords: Sports injury epidemiology, Socioecological frameworks, Systems thinking, Agent-Based Modelling,
Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics
Review
There is an Arabian proverb of which most are familiar.
It speaks of a camel whose owner had overloaded it be-
yond what was a manageable weight; so much so, that it
took only but a single piece of additional straw to bring
the animal to its knees. The idiom, ‘the straw that broke
the camel’s back’,  now extends to scenarios where a
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:a.hulme@federation.edu.au"] a.hulme@federation.edu.au
Australian Centre for Research into Injury in Sports and its Prevention
(ACRISP), Federation University Australia, SMB Campus, PO Box 663, Ballarat,
Victoria 3353, Australia 
certain number of precipitating factors combine to pro-
duce an undesirable outcome. In most instances, how-
ever, it is only the final event that is most noticeable to
the person involved, and is routinely considered as the
‘unique cause’  of the effect in question (Rothman and
Greenland 2005).  The tendency for human beings to
process events in this way, to otherwise implicate mono-
causality into their daily thinking, is simply a matter of
habituation. Conversely, when deliberating over causality
on a deeper level, or when attempting to formulate new
scientific theories, one has to advance rudimentary
© 2015 Hulme and Finch. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
Page 2
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 2 of 12
conceptions of causality to that of complexity and multi-
factorialism (Rothman and Greenland 2005).
In the broader field of epidemiology, the science of
causality, including ways in which to illustrate it, has
been discussed at length (e.g. Greenland et al. 1999;
Parascandola and Weed 2001; Broadbent 2013). Indeed,
epidemiologists are not only motivated by the task of
distinguishing simple correlation from actual causation,
but also by the underlying and often times elusive and
complex nature underpinning causal relationships (Glass
et al. 2013).  In other words, epidemiologists strive to
identify both the risk factors for, and the causal mecha-
nisms behind, the health effect in question. Closer to
home, in the sports injury literature, there have been a
number of examples that discuss or illustrate causality
from a general prevention perspective (Meeuwisse
1994a, b; Gissane et al. 2001; Bahr and Holme 2003;
Bahr and Krosshaug 2005; McIntosh 2005).  Notwith-
standing these examples, causal theory in sports injury
epidemiology has entered into a period of inertia despite
the availability of alternative conceptual causal ap-
proaches. Sports injury prevention research will not be
able to make significant gains unless a number of im-
portant issues pertaining to causality are addressed.
The first section of this narrative review discusses the
historical progression of causal concepts in the field of
epidemiology more generally. This section, albeit sum-
marised to include only a few noteworthy contributions,
provides insight into why and how casual theory has
evolved over time. From here, causal concepts in the
broader field of injury epidemiology, and models of aeti-
ology as found in the context of sports injury research
are presented. The paper finishes with an overview of
how a systems thinking approach has the potential to
further enhance sports injury aetiological understanding.
The roots of causal concepts in the modern
scientific era
In 1880, at the Tenth International Congress of Medi-
cine in Berlin, the German physician Robert Koch made
a significant contribution to the field of microbiology
and disease causality. Reflecting upon his research into
the origin of Tuberculosis, Koch outlined three illustri-
ous causal postulates (Rivers 1937): (i) that the parasite
occurs in every case of the disease in question; (ii) that it
occurs in no other disease as a fortuitous and non-
pathogenic parasite, and; (iii) that after being fully
isolated from the body and repeatedly grown in pure
culture, it can cause the disease again. At the time,
Koch’s postulates were designed to definitively establish
whether a causal relationship existed between a single
infectious agent and particular disease. Ironically, how-
ever, it was the limitations associated with these postu-
lates that contributed to advancing aetiological 
understanding in this area (Fredricks and Relman 1996).
Certainly, for some pathogenic bacterial species, the pos-
tulates were highly applicable. Yet, for other organisms,
a clear violation of one or more of the postulates was
found (Fredricks and Relman 1996).
The discovery of viruses in the early Twentieth cen-
tury prompted a revision to Koch’s postulates. Rivers
(1937) recognised that the monocausal exposure-disease
framework was flawed, and warned of its continued ap-
plication. Twenty years later, Huebner’s (1957) refine-
ments to causal theory included, for the first time, the
importance of epidemiological approaches alongside
mere laboratory-based research. With the passing of yet
another decade, the Five Realities of acute respiratory
disease were formulated and supported the now ac-
cepted multicausal paradigm through recognising the
importance of the individual’s biological constitution,
and the influence of seasonal variation on the pathogen-
icity of certain agents (Evans 1967).
The further discovery of hundreds of new viruses
transformed disease causality into a complex concept
that included demographical, geographical and social
layers. Accordingly, the historical progression of the sci-
ence of infectious disease causality has been condensed
into three distinct stages (Evans 1976): (i) the nature of
the agent as a key focus (e.g. Koch’s postulates andmonocausality); (ii) consideration to the environment in
which the disease occurred (e.g. refinements from
Huebner and Rivers) (Huebner 1957; Rivers 1937); and
(iii), recognition of how the characteristics of the host in-
fluences the pathophysiology of disease (e.g. Evan’s Five
Realities) (Evans 1967).
The evolution of causal thinking in epidemiology
Over the course of the mid-late 1900s, the provision of
healthcare services, improved community sanitation and
hygiene, and scientific discoveries including the develop-
ment of vaccinations contributed to a declining inci-
dence of infectious diseases (Baum 2011). Paradoxically,
technological advancements and obesogenic environ-
ments gave rise to a range of new health issues. The epi-
demiological teaching resources that emerged around
the 1950s embraced a new research agenda, and along-
side infectious disease, were now concerned with the de-
velopment and prevention of non-communicable
chronic health conditions (Krieger 1994).  The single
agent germ theory was completely displaced by models
of disease aetiology that directly assimilated, or took ad-
vantage of, the underpinning principles associated with
the Agent, Host, and Environment triad. Standout exam-
ples include the Web of Causation (MacMahon et al.
1960),  Hill’s (1965) nine considerations for inferring
causation, and Rothman’s  (1976; 2005) Theoretical
Sufficient-Component Cause Model; which, was based
Page 3
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 3 of 12
on earlier work by distinguished philosophers of science
(Mackie 1965; Lyon 1967).
Causal concepts in injury epidemiology
Whether it be improvised footwear to protect against
the elements, or engineered clothing and equipment
worn during warfare, injury prevention interventions
have continued to evolve since the earliest known re-
cords (Rivara 2001). Aside from a number of early les-
sons, it took until the mid-late Twentieth century before
the true application of epidemiological techniques for
better understanding injury control were applied (Rivara
2001). If it were not for the causal concepts that has pre-
viously been established in the infectious and chronic
disease literature, injury epidemiology might have set
out on an altogether different trajectory (Robertson
2007). Notable early concepts that were applied to injury
control included the Domino Theory of Accident
Causation (Heinrich 1931),  De Dehaven’s (1942) bio-
mechanical theories of energy exchange and force distri-
bution, and the self-involved experiments of Stapp
(1957). A number of influential visionaries prophetically
elaborated on these robust theoretical foundations, and
so injury control was established as a legitimate scientific
discipline.
In his paper ‘The Epidemiology of Accidents’,  Gordon
(1949) illustrated a similar pattern of mortality between
an outbreak of typhoid fever amongst a troupe of circus
performers and that of a nightclub fire. The analogy of
these two distinct scenarios, aside from the literal graph-
ical representation of the sharp and initial aggregation of
cases, was reflected in his commentary (Gordon 1949;
p.515):
“Specifically directed prevention based on an
understanding of cause has long guided the attack on
communicable and other diseases…the biologic
principles that govern disease as a community
problem are interpreted as holding equally well for
injuries. A pattern for epidemiologic analysis is
presented [Agent, Host, and Environment], as a means
for a better understanding of accidents”.
Gordon (1949) believed that, like disease, injuries were
caused by particular epidemiologic episodes, such as sea-
sonal change, demographic characteristics and an indi-
vidual’s  susceptibility. Just over a decade later, an
experimental psychologist proposed that injuries were
caused by the transfer of energy (Gibson 1961). The the-
ory of energy exposures exceeding an organism’s physio-
logical injury threshold remains foundational to the
science of injury control.
A breakthrough in injury research arrived with the re-
lease of ‘Accident Research: Methods and Approaches’ 
(Haddon et al. 1964). Haddon et al. (1964) had produced
the ultimate anthological resource which established in-
jury research as an important scientific discipline (Li and
Baker 2014).  The theories and methods presented in
their definitive text were the catalyst for many more im-
portant publications that followed, including numerous
reports by the US-based National Research Council and
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
(Rivara 2001).  Like Gordon (1949) before him, one of
the greatest contributions to injury research by Haddon
(1970, 1980) was his recognition of the Agent, Host and
Environment triad. Haddon’s (1970, 1980) efforts to co-
ordinate three distinct injury prevention phases (i.e. pre-
event, event, post-event) with the Epidemiological Triad
resulted in the now famous Haddon Matrix for injury
prevention interventions. The Haddon Matrix is widely
used to conceptualise the candidate risk factors, tempor-
ality, and the mechanisms of injury, and has been
applied in a number of different injury contexts (Scott-
Parker and Morang MacKay 2015).  The addition of a
third dimension to Haddon’s Matrix by Runyan (1998)
introduced value criteria to enhance the efficacy and ef-
fectiveness of injury prevention interventions. Runyan’s
(1998) suggested criteria included: (i) effectiveness; (ii)
cost; (iii) freedom; (iv) equity; (v) stigmatization; (vi)
preferences, and; (vii) feasibility.
Causal concepts in sports injury epidemiology
Contemporary models of sports injury aetiology have
broadly visualised how a multitude of risk factors pre-
dispose and subsequently leave athletes susceptible to
sustaining injury. These models have developed incre-
mentally over time, being grounded in the broader
causal concepts that have been outlined thus far.
Meeuwisse (1994a) was one of the first sports medi-
cine researchers to discuss the importance of accurately
assessing causation in sports injury research. In particu-
lar, two early articles outlined key principles relating to
the assessment of risk factors, and elucidated why a
multifactorial approach to understanding sports injury
risk was needed (Meeuwisse 1994a, b).  Inspired by
causal concepts in the disease literature, Meeuwisse
(1994a) created his new multifactorial model of athletic
injury aetiology. The model included the relationship be-
tween intrinsic (e.g. maturational stage, somatotype, bio-
mechanics, conditioning) and extrinsic (e.g. weather,
footwear, terrain, competitive rules) risk factors and
sports injury. According to the model, any given athlete
has a unique predisposition for injury based on their
own intrinsic set of risk factors, and further external risk
factors acting ‘from outside’  render the athlete suscep-
tible to injury. The multifactorial model was revised just
over a decade later, prompted in part by the presentation
of a new operational cyclical model by Gissane et al.
Page 4
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 4 of 12
(2001),  alongside later suggestions (Bahr and Holme
2003; Bahr and Krosshaug 2005). The updated model ef-
fectively advanced the initial linear paradigm of injury
causality to a dynamic model in which a given athlete’s
susceptibility to injury could continually change accord-
ing to many adaptations or maladaptations that occur
with continued sports participation (Meeuwisse et al.
2007) (Fig. 1).
A biomechanical perspective on sports injury causality
illustrated a number of considerations that added com-
plexity to sports injury causality (McIntosh 2005).
McIntosh (2005) drew upon his own research, and ratio-
nalised that the use of protective headgear might not
affect sports injury risk, for better or worse, if that par-
ticular intervention were to modify the behaviour and
attitudes of its user. The model visualised how personal-
ity, level of competitiveness and exposure to coaching
practices interplay with environmental and biomechan-
ical properties to influence injury risk. Ultimately,
McIntosh (2005) explained how injury prevention pro-
grams might not work to their full capacity if physical
loads are reduced through intervention, yet an increase
in kinetic energy exchange and higher forces are encour-
aged through the actions and desires of coaches and ath-
letes. Hagel and Meeuwisse (2004) similarly dedicated an 
earlier paper to the notion of risk compensation in the
sports injury context. They argued that, despite the best
intentions of researchers’  to introduce sports injury
countermeasures, interventions might not always have
the desired effect. Their conclusion emphasised the im-
portance of conducting injury prevention studies for de-
termining whether countermeasures are efficacious
through evaluating their net benefit (Hagel and
Meeuwisse 2004).
Proposing a complementary research agenda for
sports injury aetiological research
Existing sports injury prevention frameworks have been
valuable for outlining and facilitating the overall research
process. For instance, stage two associated with both the
Sequence of Prevention model (van Mechelen et al.
1992) and the Translating Research into Injury Preven-
tion Practice (TRIPP) framework (Finch 2006) specifies
that the implementation and evaluation of injury preven-
tion interventions cannot occur until risk factors and
mechanisms of injury have been firmly established. Ac-
cordingly, aetiological research requires a multidisciplin-
ary approach, including not only biomechanical and
clinical studies, but also investigations with a focus on
behavioural and motivational factors (Finch 2006).
Fig. 1 A dynamic, recursive model of etiology in sport injury (Meeuwisse et al. 2007)
Page 5
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 5 of 12
Despite this, very few original studies in the uninten-
tional injury and sports injury literature have used be-
havioural and social science theories in order to facilitate
the uptake and maintenance of injury prevention inter-
ventions (Trifiletti et al. 2005; McGlashan and Finch
2010).  This is concerning given that injury research,
whether focused on aetiology or prevention, has to occa-
sionally reach above and beyond not only the biomedical
and clinical sciences, but also the behavioural and mo-
tivational levels to truly make a difference (Allegrante et
al. 2010). In other words, incorporating injury determi-
nants as they relate to policy development and legisla-
tion are also crucial for prevention purposes, yet they
too have only featured on a very limited basis in sports
injury research.
In one of very few examples, Cameron et al. (1994) ex-
plained that before regulations specified that bicycle hel-
met use was mandatory, the overall uptake of this injury
prevention intervention was less than adequate. If people
do not know, appreciate, or consider that particular in-
jury countermeasures are necessary for enhancing their
personal safety, there will be little incentive to use them.
Accordingly, to increase the effectiveness of an interven-
tion to reduce severe eye injuries amongst squash
players, Eime et al. (2005) collaborated with the Victor-
ian Squash Federation, leading eyewear manufacturing
companies and sports venue managers. This was along-
side behavioural and motivational strategies to ensure
both the uptake and efficacy of the program was suc-
cessful (Eime et al. 2004).
More recently, Finch and Donaldson (2010) developed
a novel extension to the RE-AIM (Reach; Effectiveness;
Adoption; Implementation; Maintenance) framework,
through the Sports Settings Matrix to identify the mul-
tiple levels of the sports delivery setting (e.g. national
level through to a club, team and individual level that
impact on injury prevention). The authors’ stressed that
the attitudes and knowledge towards injury prevention
interventions need addressing, but equally, the setting,
culture, and infrastructural support networks in which
programs are to be delivered are also essential consider-
ations for the success of initiatives. For injury prevention
interventions to have the best chance of working,
practice-based research that aims to measure the con-
textual determinants of program effectiveness is required
to translate efficacy into effectiveness; but alone, this is
not enough. Even prior to implementation, it is impera-
tive to reconcile differing perceptions of injury causation
(Hanson et al. 2012).
The current state of sports injury aetiological research
Contemporary models of sports injury aetiology have
been influenced by a doctrine of scientific objectivity
and engineered under a biomedical construct. This 
means that injury mechanisms have primarily been
understood from a biophysiological and biomechanical
perspective. Despite being useful for calibrating research
priorities and enhancing injury prevention efforts, such
models have always directed attention to the individual
athlete (i.e. age, gender, strength, neuromuscular control,
equipment, training surface etc.)  (Meeuwisse 1994a;
Gissane et al. 2001; McIntosh 2005; Meeuwisse et al.
2007).  This promotes a view that the science of sports
injury control is best characterised by reducing the in-
jury mechanism down to a level that only educational,
behavioural and medically-oriented interventions can
address. If not called into question, a biomedical and ob-
jectivist epistemic tradition will continue to lead sports
injury researchers to believe that athletes are ‘free’ agents
who can always ‘choose’  their own behaviours. What is
now required is the introduction of a complementary
and alternative conceptual approach for better under-
standing the development and prevention of sports in-
jury. Revisiting the ten ecological principles (Haddon
1970) and re-examining the Injury Iceberg (Hanson et
al. 2005) represents the first step in being able to show
that it is possible to preserve the traditional approach in
sports injury research, yet simultaneously, extend the
horizon beyond it.
Forwards to a systems paradigm
Over the latter half of the Twentieth century, the field of
public health blossomed into a multidisciplinary science
(Rogers 1960). The limitations associated with routinely
targeting interventions at individual-level, health-related
determinants were recognised (Rose 1985; Graham
2004).  The controversial ‘The role of medicine. Dream,
Mirage or nemesis’ claimed that the primary reasons for
improvements in health-related outcomes in the
developed world, at least post Eighteenth century, were
nutritional, environmental and behaviourally-related
(McKeown 1979).  With increasing awareness that the
process of scientific reductionism was not the sole an-
swer to many public health issues, early government pol-
icies (Lalonde 1974),  associated literature (Blum 1974;
Dever 1976), and pivotal comprehensive global agendas
by the World Health Organisation (1986) recalibrated
focus upstream to a political and societal-level (Graham
2004).  Around the same time, calls for a greater em-
phasis to be placed on social science theory (Cassel
1964, 1976) and social reformation strategies to address
socioeconomic inequalities (Wing 1984, 1988) started to
catalyse some of the more recognised ecological models
of health (e.g. Dahlgren and Whitehead 1991; Green and
Kreuter 1999; VanLeeuwen et al. 1999).
A reorientation of focus to upstream health-related
determinants nurtured a quiet tension and scientific
divide with regard to how disease pathogenesis and
Page 6
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 6 of 12
pathophysiology could best be investigated and under-
stood. One school of scientists preferred to reduce
disease down to a molecular level and study its
pathogenic mechanisms, especially given technological
advances in the fields of biology and genetics (Van-
denbroucke 1988).  Vandenbroucke (1988) drew a
comparison between the Nineteenth century’s miasmic
theory and the modern day environmentalist move-
ment striving for social change. Conversely, another
school of scientists believed that historical, social, and
geographical factors had been, and still were, equally
responsible for the aetiology of many diseases along-
side the specific-agent position (Loomis and Wing
1990). Loomis and Wing (1990) identified the similar-
ity between Vandenbroucke’s  (1988) molecularised
epidemiology and the previous century’s germ theory.
In ‘The Limits of Epidemiology’,  Wing (1994) claimed
that the field of epidemiology was vulnerable to being
labelled as a ‘basic science’ if practitioners were to con-
tinue viewing exposure-disease relationships as self-
contained, homogenous and universal phenomena. In
other words, generalised assumptions and inferences de-
rived via experimental and observational study designs
need to reflect the social, political, and economic dimen-
sions to which exposure(s) are influenced (Wing 1994).
Consequently, in a series of papers, Susser and Susser
(1996a, b) and Susser (1998) argued that the field of epi-
demiology required a theoretical shift to encourage the
emergence of a new scientific paradigm titled ‘eco-epi-
demiology’. The brilliance of this work, though, was not
necessarily with a proposed eco-epidemiological para-
digm, but the ability to outwardly project into the future
(Susser and Susser 1996b; p.676):
“…one must also take heed of another emergent
paradigm. Information systems combined with systems
analyses might well lead into a systems paradigm,
with its own attractions for mathematically minded
epidemiologists…”.
With recognition for Haddon’s (1970) early concept of
ecological injury prevention, and Green and Kreuter’s
(1999) ecological approach in the context of health pro-
motion, Hanson et al. (2005) presented their metaphor-
ical iceberg of injury prevention for the application of
community safety interventions. The model visualised
that above the water’s surface and within the iceberg’s
tip lies a single level containing: (i) intrapersonal factors
(e.g. behaviour, biology, psychology).  But below the
waterline in the socioecological depths were an add-
itional four levels. These were: (ii) interpersonal (e.g.
home, family); (iii) organisational (e.g. occupation, heath
organisations);  (iv) community (e.g. social class, public
facilities),  and; (v) society (e.g. infrastructure, 
government policy). Both Haddon (1970) and Hanson et
al. (2005) identified that the aetiology and prevention of
injury, like disease, is grounded in an intrinsically eco-
logical concept, and the individual is merely the salient
‘tip’ of the iceberg (Fig. 2).
In the case of the Injury Iceberg, a socioecological per-
spective towards injury control has many benefits, and
draws attention to: (i) the importance of ergonomic and
environmental design; (ii) the sustainability and alloca-
tion of resources (e.g. personnel availability to financial
budgeting); (iii) the value of community engagement and
empowerment, and; (iv) how multiple countermeasures
and interventions at different levels can maximise the
ability to attenuate risk and prevent injury (Hanson et al.
2005; Allegrante et al. 2010).  On the other hand,
socioecological models are, first and foremost, only
conceptual frameworks in which to challenge the bio-
medical paradigm of individualism which originated
out of the ‘medical model’  of both disease and injury
(Eime et al. 2004, 2005).  For instance, any given
socioecological model does not identify discrete fac-
tors, nor does it attempt to substantiate the strength
and temporality of causal effects across its entire
framework. In a similar manner, Hill’s (1965) consid-
erations for causation and Rothman’s (1976; 2005)
model, despite having had a positive impact on con-
temporary epidemiological issues (e.g. Potischman and
Weed 1999; Grant 2009; Ronksley et al. 2011),  have
also been regarded as ‘heuristics’  that are limited in
their scope and application (Koopman and Lynch
1999; Phillips and Goodman 2004, 2006; Marshall and
Galea 2014).  Notwithstanding the promising evolution
of multicausal theory in epidemiology, many import-
ant public health issues stand resilient in spite of the
best intentions to design and implement suitable in-
terventions (Marshall and Galea 2014).  Another con-
ceptual approach known as ‘systems thinking’,  which
builds on the strong theoretical foundation that is of-
fered by socioecological models, has potential and
should be considered for better understanding the de-
velopment and prevention of sports injury.
Thinking in ‘systems’
Systems thinking is a unique science that partly emerged
out of General Systems Theory (Bertalanffy 1969), and has
been further refined by academics from the fields of
engineering and organisational safety (e.g. Checkland
1981; Ackoff 1971) alongside scientists located at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Senge 1990). Sys-
tems thinking shares the multifaceted framework that is
offered by socioecological models of health (Dahlgren and
Whitehead 1991; Green and Kreuter 1999; VanLeeuwen
et al. 1999; Hanson et al. 2005), but elaborates with its
own theory and principles. In other words, socioecological
Page 7
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 7 of 12
Fig. 2 The Injury Iceberg (Hanson et al. 2005)
and systems thinking approaches are conceptually syn-
onymous, but particular systems thinking techniques offer
methodological and analytical rigour to an already primed
ecological framework. A succinct definition of systems
thinking has been provided by Trochim et al. (2006;
p.593):
“Systems thinking is a general conceptual orientation
concerned with the interrelationships between parts
and their relationships to a functioning whole, often
understood within the context of an even greater
whole. It is ancient in origin and familiar to us all, but
it is also something very modern”.
System thinking theory and principles
A number of systems thinking principles are well recog-
nised (Sterman 2006; Diez Roux 2007; Dekker 2011): (i)
complexity in the system arises from multiple webs, rela-
tionships, and interactions between a large number of
heterogeneous factors; (ii) the knowledge associated with
a given actor, agent or factor in the system is limited and
localised to its respective sub-system or level; (iii) history
plays an important role in the system, and past events
explain present and future behaviour; (iv) interactions in
the system can include non-linear self-reinforcing and
self-correcting feedback loops (i.e. reciprocity),  which
might produce an emergent effect (i.e. small initial 
events can reverberate exponentially and produce a dis-
proportionately larger consequence in time, otherwise
known as ‘sensitivity on initial conditions’); (v) complex
systems are homeostatic: they persist, adapt, and are
continually in flux to enable reconfiguration in response
to internal or external influence and change; (vi) systems
are counterintuitive, and aetiological processes can be
vastly distant in time and space, and; (vii) systems can
be resistant to obvious solutions (i.e. seemingly reason-
able strategies can actually worsen the issue). The corol-
lary of these characteristics is that adverse events,
including injury, are emergent properties that arise from
the many decisions, actions and interactions between ac-
tors and agents across the entire system.
Principles in practice
Systems thinking principles violate the overall premise
associated with the ‘chain-of-causality model’  (Leveson
2011). For instance, simply working backwards from the
injurious outcome, whilst pinpointing particular failures
interspersed by human error, is a process divorced from
systems concepts such as nonlinearity and emergence.
In a similar way, epidemiologists generally prioritise the
study of proximal downstream causal effects (Glass et al.
2013). Certainly, it is more feasible to conduct observa-
tional studies and randomised controlled trials with co-
horts of individuals, than it is to examine the nature of
Page 8
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 8 of 12
upstream influences across the broader social structure
(i.e. the behaviour of powerful corporate entities, tax sys-
tems, and political processes) (Hernán 2015). This point
is no better illustrated than by current models of sports
injury aetiology which have primarily been concerned
with the individual athlete and their immediate environ-
ment. The revised model of athletic injury aetiology
(Meeuwisse et al. 2007), for example, represents a sound
attempt at advancing the initial static and linear para-
digm, but systemic and interpersonal determinants are
not featured. According to systems theory, any given sys-
tem is characterised by continual adaptation and change
involving multiple sub-systems. These sub-systems are
further comprised of many interconnected compo-
nents that are fundamentally different, including non-
biological elements (e.g. amenities, products),  along
with individuals, communities, organisations, regula-
tory agencies and political bodies. Ultimately, injury is
the result of the many complex interrelated processes
that need to be understood, and not the events and
conditions in the system per se that produce emer-
gent behaviour (Leveson 2011).
The application of system-based principles also have a
number of analytical implications in terms of conventional
epidemiological approaches. For example, given that it is
necessary to study a system as a whole instead of isolating
relationships between individual factors, the underlying
assumptions that are commonly used in traditional statis-
tical modelling are divorced from systems theory (Ip et al.
2013). This does not mean that systems thinking dismisses
or acts as a substitute for scientific reductionism or linear
modelling. Rather, system-driven approaches are viewed
as supplementary to reductionist approaches, and can
even include data derived via traditional statistical
methods (Trochim et al. 2006). In response to the promul-
gation of an ecological understanding of health-related
processes, more sophisticated analytical techniques are
available, such as multilevel analyses and random effects
models (Luke and Stamatakis 2012; Galea and Ahern
2006). Despite being able to adjust for potential confound-
ing, a  fundamental limitation associated with all
regression-based analyses lies with their inability to
account for system-wide phenomena, such as self-
reinforcing and self-correcting feedback mechanisms or
causal effects that are time-distant from the outcome (i.e.
the use of longitudinal snapshot data at predefined inter-
vals) (Galea et al. 2010). Illustrative models such as Di-
rected Acyclic Graphs and Structural Equation Modelling
(e.g. path analysis) are used for different ends, and have
even featured in sports injury research (e.g. Shrier and
Platt 2008). However, these types of diagraphs are mostly
concerned with the visualisation of traditional statistical-
related subject matter at a single level (e.g. adjusted effect
estimates and directed dependencies) (Pearl 1995; 
Greenland et al. 1999; Shipley 2002; Greenland 2003;
Olobatuyi 2006; VanderWeele and Robins 2007). Effect-
ively, a systems approach attempts to understand the
underlying processes along with the overall functioning of
a system in relation to its principles, rather than to iden-
tify individual causal effects between isolated parameter
estimates (Diez Roux 2007).
A brief overview of available system-based methods
Although not formally recognised as such in the literature,
there are two main systems-related fields. At one end of the
systems thinking continuum lies computational system sci-
ence methods which includes three prominent techniques:
Agent Based Modelling (ABM),  System Dynamics, and
Network Analysis (Bonabeau 2002; Trochim et al. 2006;
Marshall and Galea 2014). Both ABM and System Dynam-
ics are computer-based simulations that have the ability to
produce emergent behaviour after equations and rules have
been assigned to individual elements in the system (Resni-
cow and Page 2008; Galea et al. 2010; Luke and Stamatakis
2012) (i.e. predict the potential spread of global infectious
pandemics and patterns of climate change). These methods,
however, have also had epidemiological applications to
chronic disease (Ness et al. 2007),  Human Immunodefi-
ciency Virus transmission and prevention (Aral et al. 2010;
Marshall et al. 2012), substance-abuse (Moore et al. 2009;
Gordon et al. 2006), physical inactivity (Yang et al. 2011),
and dietary practices (Auchincloss et al. 2013). In terms of
injury, System Dynamic modelling has been discussed as a
way to strengthen the understanding of upstream activities
in order to identify key political leverage points for injury
prevention purposes (Ferencik and Minyard 2011).
The other end of the systems thinking armamentarium
belongs to the science of Applied Human Factors and
Ergonomics (AHFE),  which historically, has been con-
cerned with the detailed analyses of accidents. The
AHFE literature also contains three prominent systems-
based methods (Salmon et al. 2012): Rasmussen’s (1997)
Risk Management Framework, Reason’s (1997) Swiss
Cheese model (Salmon et al. 2010), and Leveson’s (2004)
Systems Theoretic Accident Modelling and Processes
model. Application of these three AHFE systems meth-
odologies has been dependent on the skill and experi-
ence of the systems analysts who have used them.
Historical data, witness reports, expert consensus, and a
range of other qualitative methods of inquiry are re-
quired to facilitate the identification of system failures
associated with accidents and injury. This subjectivity
could be regarded as an inherent limitation associated
with these methods and models. Nevertheless, AHFE
systems-based methods have been successfully used for
accident analysis and injury control purposes in a num-
ber of contexts, including the firearm (Jenkins et al.
2010),  industrial (Goode et al. 2014),  rail (Read et al.
Page 9
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 9 of 12
2013),  outdoor activity (Salmon et al. 2014),  and road
safety (Scott-Parker et al. 2015) systems. The successful
operationalisation of AHFE systems-based methods
demonstrates that these approaches are viable, practical,
and highly versatile.
A case in point from the sports injury literature
The potential value of systems thinking principles can
be illustrated in the context of sports injury by using the
activity of distance running as an example. This particu-
lar exercise modality, whether for recreational or com-
petitive ends, has been chosen given its popularity,
accessibility, and the plethora of health-related benefits
associated with it. The term ‘the distance running sys-
tem’ will exemplify this scenario based on research from
another context (Scott-Parker et al. 2015).
The distance running system in which a runner resides
is comprised of many levels, including but not limited
to: (i) equipment and the physical training environment;
(ii) the runner themselves; (iii) wider social networks in-
cluding other runners; (iv) occupational habits and life-
style practices; (v) fitness trainers and coaches; (vi)
running and fitness clubs and associated policies; (vii)
community healthcare services; (viii) athletics associa-
tions and official governing bodies, and; (ix) the wider
political and regulatory environment. Certain outputs in
the distance running system, such as injury, result from
the synergistic interaction between its many various het-
erogeneous elements. Consistent with contemporary
models of sports injury aetiology (Meeuwisse et al.
2007),  the most utilised epidemiological approach has
been to collapse the distance running system down, and
reduce injury mechanisms to the biomechanical and be-
havioural levels only (van Gent et al. 2007; Nielsen et al.
2012; Saragiotto et al. 2014).  From there, it has been
possible to examine particular causal effects of interest
(e.g. Boldt et al. 2013; Bredeweg et al. 2013; Rodrigues et
al. 2013; Nielsen et al. 2014), such as isolating the associ-
ation between isokinetic strength variables and injury
using traditional statistical modelling (e.g. Messier et al.
1995).  On the other hand, reassembling the distance
running system after identifying statistically significant
variables (on the tacit assumption that the whole cannot
be greater or less than the sum of its parts),  now re-
quires supplementation with a systems approach. This
will involve traversing ‘up and out’ of the system to also
identify and examine the contribution of indirect influ-
ences and systemic processes as they relate to running
injury development. This includes, for example, the mar-
keting, distribution and uptake of running footwear, the
design of built environments, social expectations and
norms, emerging technologies and the role of ‘e-health’,
athletic policies, and the influence of private industry
and healthcare services. 
In reconciling systems concepts with epidemiology,
Pearce and Merletti (2006) argue that the health of a
population can be viewed as a complex adaptive system.
By definition, this premise can be extended to athletic
populations, including distance runners. But as Diez
Roux (2007) has reasonably asked, what would a systems
perspective actually look like in practice? The answer to
this question is dependent on which systems-related
field and method is adopted. Computational system sci-
ence techniques and AHFE methods both show great
promise for a variety of topics, but the former are inher-
ently quantitative and the latter qualitative. It can be said
with certainty, however, that both ends of the systems
thinking continuum necessitate a team of multidisciplin-
ary practitioners, each with unique skillsets and know-
ledge regarding how to operationalise a particular
methodology (Ferencik and Minyard 2011). In order to
answer questions about complex causal phenomena, epi-
demiologists are encouraged to find the ‘middle ground’
between traditional epidemiological inquiry, and the ab-
stract mental models found in the social sciences
(Marshall and Galea 2014; Hernán 2015).  Even though
systems thinking is an appropriate starting point in
which to reconcile data with theory, it still remains to be
widely accepted across a number of scientific disciplines.
This is because system-based methods are still in a stage
of maturation and refinement. Currently, it is not pos-
sible to produce a numerically precise systems-based
model that simultaneously preserves the face validity
underpinning the nature of reality (Ip et al. 2013). This
delicate balance between statistical precision and eco-
logical realism, however, might be viewed as a welcome
trade-off for sports injury prevention research. There-
fore, we contend that the future study of causality in
sports injury research lies with a mutually inclusive an-
swer: continue to utilise traditional epidemiological ap-
proaches, but also embrace the possibilities associated
with a systems thinking approach.
Conclusion
Reflecting back on the historical context in which causal
concepts in epidemiology have been formulated is im-
portant for establishing scientific progress, and presents
the opportunity to inform future perspectives. The jour-
ney from the theory of monocausality in the late Nine-
teenth century to multifactorialism in the modern
scientific era is only the beginning. Bar a few exceptions
to the general rule, the main focus of sports injury
aetiological research to date has been on risk factor
identification at the individual component cause level.
Some have argued that the next step for sports injury re-
search is to further embrace an ecological perspective
that supplements the biomedical tradition – both in
terms of aetiology and the implementation of injury
Page 10
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 10 of 12
prevention interventions. However, rapid developments
in the broader field of public health and Applied Human
Factors and Ergonomics, are fast moving beyond the
socioecological era. In fact, recognition for the potential
of systems thinking methodologies and analyses has
already gained traction in other injury contexts. The ad-
vancement of sports injury prevention research will re-
quire that epidemiologists bring their knowledge and
skillsets forwards in an attempt to use, adapt, and even
refine existing systems-based approaches. Alongside the
natural development of conventional scientific method-
ologies and analyses in sports injury research, moving
forwards to a complementary systems paradigm is now
required.
Abbreviations
ABM: Agent Based Modelling; AHFE: Applied Human Factors and
Ergonomics; RE-AIM: Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation,
Maintenance.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. AH led the
development of the manuscript and initiated the idea. CFF contributed
further ideas and had editorial input into the manuscript
Authors’ information
AH undertook this work as part of his PhD studies under the supervision of
CFF. AH is supported by a Federation University Australia PhD scholarship.
CFF is the Director of the Australian Centre for Research into Injury in Sport
and its Prevention (ACRISP). ACRISP is one of nine research centres
worldwide to be selected by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) as a
member of the IOC Medical Research Network. CFF is supported by a
National Health and Medical Research Council (of Australia) Principal
Research Fellowship (ID: 1058737).
Acknowledgements
Dr Rasmus Nielsen, Professor Andrew McIntosh and Professor Paul Salmon
provided feedback on sections in a draft version of this manuscript.
Received: 7 September 2015 Accepted: 3 December 2015
References
Ackoff RL. Towards a system of systems concepts. Manag Sci. 1971;17:661–71.
Allegrante JP, Hanson DW, Sleet DA, Marks R. Ecological approaches to the
prevention of unintentional injuries. Ital J Public Health. 2010;7:24–31.
Aral SO, Leichliter JS, Blanchard JF. Overview: the role of emergent properties of
complex systems in the epidemiology and prevention of sexually
transmitted infections including HIV infection. Sex Transm Infect. 2010;86
Suppl 3:1–3.
Auchincloss AH, Riolo RL, Brown DG, Cook J, Roux Diez AV. An agent-based
model of income inequalities in diet in the context of residential
segregation. Am J Prev Med. 2013;40:303–11.
Bahr R, Holme I. Risk factors for sports injuries - a methodological approach.
Br J Sports Med. 2003;37:384–92.
Bahr R, Krosshaug T. Understanding injury mechanisms: a key component of
preventing injuries in sport. Br J Sports Med. 2005;39:324–9.
Baum F. The new public health. Sydney: Oxford University Press; 2011.
Bertalanffy L. General system theory: foundations, development, application. New
York: Brazilier; 1969.
Blum HL. Planning for health: developmental application of social change theory.
New York: Human Sciences Press; 1974. 
Boldt AR, Willson JD, Barrios JA, Kernozek TW. Effects of medially wedged foot
orthoses on knee and hip joint running mechanics in females with and
without Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome. J Appl Biomech. 2013;29:68–77.
Bonabeau E. Agent-based modeling: methods and techniques for stimulating
human systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99:7280–7.
Bredeweg SW, Kluitenberg B, Bessem B, Buist I. Differences in kinetic variables
between injured and noninjured novice runners: a prospective cohort study.
J Sci Med Sport. 2013;16:205–10.
Broadbent A. The philosophy of epidemiology. Palgrave Macmillan: Basingstoke;
2013.
Cameron MH, Vulcan AP, Finch CF, Newstead SV. Mandatory bicycle helmet use
following a decade of helmet promotion in Victoria, Australia – an
evaluation. Accid Anal Prev. 1994;26:325–37.
Cassel J. Social science theory as a source of hypotheses in epidemiological
research. Am J Public Health Nations Health. 1964;54:1482–8.
Cassel J. The contribution of the social environement to host resistance.
Am J Epidemiol. 1976;104:107–23.
Checkland P. Systems thinking, systems practice. New York: John Wiley & Sons;
1981.
Dahlgren G, Whitehead M. Policies and strategies to promote equity in health.
Institute for Future Studies: Stockholm; 1991.
De Haven H. Mechanical analysis of survival in falls from heights of fifty to one
hundred and fifty feet. War Med. 1942;2:586–96.
Dekker S. Drift into failure. Surrey: Ashgate Publishing Limited; 2011.
Dever AGE. An epidemiological model for health policy analysis. Soc Indic Res.
1976;2:453–66.
Diez Roux AV. Intergrating social and biologic factors in health research: a
systems view. Ann Epidemiol. 2007;17:569–74.
Eime R, Owen N, Finch CF. Protective eyewear promotion: Applying principles of
behaviour change in the design of a squash injury prevention programme.
Sports Med. 2004;34:629–38.
Eime R, Finch C, Wolfe R, Owen N, McCarty C. The effectiveness of a squash
eyewear promotion strategy. Br J Sports Med. 2005;39:681–5.
Evans AS. Clinical syndromes in adults caused by respiratory infection. Med Clin
North Am. 1967;51:803–18.
Evans AS. Causation and disease: the Henle-Koch postulates revisited. Yale J Biol
Med. 1976;49:175–95.
Ferencik R, Minyard K. Systems thinking and injury prevention: an innovative model
for informing state and local policies. West J Emerg Med. 2011;12:273–4.
Finch CF. A new framework for research leading to sports injury prevention. J Sci
Med Sport. 2006;9:3–9.
Finch CF, Donaldson A. A sports setting matrix for understanding the
implementation context for community sport. Br J Sports Med. 2010;44:973–8.
Fredricks DN, Relman DA. Sequence-based identification of microbial pathogens:
a reconsideration of Koch’s postulates. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1996;9:18–33.
Galea S, Ahern J. Invited commentary: considerations about specificity of
associations, causal pathways, and heterogeneity in multilevel thinking.
Am J Epidemiol. 2006;163:1079–82.
Galea S, Riddle M, Kaplan GA. Causal thinking and complex system approaches in
epidemiology. Int J Epidemiol. 2010;39:97–106.
Gibson JJ. The contribution of experimental psychology to the formulation of the
problem of safety: a brief for basic research. In: Jacobs HH, editor. Behavioral
approaches to accident research. New York: Association for the Aid of
Crippled Children; 1961. p. 77–89.
Gissane C, White J, Kerr K, Jennings D. An operational model to investigate
contact sports injuries. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33:1999–2003.
Glass TA, Goodman SN, Hernán MA, Samet JM. Causal inference in public health.
Annu Rev Public Health. 2013;34:61–75.
Goode N, Salmon PM, Lenné MG, Hillard P. Systems thinking applied to safety
during manual handling tasks in the transport and storage industry. Accid
Anal Prev. 2014;68:181–91.
Gordon JE. The epidemiology of accidents. Am J Public Health Nations Health.
1949;39:504–15.
Gordon DM, Mezic J, Gruenwald PJ. Agent-based modelling of drinking behavior:
a preliminary model and potential applications to theory and practice.
Am J Public Health. 2006;96:2055–60.
Graham H. Social determinants and the unequal distribution: clarifying policy
understandings. Milbank Q. 2004;82:101–24.
Grant WB. How strong is the evidence that solar ultraviolet B and vitamin D
reduce the risk of cancer? An examination using Hill’s criteria for causality.
Dermatoendocrinology. 2009;1:17–24.
Page 11
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 11 of 12
Green LW, Kreuter MW. Health promotion planning: an educational and
ecological approach. 3rd ed. California: Mayfield Publishing Company; 1999.
Greenland S. Quantifying biases in causal models: classical confounding vs
collider-stratification bias. Epidemiology. 2003;14:300–6.
Greenland S, Pearl J, Robins JM. Causal diagrams for epidemiologic research.
Epidemiology. 1999;10:37–48.
Haddon W. On the escape of tigers, an ecological note. Am J Public Health. 1970;
60:2229–34.
Haddon W. Advances in the epidemiology of injuries as a basis for public policy.
Public Health Rep. 1980;95:411–21.
Haddon W, Suchman E, Klein D. Accident research: methods and approaches.
New York: Harper & Row; 1964.
Hagel B, Meeuwisse W. Risk compensation: a “side effect” of sport injury
prevention. Clin J Sport Med. 2004;14:193–6.
Hanson D, Hanson J, Vardon P, McFarlane K, Lloyd J, Muller R, et al. The injury
iceberg: an ecological approach to planning sustainable community safety
interventions. Health Promot J Austr. 2005;16:5–10.
Hanson DW, Finch CF, Allegrante JP, Sleet D. Closing the gap between injury
prevention research and community safety promotion practice: revisiting the
public health model. Public Health Rep. 2012;127:147–55.
Heinrich HW. Industrial accident prevention: a scientific approach. New York:
McGraw-Hill; 1931.
Hernán MA. Invited commentary: agent-based models for causal
inference—reweighting data and theory in epidemiology. Am J Epidemiol.
2015;181:103–5.
Hill AB. The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc R Soc Med.
1965;58:295–300.
Huebner RJ. Criteria for etiologic association of prevalent viruses with prevalent
diseases; the virologist’s dilemma. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1957;67:430–8.
Ip EH, Rahmandad H, Shoham DA, Hammond R, Huang TK, Wang Y, et al.
Reconciling statistical and systems science approaches to public health.
Health Educ Behav. 2013;40:123–31.
Jenkins DP, Salmon PM, Stanton NA, Walker GH. A systemic approach to
accident analysis: a case study of the Stockwell shooting. Ergonomics.
2010;53:1–17.
Koopman JS, Lynch JW. Individual causal models and population system models
in epidemiology. Am J Public Health. 1999;89:1170–4.
Krieger N. Epidemiology and the web of causation: has anyone seen the spider?
Soc Sci Med. 1994;39:887–903.
Lalonde M. A new perspectice on the health of Canadians: a working document.
 http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/ph-sp/pube-pubf/perintrod-eng.php (1974).
Accessed 24 Aug 2015.
Leveson NG. A new accident model for enginnering safer systems. Saf Sci. 2004;
42:237–70.
Leveson NG. Applying systems thinking to analyze and learn from events. Saf Sci.
2011;49:55–64.
Li G, Baker SP. Preface. In: Li G, Baker SB, editors. Injury research: theories,
methods and approaches. New York: Springer; 2014. p. ix–x.
Loomis D, Wing S. Is molecular epidemiology a germ theory for the end of the
twentieth century? Int J Epidemiol. 1990;19:1–3.
Luke DA, Stamatakis KA. Systems science methods in public health. Annu Rev
Public Health. 2012;33:357–76.
Lyon A. Causality. Br J Philos Sci. 1967;18:1–20.
Mackie JL. Causes and conditions. Am Philos Q. 1965;2:245–64.
MacMahon B, Pugh TF, Ipsen J. Epidemiologic methods. Boston: Little Brown and
Co; 1960.
Marshall BDL, Galea S. Formalizing the role of agent-based modeling in causal
inference and epidemiology. Am J Epidemiol. 2014;181:92–9.
Marshall BDL, Paczkowski, MN, Seemann L, Tempalski B, Pouget RR, et al. A
complex systems approach to evaluate HIV prevention in metropolitan areas:
preliminary implications for combination intervention strategies. Plos One.
2012; doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0044833"] 10.1371/journal.pone.0044833.
McGlashan AJ, Finch CF. The extent to which behavioural and social sciences
theories and models are used in sport injury prevention research. Sports
Med. 2010;40:841–58.
McIntosh A. Risk compensation, motivation, injuries, and biomechanics in
competitive sport. Br J Sports Med. 2005;39:2–3.
McKeown T. The role of medicine. Dream, mirage or nemesis? Oxford: Basil
Blackwell; 1979.
Meeuwisse WH. Assessing causation in sport injury: a multifactorial model. Clin J
Sport Med. 1994a;4:166–70. 
Meeuwisse WH. Athletic injury etiology: distinguishing between interaction and
confounding. Clin J Sport Med. 1994b;4:171–5.
Meeuwisse WH, Tyreman H, Hagel B, Emery C. A dynamic model of etiology in
sport injury: the recursive nature of risk and causation. Clin J Sport Med.
2007;17:215–9.
Messier SP, Edwards DG, Martin DF, Lowery RB, Cannon DW, James MK, et al.
Etiology of iliotibial band friction syndrome in distance runners. Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 1995;27:951–60.
Moore D, Dray A, Green R, Hudson SL, Jenkinson R, Siokou C, et al. Extending
drug ethno-epidemiology using agent-based modelling. Addiction. 2009;104:
1991–7.
Ness RB, Koopman JS, Robert MS. Causal system modeling in chronic disease
epidemiology: a proposal. Ann Epidemiol. 2007;17:564–8.
Nielsen RO, Buist I, Sørensen H, Lind M, Rasmussen S. Training errors and running
related injuries: a systematic review. Int J Sports Phys Ther. 2012;7:58–74.
Nielsen RO, Buist I, Parner ET, Nohr EA, Sorensen H, Lind M. Foot pronation is not
associated with increased injury risk in novice runners wearing a neutral
shoe: a 1-year prospective cohort study. Br J Sports Med. 2014;48:440–7.
Olobatuyi ME. A user’s guide to path analysis. Oxford: University Press of America;
2006.
Parascandola M, Weed DL. Causation in epidemiology. J Epidemiol Community
Health. 2001;55:905–12.
Pearce N, Merletti F. Complexity, simplicity, and epidemiology. Int J Epidemiol.
2006;35:515–9.
Pearl J. Causal diagrams for empirical research. Biometrika. 1995;82:669–88.
Phillips CV, Goodman KJ. The missed lessons of Sir Austin Bradford Hill. Epidemiol
Perspect Innov. 2004;1:1–5.
Phillips CV, Goodman KJ. Causal criteria and counterfactuals; nothing more (or
less) than scientific common sense. Emerg Themes Epidemiol. 2006. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1742-7622-3-5"] 10.
 1186/1742-7622-3-5.
Potischman N, Weed DL. Causal criteria in nutritional epidemiology. Am J Clin
Nutr. 1999;69 Suppl 6:309–14.
Rasmussen J. Risk management in a dynamic society: a modelling problem. Saf
Sci. 1997;27:183–213.
Read G, Salmon PM, Lenne MG. Sounding the warning bells: the need for a
systems approach to rail level crossing safety. Appl Ergon.
2013;44:765–74.
Reason J. Managing the risks of organisational accidents. Vermont: Ashgate
Publishing Ltd; 1997.
Resnicow K, Page SE. Embracing chaos and complexity: a quantum change for
public health. Am J Public Health. 2008;98:1382–9.
Rivara FP. An overview of injury research. In: Rivara FP, Cummings P, Koepsell TD,
Grossman DC, Maier RV, editors. Injury control: a guide to research and
evaluation. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2001. p. 1–14.
Rivers T. Viruses and Koch’s postulates. J Bacteriol. 1937;33:1–12.
Robertson LS. Injury epidemiology. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press;
2007.
Rodrigues P, TenBroek T, Hamill J. Runners with anterior knee pain use a greater
percentage of their available pronation range of motion. J Appl Biomech.
2013;29:141–6.
Rogers ES. Human ecology and health: an introduction for administrators. New
York: Macmillan; 1960.
Ronksley PE, Brien SE, Turner BJ, Mukamal KJ, Ghali WA. Association of alcohol
consumption with selected cardiovascular disease outcomes: a systematic
review and meta-anlysis. Br Med J. 2011. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.d671"] 10.1136/bmj.d671.
Rose G. Sick individuals and sick populations. Int J Epidemiol. 1985;14:32–8.
Rothman KJ. Causes. Am J Epidemiol. 1976;104:587–92.
Rothman KJ, Greenland S. Causation and causal inference in epidemiology. Am J
Public Health. 2005;95 Suppl 1:144–50.
Runyan CW. Using the Haddon matrix: introducing the third dimension. Inj Prev.
1998;4:302–7.
Salmon PM, Williamson A, Lenné M, Mitsopoulos-Rubens E, Rudin-Brown CM.
Systems-based accident analysis in the led outdoor activity domain:
application and evaluation of a risk management framework. Ergonomics.
2010;53:927–39.
Salmon PM, Cornelissen M, Trotter MJ. Systems-based accident analysis
methods: a comparison of Accimap, HFACS, and STAMP. Saf Sci.
2012;50:1158–70.
Salmon PM, Goode N, Lenné MG, Finch CF, Cassell E. Injury causation in the
great outdoors: a systems analysis of led outdoor activity injury incidents.
Accid Anal Prev. 2014;63:111–20.
Page 12
Hulme and Finch Injury Epidemiology (2015) 2:31  Page 12 of 12
Saragiotto BT, Yamato TP, Hespanhol LC, Rainbow MJ, Davis IS, Lopes AD. What
are the main risk factors for running related injuries? Sports Med. 2014;44:
1153–63.
Scott-Parker B, Morang MacKay J. Research and practice in a multidimensional
world: a commentary on the contribution of the third dimension of the
Haddon matrix to injury prevention. Inj Prev. 2015;21:131–2.
Scott-Parker B, Goode N, Salmon P. The driver, the road, the rules…and the rest?
A systems-based approach to young driver road safety. Accid Anal Prev.
2015;74:297–305.
Senge PM. The fifth discipline: the art and practice of the learning organisation.
New York: Doubleday; 1990.
Shipley B. Cause and correlation in biology. United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press; 2002.
Shrier I, Platt RW. Reducing bias through directed acyclic graphs. BMC Med Res
Methodol. 2008. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-8-70"] 10.1186/1471-2288-8-70.
Stapp JP. Human tolerance to deceleration. Am J Surg. 1957;93:734–40.
Sterman JD. Learning from evidence in a complex world. Am J Public Health.
2006;96:505–14.
Susser M. Does risk factor epidemiology put epidemiology at risk? Peering into
the future. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1998;52:608–11.
Susser M, Susser E. Choosing a future for epidemiology: I. Eras and paradigms.
Am J Public Health. 1996a;86:668–73.
Susser M, Susser E. Choosing a future for epidemiology: II. From black box to
Chinese boxes and eco-epidemiology. Am J Public Health. 1996b;86:674–7.
Trifiletti LB, Gielen AC, Sleet DA, Hopkins K. Behavioral and social sciences
theories and models: are they used in unintentional injury prevention
research? Health Educ Res. 2005;20:398–07.
Trochim WM, Cabera DA, Milstein B, Gallagher RS, Leischow SL. Practical
challenges of systems thinking and modeling in public health. Am J Public
Health. 2006;96:538–46.
van Gent RN, Siem D, van Middelkoop M, van Os AG, Bierma-Zeinstra SMA, Koes
BW. Incidence and determinants of lower extremity running injuries in long
distance runners: a systematic review. Br J Sports Med. 2007;41:469–80.
van Mechelen W, Hlobil H, Kemper HCG. Incidence, severity, aetiology and
prevention of sports injuries: a review of concepts. Sports Med. 1992;14:82–99.
Vandenbroucke JP. Is ‘The Causes of Cancer’ a miasma theory for the end of the
twentieth century? Int J Epidemiol. 1988;17:708–9.
VanderWeele TJ, Robins JM. Directed acyclic graphs, sufficient causes, and the
properties of conditioning on a common effect. Am J Epidemiol. 2007;166:
1096–104.
VanLeeuwen JA, Waltner-Toews D, Abernathy T, Smit B. Evolving models of
human health toward an ecosystem context. Ecosyst Health. 1999;5:204–19.
Wing S. The role of medicine in the decline of hypertension-related mortality. Int
J Health Serv. 1984;14:649–66.
Wing S. Social inequalities in the decline of coronary mortality. Am J Public
Health. 1988;78:1415–6.
Wing S. The limits of epidemiology. Med Global Surv. 1994;1:74–86.
World Health Organisation. The Ottawa Charter for health promotion: first
international conference on health promotion, Ottawa, 21 November 1986.
 http://www.who.int/healthpromotion/conferences/previous/ottawa/en/.
Accessed 23 Nov 2015.
Yang Y, Diez Roux AV, Auchincloss AH, Rodriguez DA, Brown DG. A spatial agent-
based model for the simulation of adults’ daily walking within a city.
Am J Prev Med. 2011;40:353–61. 
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁ t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
