REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Overview ............................................................................................................................................................... 1
Application ............................................................................................................................................................ 3
Appendix A: Evaluation Criteria ........................................................................................................................... 11
Appendix B: Eligible and Ineligible Activities ....................................................................................................... 12
Appendix C: Eligible Census Tracts Map ............................................................................................................. 21
Appendix D: Sample Logic Model............................................................................................................................... 22
OVERVIEW
The City of Framingham’s Community Development Program invites local nonprofit organizations or City
departments to submit Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program proposals for fiscal year 2023
starting on July 1, 2022, and ending on June 30, 2023. CDBG funds are allocated to the city by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to impact a wide range of services and programs, 
principally for low- and moderate-income residents. 
The City of Framingham receives an average of $525,000 CDBG funding annually. Final figures will not be known
until after the federal budget is passed and HUD announces allocation amount. The chart below lists the
approximate amount awarded to various projects. 
Project  Approximate Amount Notes
Administration  $105,000 City can spend 20% on administration
Public Services (Non-Profits)  $77,000 City can spend up to 15% on public services
Housing Rehab, code enforcement, 
economic development projects, 
public facilities 
$343,000 CD Committee and mayor final decision on how
these funds are distributed
All organizations requesting funding from the Framingham Community Development Block Grant Program must
email complete applications by December 10, 2021, at 5:00 pm to
 communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov. CD staff will email applicants for more information for
clarification if needed after the deadline. CD staff will review applications for compliance with minimum
requirements. 
Eligibility criteria include, but are not limited to: 
● Compliance with federal eligibility standards
● Overall benefit to low- and moderate-income persons
● How such benefits will be measured/reported
● Project goals
● Need for the proposed activity
● How the proposed project is unique, complementing and not duplicating existing services.
1
Page 2
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
● The experience and capability of applicants to provide proposed activities
● Documentation of support for the project
● Availability of matching funds for the activity will also be considered.
Eligible projects will be forwarded to the committee to make funding recommendations for final approval by the
Mayor. Applicants can contact the CD office by email or call (508) 532-5457 by December 3rd to ask questions
about the application. 
The Community Development Program and the City reserve the right to reject any proposals that are incomplete
and unresponsive to the information requested in the proposal package. The Community Development Program
can recommend or reject any proposal, in whole or in part, determined not to be in its interest. Note that CDBG
funds must be used conforming to applicable city, state and federal laws that include procurement policies, equal
employment opportunity/Section 3 requirements, anti-kickback rules, Davis-Bacon Act (prevailing wages for
construction projects in excess of $2,000 or housing of eight units or more), bonding and insurance regulations, 
and environmental requirements. 
Timeline: 
October 22th: Application Posted 
December 10: Applications Due by 5pm to [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov
December 17: Applications sent to community development committee for review
Week of January 25, 2022: Committee will schedule two public hearings on Public Services and non-public
services 
February 1, 2022 Committee makes recommendations 
2
Page 3
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
A. APPLICATION 
I. Project Eligibility
Project meets at least ONE of the HUD National Objectives listed below (please check all applicable; 
definitions are included as attachments):
❑ Benefits low/moderate income individuals/households 
❑ Addresses the prevention or elimination of slums or blight 
❑ Meets an urgent community need threatening health and welfare
Check all statements that describe HOW this project or activity meets at least one of the National
Objectives listed above: 
❑ Area Benefit Activities: The proposed project or activity meets the needs of low/moderate
income persons residing in an area where at least 51% of those residents have incomes within
80% of the Area Median Income. The benefits of this activity are available to all persons
regardless of income. Examples may include street improvements, water/sewer lines, 
neighborhood facilities, and façade improvements in neighborhood commercial districts. 
❑ Limited Clientele Activities: The proposed project benefits a specific group of people (rather 
than all residents in a particular area), where 51% of the people are documented or presumed
to be low/moderate income persons. Examples may include construction of a senior center, 
public services for the homeless, meals on wheels for the elderly, construction of a job training
facility for the handicapped. 
❑ Housing Activities: The proposed project creates or improves permanent residential units that 
will be occupied by low/moderate income persons upon completion. Housing can be either
owner occupied or rental one family or multi-family units. Examples may include property
acquisition for permanent housing, permanent housing rehabilitation, and conversion of non-
residential units into permanent housing. 
❑ Job Creation or Retention: The proposed project creates or retains permanent jobs. At least 51% 
of those jobs must be available to low- and moderate-income persons. Examples may include
loans to pay for the expansion of a factory, assistance to a business which has publicly announced
its intention to close resulting in loss of employment for low/moderate income persons. 
❑ Slum or Blighted Area: The proposed project is located in a slum/blighted area and the
anticipated results of the project addresses one or more of the conditions that qualify in the
area. 
❑ Spot Blight: The proposed project will eliminate specific conditions of blight or physical decay
outside of a blighted area. Activities are limited to demolition/clearance, historic preservation, 
and rehabilitation of buildings (to the extent necessary to eliminate public health and safety
issues).
II. Project Type (for clarification on the categories, please see Appendix B)
❑ Housing Rehabilitation
❑ Social/Public Service
❑ Infrastructure/Public Facility Improvements
3
Page 4
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
❑ Economic Development
❑ Slum/Blight Eradication
❑ Other
III. GENERAL PROJECT INFORMATION
1.  Project Name: Sage House Window Replacement
2.  Project Dates: *:  7/1/22-6/30/23
*CDBG-funded elements of proposed projects supported in Fiscal 2023 should end no later than June
30, 2023. Programs that cannot be implemented within 12 months may lose awarded CDBG funds. 
3.  CDBG Funds Requested: 
$ 55,000.00
4. 
Name of Sponsoring
Organization or Individual
SMOC 
Address
7 Bishop Street 
DUNS Number
030806830
5.  Person responsible for coordinating and administering this project (if known)
Name: David Davidowicz
Address: 7 Bishop Street, Framingham MA 01702
Phone: 508-620-2358
Email: ddavidowicz@smoc.org
6.  Location of project or area served (Include Census Tract(s) and Block Group(s) served by proposed
project, if known) (please see map in Appendix D for eligible census tracts:
Tract  Percent Low/ Mod  Check all Tracts
that Apply 
383102.01
383300.01
383200.03
383102.02 
86.5% 
85.0% 
81.2% 
80.4% 
X
X
X
X
4
Page 5
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
383101.01
383501.02
383200.01
383600.02
383101.02
383400.03
383400.02
383700.03
383400.01 
79.5% 
79.5% 
75.2% 
74.1% 
72.4% 
71.4% 
58.1% 
55.1% 
52.6% 
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
7. Compliance Statement
For public facility and infrastructure projects requiring more than $2,000 in CDBG funds, describe how
compliance with Davis/Bacon federal wage, affirmative action and Section 3 requirements will be
maintained and documented: 
By submitting this application, SMOC certifies that the agency will comply with Davis/Bacon Federal Wage
regulations which state all laborers and mechanics employed by contractors and subcontractors in the
performance of construction work greater than $2,000 in value, financed in whole or in part with grants
received under this title, shall be paid wages at rate not less than those prevailing on similar construction
(Federal Davis-Bacon "prevailing wages"). If awarded these requested CDBG funds, SMOC will seek a
welldeveloped quote and ensure that any contractor is aware that this is a Federal Davis-Bacon
("prevailing wage") bid estimate. 
5
Page 6
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
B. Project Narrative
Please provide a narrative description of your proposed project or program by answering the following
questions. We recommend that you include the question as part of your response. Responses must not
exceed 10 pages.
1. Need and Outcomes:
a. Why are you seeking to undertake this work (need)?
Sage House, located at 517 Winter Street in Framingham, addresses the gap in full-service,
comprehensive residential recovery programs for adults and their children. This residence allows
families to stay together in a structured, supported environment as they focus on recovery, and
provides both peer and professional support with a staff person on-site 24-hours a day, seven days
a week.
The 2019 Community Health Assessment of the MetroWest region identifies alcohol and substance
use as one of the greatest health concerns in the MetroWest region. While developing the 2019
CHNA, one interviewee explained that substance use is such a persistent issue “because there are
[a] lack of access to long term treatment/residential services” and other sobriety supports. Sage
House operates to address this need for residential, comprehensive services for those in recovery
from alcohol and substance use in our region.
The removal and replacement of 55 building windows at the property will enable the Sage House
program to continue to provide critical support, as well as a safe, healthy, and affordable home to
families in our community. This upgrade will protect vulnerable families as well at the building that
shelters them; this itself is an essential component in supporting individuals on their path towards
long-term recovery and is a strong determinant of health. A CDBG grant award will allow us to
continue supporting these families on their journey to sobriety and self-sufficiency by providing a
provide safe, respectful, and supportive residence. 
b. Why do you believe your organization is best positioned to address this need?
For over 55 years, SMOC has been providing services to low-income and disadvantaged individuals
and families. Founded through the efforts of community activists in the Town of Framingham
under Title II of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964, SMOC is a nonprofit corporation with a
501(C)(3) federal tax designation; a federally designated Community Action Agency (CAA); a
statewide provider of low-income housing; and a certified Ch.40H statewide Community
Development Corporation (CDC). SMOC is the primary provider of housing and services in the
MetroWest region for homeless families and individuals. We are committed to moving this
population towards economic independence and sustained self-sufficiency. 
SMOC operates as a major provider of social determinants of health services with a substantial
focus on recovery programs and behavioral health in the MetroWest region. We operate a full
continuum of care, including housing and wraparound services. During their residence at Sage
House, individuals and families are connected to a number of these supports, in addition to the
direct treatment of substance use and recovery resources. SMOC has extensive experience
6
Page 7
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
providing Family Services and Family Emergency System; the agency owns and operates six
congregate shelters and operates 129 Scattered site units of family shelter in the MetroWest and
Worcester areas. SMOC conducts intake assessments with families to identify needs, and case
management staff make referrals for educational, medical, vocational, behavioral health and legal
services as appropriate. Case managers also work with families to develop a re-housing plan is and
intensive housing search assistance is provided. 
c. How will you measure success?
Project success will be measured by our ability to successfully complete the replacement of the 55
building windows by the end of FY2023 with funding from this award. This project, in addition to
the other capital repairs SMOC has completed at the property in recent years, will ensure Sage
House is a safe place to call home for residents for decades to come, resulting in a more positive,
comfortable setting for the residents and lowering ongoing maintenance costs for SMOC. We will
also measure the project’s success based on our ability to complete the work with minimal
disruption to residents and programming throughout the project period.
Sage House also operates with six goals to for residents and staff to strive towards and that
indicate the success of the program. These goals and outcomes are as follows:
1: Pursuing recovery from chemical dependency will result in each family leaving the program with
the understanding of the nature and the effects of chemical dependency and be given skills to lead
a life free of substance abuse.
2: Pursuing recovery from past harm will result in each family leaving the program with the skills
needed to deal with past abuse in a positive and proactive fashion.
3: Providing the tools needed to establish new and more effective communication and nurturing
patterns between parents and children will enhance parent/child interactions.
4: Clients leaving the program will understand basic parenting skills and how to break
abusive/dysfunctional cycles of family interaction.
5: The reunification of families will be facilitated to ensure a safe and successful transition for all
family members.
6: Clients will leave Sage House with some sort of employment or with a plan to establish
employment.
d. What do you expect the status of this project to be at the end of FY2023? (Ex: iterative revision,
continuation, end)
At the end of FY2023, 55 new windows will be fully and completely installed at Sage House. The
program will remain fully operational to the families we serve throughout the project. At the end of
the project, the building’s efficiency and residents' comfort during the cold winter months will have
been increased as a result of the work, all while lowering the need for ongoing maintenance.
e. Please provide backup data documenting need
According to the 2020 HUD Point-In-Time PIT Count, 2,961 individuals from 1,574 households were
experiencing homelessness in the Massachusetts Balance of State CoC. Of these, 2,003 individuals
were from a household with at least one child, including 1,214 children under the age of 18. 279
7
Page 8
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
individuals experiencing homelessness were also living with Severe Mental Illness, and 171 with
Chronic Substance Abuse. 
2. Impact:
a. Who benefits from this work and how?
Sage House is a residential treatment program which provides recovery-focused supportive
housing for families (male head of households with children and/or couples with children) with
chronic substance abuse problems. The program provides residents practical skills for leading a
healthy, sober lifestyle and lays the foundation for future independence and success.
Sage House collects data and demographics on all clients upon entry into the program, which is
tracked in SMOC’s internal database, CSG Engage. The population served by Sage House are men,
women and children; two of the current male clients are single fathers. Racial/ethnic demographics
of the adults are 86% White, 7% Black, and 7% Hispanic. Participants come from communities all
across Massachusetts; Sage House directly serves in the MetroWest region and welcomes residents
from IHR’s service areas including Cambridge, Lowell, Boston, Fall River, and Springfield. The
average length of stay for families at Sage House is six to nine months.
b. How many will be served?
517 Winter Street can house up to 11 families at any one time. The program is currently able to
operate at full capacity; gratefully, this was never impacted by the COVID-19 Pandemic. Sage House
is currently home to seven families, with two more expected to join the program by mid-
December. These families are comprised of men and women ages 27 – 48, with children ages new
born – nine years.
The project we are requesting funding for will ensure hundreds of families can benefit from Sage
House’s services for decades to come.
c. If this is a request for continued funding, please document the progress of your current project or
program, including the number served and the outcomes achieved thus far.
N/A
3. Solution Design:
a. What is the evidence base to support this project’s design and outcomes?
The Community Health Network Area (CHNA) 7 covers the Metro West area and aims to improve
the health of residents with an emphasis on serving low-income individuals and families and
culturally, ethnically and linguistically diverse populations. Sage House closely aligns with the 2019
MetroWest Community Health Assessment, which has maintained Alcohol & Substance Use and
Mental Health as the two greatest health concerns from 2016 to 2019, identified by CHNA 7 survey
respondents. Sage House directly addresses high priority issues within these areas such as
expanding support services to people affected by mental health and substance abuse, providing
more alcohol and drug prevention and treatment services, and providing more mental health and
counseling services for youth and adults. 
8
Page 9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
Sage House also closely aligns with the 2021-2022 MetroWest CHIP which identifies Behavioral
Health as its core focus, with mental health and substance use as the two main overarching issues
in the region. This year’s CHIP breaks Behavioral Health efforts into four categories: prevention, 
intervention, treatment, and recovery. Sage House provides services across all of these categories, 
including addiction education; service and care coordination to residents; mental and behavioral
health care treatment options; peer support; and relapse prevention services. In addition to on-site
support, Sage House staff and Case Managers are able to connect families to SMOC’s wraparound
support services, as needed. This coordinated care creates a dynamic, comprehensive effort to
provide optimal behavioral health care to families and best prepare them to successfully sustain
their recovery. 
b. With whom have you consulted/collaborated and how did their input impact the solution design?
Upon a grant award, SMOC will solicit contractor estimates for the requested project work. SMOC
is committed to seeking out contractor estimates through the use of the Supplier Diversity Office
(SDO) Registry, which certifies diverse businesses and also manages business programs that help
enhance the marketability of small and diverse businesses when they bid on public contracts, such
as Women and Minority owned and led contractors. Once a contractor is selected and awarded the
bid, SMOC will consult with them on the requested project.
The Sage House program also utilizes Self-Management and Recovery Training (SMART Recovery)
with families. SMART Recovery is an innovative approach to recovery that focuses on learning
coping skills that work well, both short- and long-term, to help individuals develop a more
sustainable, positive lifestyle. The SMART model is a science-informed structure helps individuals
learn the skills they need to overcome addictions and make a sustainable transition from negative
to positive behaviors through a 4-Point Program focusing on 1) Building and maintaining
motivation; 2) Coping with urges; 3) Managing thoughts, feelings, and behaviors; 4) Living a
balanced life. SMART Recovery has also established a peer-driven community in which volunteers
who are in recovery are able to help others. This peer-recovery model is one that SMOC uses in our
own programming, such as at our Recover Support Center.
c. If you are applying for continued funding, how has your design/methodology evolved in response to
evaluation and feedback?
N/A
d. How have you designed your solution to maximize impact to reach critical needs?
While living at Sage House, residents receive a number of direct services to help them on their
journey in recovery and towards self-sufficiency. Clients participate in support groups each week
(three groups a day, Monday-Friday) that consist of Self-Management and Recovery Training
(SMART Recovery), Parenting Support, Relapse Prevention, and Anger Management services.
SMART Recovery focuses on learning coping skills that work well, both short- and long-term, to
help individuals develop a more sustainable, positive lifestyle.
Sage House residents receive life skills instruction for addiction, HIV, tobacco use and sex
education. They also take part in both Individual and Family Therapy. Child Care and Case
Management services are provided to help with each individual and family’s unique needs. Case
Managers connect residents to SMOC’s wide array services, be it applying for housing (including
9
Page 10
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
HomeBASE/RAFT vouchers), job search assistance, High School Equivalency Diploma (HiSET, 
formerly GED), and more. Case Managers also work with the Department of Children & Families to
reunify adult residents with children that they may be in separation with. This approach offers
families a comprehensive wraparound treatment to maximize the effectiveness of our service
provision, as well as each family’s success in recovery and on their path to self-sufficiency. 
e. How will you validate your design/methodologies/approach and track and report impact?
We will validate our approach to this project based on whether we are able to complete the work
within the grant period and within our budget. We will track the time period and budget for the
window replacements as we have done for the previous capital projects at 517 Winter Street. We
will also track the success of our design and impact through an increase in building efficiency and
the preservation of housing units. The replacement of the building windows will assist in improving
the energy efficiency of the building and decrease overall maintenance costs, resulting in an
increase in revenue to use towards programmatic expenses at Sage House. The increased efficiency
of new windows will also provide an environmental benefit, where SMOC feels an obligation to be
responsible stewards of the environment.
Participant success at Sage House can be measured against the program’s goals and outcomes
(detailed in answer 1.C.) and participant progress is tracked in our internal database where reports
on case management and referrals can be accessed.
4. Community Engagement:
a. Describe how your organization has engaged and continues to engage those intended to benefit
from this work in the design, delivery and evaluation of services to be provided?
Sage House has been providing recovery-focused supportive housing for families with chronic
substance abuse problems for many years. Before the pandemic, client satisfaction surveys were
conducted by all residents to provide program feedback and inform changes to our service
delivery. Throughout the pandemic we have paused these surveys, but we hope to soon return to
conducting them once again.
Agency-wide, SMOC engages community residents and clients to inform program design and
delivery. Examples of this include Advisory Committees at SMOC’s affiliates, Lowell Transitional
Living Center and Open Pantry Community Services, made up of former clients, residents, and
community stakeholders; the Head Start Policy Council, made up of Head Start parents and
community members; and SMOC’s Recovery Support Center, which engages individuals in recovery
from addiction in the planning of programs, peer support meetings, and resources needed to aid in
their recovery. SMOC also uses a Housing Peer Support Model, whereby residents at supportive
housing locations meet regularly to discuss and shape their environment, living conditions and
activities. Each of these properties has a House Manager who is a resident/service recipient in a
leadership role, who in turn provides feedback to SMOC staff on residents’ needs and concerns.
This creates an ongoing dialogue between SMOC and its tenants, allowing SMOC to incorporate
tenant feedback into its activities.
b. Describe how your marketing and promotion plans are designed to reach the targeted constituency
All referrals to Sage House come through the Institute for Health and Recovery (IHR). Once a family
10
Page 11
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
has been referred and arrives at Sage House, they first complete an internal intake process. The
Case Manager meets with the family and completes required intake documentation including
HIPPA, Consent to Title X, and Sage House program policies and procedures. The Clinical Director
also completes a comprehensive Biophysical assessment that includes a mental health assessment, 
a substance use assessment, and physical health. Both of these processes ensure we are able to
best serve and make appropriate referrals for each family based on their unique needs. 
c. How do you intend to keep the community informed of your progress?
Sage House staff report regularly to the program’s primary funder, the Bureau of Substance Abuse
Services (BSAS), in order to keep them apprised of program progress. All intake, client progress,
and evaluation information is entered into SMOC’s internal database, CSG Engage, and Virtual
Gateway for reporting as part of our funding.
5. Organizational Capacity:
a. What experience, skills and leadership does your agency bring to this work?
Daniel Jusseaume is the current Sage House Program Director and has been an employee at SMOC
for seven years. Tina Santospago is the program’s new Clinical Director and comes with many years
of knowledge in the addiction and mental health field. She is a licensed clinician and has experience
in all levels of care including detox, Clinical Support Services (CSS), and Transitional Support
Services (TSS).
David Davidowicz, Senior Director of South Middlesex Non-Profit Housing Corporation, is
responsible for overseeing maintenance, facilities, housing operations, and property management.
David has been with SMOC since 2003 and has served in a number of roles. He has extensive
knowledge of our various programs and housing continuum which ensures a strong collaboration
between the Housing Corporation and programs and services that make housing referrals to sites
that provide supportive services to our residents.
Incorporated in 1986 as a wholly-owned subsidiary of SMOC, the mission of the Housing
Corporation is to preserve and improve the existing affordable housing stock and to provide new
affordable housing opportunities for low-income and disadvantaged individuals. The Housing
Corporation owns 1,700 units of affordable housing in 26 communities, including emergency
shelters, service-enriched residential programs, sober housing, and permanent affordable housing.
Uniquely, housing programs are integrated with case management services and connections to
SMOC’s wraparound services and services to help residents in their efforts to achieve self-
sufficiency. The majority of SMOC’s properties were formerly distressed properties, which the
Housing Corporation renovates into well-managed dwellings for the disadvantaged, allowing
homeless individuals and families to be housed within their communities and focus on finding
employment to support a permanent housing placement for themselves and their families.
Ongoing maintenance and capital repairs are a primary focus of SMOC, and major repairs are
generally funded through a combination of proceeds from mortgage refinancing, special bond
financing, capital grant requests, and other targeted fundraising efforts.
b. What other organizations will you be collaborating with to achieve maximum results (please
include letters of collaboration)? 
11
Page 12
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
In addition to linkages to all of SMOC’s wraparound support services, the Sage House program and
staff work with a number of external local agencies and organizations to best serve residents and
provide appropriate referrals and services. These partners include Spectrum Health, New Horizons, 
Horizons for Youth, local churches, daycares, school systems, and the YMCA. 
6. Equity:
a. How will you ensure equitable access and success for underserved populations?
SMOC operates over 60 wraparound services designed to help low-income and disadvantaged
individuals and families improve their circumstances. SMOC’s diverse workforce of human services
professionals strive to provide access to these programs for all who need them, regardless of
demographics, language proficiency, income, or any other barrier to access.
Families enter Sage House through referrals from the Institute for Health and Recovery. Once a
family has been referred and arrives at Sage House, they first complete an internal intake process.
This intake helps Sage House staff and Case Managers connect families to SMOC’s wraparound
support services that these families may not have been able to access on their own. This
coordinated care creates a dynamic, comprehensive effort to provide optimal behavioral health
care to families and best prepare them to successfully sustain their recovery.
b. What barriers to access exist in your community and how will you address them?
Barriers in our community include the high cost of living, the shortage of affordable housing, and
the stigma around seeking treatment for mental health and substance use. As a Community
Development Corporation, SMOC and its nonprofit subsidiary, South Middlesex Non Profit
Housing Corporation, own and operate thousands of affordable housing units throughout the
Commonwealth. Part of the Sage House program includes assisting families transitioning from
Sage House into affordable housing, which is made possible through connections to SMOC’s own
affordable housing stock. Sage House uses both professional clinicians and a peer support model
to help participants recover from addiction alongside others who are facing similar challenges.
c. How will you ensure marginalized voices in your community are amplified and consulted in the
design, delivery, and evaluation of your project/program?
As an agency, SMOC completes a comprehensive community needs survey every three years that
includes hundreds of client surveys, as well as focus groups and stakeholder interviews. This data
impacts all areas of our service design and delivery. For example, a recent focus group at one of
SMOC’s group homes identified capital repair needs that SMOC was then able to address to the
residents’ satisfaction.
d. Describe efforts underway within your organization to promote diversity, equity and inclusion
As an agency, SMOC has a strong commitment to promoting diversity, equity and inclusion. In the
summer of 2020, SMOC created a Diversity, Access and Inclusion Committee (DAI) led by upper- 
and mid-level managers and SMOC board members. The DAI Committee meets monthly and has
received several grants to fund both agency-wide diversity trainings and conversations as well as a
grant that will fund strategic planning to review our systems and policies and identify
12
Page 13
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
opportunities to strengthen our policies to support our DAI work, beginning in 2022. 
7. Sustainability:
a. Does this work depend entirely on CDBG funds? Please describe your plans for this work if full
funding is not granted.
The work to replace 55 windows that we are requesting funding for will rely largely on CDBG
funding. If full funding of our request is not granted, we will be able to scale the full scope of the
project into the allotted funding amount of our grant award and may choose to focus on replacing
those windows that are most in need with any awarded funds.
In September 2020, SMOC closed on a tax-exempt bond issued through MassDevelopment. 
Proceeds from this transaction established a capital repair reserve fund, allowing SMOC to invest
in a restricted collection of 46 mission-core properties with new roofs, appliances, mechanical
equipment and other capital items as they wear out. This reserve has helped us complete a
number of projects that 517 Winter Street requires; however, SMOC is first approaching the City
for funding for the window replacement project. While the capital reserve fund allows us to
contribute a substantial amount of funds towards completing such work, as a larger capital project
we are seeking additional outside support to ensure the reserve can fund capital work at as many
properties as possible. 
b. How do you plan to sustain this work once CDBG support ends, keeping in mind that sustainability
means more than replacing funding?
The cost of this project is a one-time expense that will, if supported by Framingham CDBG funds,
will last sustain itself for decades to come.
At the Sage House program, other than what is billed to their insurance, residents do not pay any
rent or program fees which drastically reduces the burden that rent can place on families. Sage
House is funded primarily through the Bureau of Substance Abuse Services (BSAS), along with
third-party billing through client insurance. These funding sources sustain the Sage House program
and recovery services, but do not cover all the costs of upkeep at 517 Winter Street. Major capital
repairs often require philanthropy and additional funds to complete; in these cases, SMOC
strategically allocates its own equity and seeks out external grant opportunities, such as this
request to the City of Framingham.
In recent years, Sage House has undergone a number of updates and remodels. In 2017, SMOC
was awarded a grant through the Amelia Peabody Charitable Fund to fund the replacement of
Sage House’s roof. This year, SMOC received a generous grant from the Reliant Foundation to
replace the building’s wheel chair accessible ramp. In 2021, SMOC invested over $30,000 in its
own equity towards renovations at Sage House, including power washing and freshly painting the
building, and is prepared to contribute more in the coming months to replace the building’s
existing boiler. 
13
Page 14
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
c. Additional Proposal Narrative:
What else would you like us to know about your proposed project?
14
Page 15
C. Logic Model 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
Use this template to develop and submit a logic model for your proposed project. If you need help in developing a logic model
for your grant proposal, please reach out to us at [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov or 508-532-5457 or the next page
has a sample one. 
INPUTS
Resources to be used to
undertake this project or
program. 
ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS SHORT-TERM
OUTCOMES 
LONG-TERM- 
OUTCOMES
Specific events, actions, 
partnerships, and processes. 
Artifacts and evidence of the Measurable changes that will
activities.  occur in the next year. 
Long-term intended effects. 
Window contractor; SMOC Window removals and  55 windows are removed and Sage House is made safer, more Sage House offers safe, efficient, 
maintenance staff  replacements in addition to newly installed. comfortable, and efficient for and warm housing for families
routine facility maintenance  residents by removing old  for decades to come. 
windows and installing new
ones that are freshly sealed. 
Recovery-focused professional Case management, including Individualized treatment Families leave the program with Families grow stronger through
and peer support and  housing, education, plans are created and  the understanding of the nature reduced challenges caused by
programming for families with employment and budget followed throughout each and effects of chemical substance use and addiction and
substance use  planning  family’s stay.  dependency and the skills to  know how to access additional
lead a life free of substance supports if other challenges arise. 
abuse. 
15 
Page 16
Clients transition to other
housing and with employment
or with a plan to establish
employment. 
16 
Page 17
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
D. PROJECT COSTS
1. Detailed Project Budget:
Budget Item (A) 
i.e. Personnel, Office
Supplies, etc.
55 Windows and
replacement labor (Davis
Bacon wages) 
CDBG Funds (B) 
$55,000 
Other Sources (C)  Total (B + C) 
$55,000
Total Project Cost  $55,000  $55,000
2. Anticipated Project Funding Sources (Include all funding sources for which you’ve applied
CDBG  Projected Committed Amount
a) Other sources (Please Specify which
are projected and which are
committed):
b) Donations for project use
c) In kind Donations (please specify)
d) Total CDBG Amount  $55,000
*Total Project Funding:  $55,000
*Project costs in Table 2 must match Table 1 Total Project Costs.
17 
Page 18
Susan Gentili  President & CEO
12/9/2021
Page 19
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
Evaluation Criteria 
Appendix A
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds are awarded through a competitive proposal
evaluation process. The evaluation considers all aspects of the proposal as described in the RFP and
proposal application. 
Proposals are checked first by the City’s Planning and Community Division staff for completeness of
application, content and eligibility under CDBG guidelines. Eligible applicants will have proposals
reviewed and ranked by members of the Community Development Committee using the City of
Framingham’s Application Evaluation Worksheet. If a question arises during its review, the committee
reserves the right to contact the applicant for clarification. Based on the committee’s review and
ranking of proposals, recommendations will be presented to the Mayor’s Office, which will render the
final decision on grant awards. Ultimately, the City Council votes to accept or reject the annual
aggregate federal funds before the Annual Action Plan is submitted and the funds dispersed. 
The Division of Planning and Community Development and the Community Development Committee
will have sole discretion on the approval of funds. Committee has discretion to partially or fully fund a
proposal. Please note that a well-written application is no guarantee of funding since this is a highly
competitive process. Applicants should give adequate attention to the completeness, conciseness, and
responsiveness of the information provided in response to the questions asked within the application. 
The RFP will be the only time for organizations to present proposals since no future meetings or
hearings are scheduled between the submission date and allocation date. Please contact the
Community Development Department at [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov if you have any
questions concerning the Evaluation Worksheet or the application. 
11
Page 20
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
APPENDIX B
SUMMARY OF ELIGIBLE AND INELIGIBLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT ACTIVITIES
This is a summary of the activities that are eligible and ineligible for assistance under the Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program pursuant to governing regulations of the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 24, Part 570, Sections 570.200 – 570.207. This summary is based upon the Final Rules
published in March 1996 and is meant to be a guide. Please check with CD staff or the HUD website for
any changes that may have occurred since 1996. 
General Policies – 570.200
The primary objective of the CDBG Program is the development of viable communities, by providing
decent housing and sustainable living environment, and expanding economic opportunities, principally
for persons of low and moderate-income. Funds must be used so as to give maximum feasible priority to
activities that will carry out one of the three broad national objectives of: benefit to low and moderate- 
income families, aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or blight, or activities that meet an urgent
community need due to existing conditions that pose a serious and immediate threat to the health or
welfare of the community where other financial resources are not available to meet such needs. At least
70% of the total CDBG funds must be used for activities that benefit low and moderate-income persons; 
and at least 51% of the beneficiaries of the individual activities must be low to moderate-income persons. 
Basic Eligible Activities – 570.201
CDBG funds may be used for the following activities: 
(a)  Acquisition. Acquisition in whole or in part by purchase, long-term lease, donation, or otherwise, 
of real property (including air rights, water rights, rights-of-way, easements, and other interests
therein) for any public purpose. 
(b)  Disposition. Disposition, through sale, lease, donation, or otherwise, of any real property acquired
with CDBG funds or its retention for public purposes, including reasonable costs of temporarily
managing such properties. 
(c)  Public facilities and improvements. Acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
installation of public facilities and improvements, except buildings for the general conduct of
government. Activities may include: 
•  Removal of material and architectural barriers that restrict the mobility and accessibility of
elderly or severely disabled persons to public facilities and improvements; 
•  Design features and improvements that promote energy: 
•  Architectural design features, and similar treatments intended to enhance the aesthetic
quality of facilities and improvements receiving CDBG assistance: 
•  Eligible facilities include shelters for the homeless; convalescent homes; hospitals, nursing
homes; battered spouse shelters; halfway houses for run-away children, drug offenders or
12
Page 21
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
parolees; group homes for intellectually challenged persons and temporary housing for
disaster victims: 
(d)  Clearance activities. Clearance, demolition, and removal of buildings and improvements, 
including movement of structures to other sites. Demolition of HUD-assisted or HUD-owned
housing units may be undertaken only with the prior approval of HUD. 
(e)  Public services. Provision of public services (including labor, supplies, and materials) including but
not limited to those concerned with employment, crime prevention, child care, health, drug
abuse, education, fair housing counseling, energy conservation, homebuyer down payment
assistance, or recreational needs. To be eligible for CDBG assistance, a public service must meet
each of the following criteria: 
•  A new service or a quantifiable increase in the level of an existing service above that which
has been provided with State and Local funds in the previous 12 calendar months; and
•  The amount of CDBG funds obligated for public services shall not exceed 15 percent of the
annual grant, and 15 percent of program income received during the immediately preceding
program year. 
(f)  Interim assistance. Activities may be undertaken on an interim basis in areas exhibiting objectively
determinable signs of physical deterioration where immediate action is needed and where
permanent improvements will be carried out as soon as practicable in order to alleviate
emergency conditions threatening the public health and safety in areas where an emergency
condition exists and requires immediate resolution. 
(g)  Payment of non-Federal share. Payment of the non-Federal share required in connection with a
Federal grant-in-aid program undertaken as part of CDBG activities. 
(h)  Urban renewal completion. Payment of the cost of completing an urban renewal project funded
under title I of the Housing Act of 1949 as amended. 
(i)  Relocation. Relocation payments and other assistance for permanently and temporarily relocated
individuals, families, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farm operations. 
(j)  Loss of rental income. Payments to housing owners for losses of rental income incurred in holding, 
for temporary periods, housing units to be used for the relocation of individuals and families
displaced by program activities assisted under this part.
(k)  Housing services. Housing services such as tenant counseling in connection with tenant-based
rental assistance and affordable housing projects, energy auditing, preparation of work
specifications, loan processing, inspections, tenant selection, management of tenant-based rental
assistance, and other services related to assisting owners, tenants, contractors, and other entities
participating or seeking to participate in housing activities assisted under title II of the Cranston- 
Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act. 
(l)  Privately owned utilities. CDBG funds may be used to acquire, construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, 
or install the distribution lines and facilities of privately-owned utilities, including the placing
underground of new or existing distribution facilities and lines. 
13
Page 22
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
(m) Construction of housing. CDBG funds may be used for the construction of housing assisted under
section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. 
(n)  Homeownership assistance. CDBG funds may be used to provide direct homeownership
assistance to low- or moderate-income households in accordance with section 105(a) of the Act. 
(o)  Facilitate economic development. CDBG funds may facilitate economic development by: 
•  Providing credit, including, but not limited to, grants, loans, loan guarantees, and other forms of
financial support, for the establishment, stabilization, and expansion of micro enterprises; 
•  Providing technical assistance, advice, and business support services to owners of micro
enterprises and persons developing micro enterprises; and
•  Providing general support, including, but not limited to, peer support programs, counseling, 
childcare, transportation, and other similar services, to owners of micro enterprises and persons
developing micro enterprises. 
(p)  Technical assistance. Provision of technical assistance to public or nonprofit entities to increase
the capacity of such entities to carry out eligible neighborhood revitalization or economic
development activities. 
(q)  Assistance to institutions of higher education. Provision of assistance to institutions of higher
education if such institution has demonstrated a capacity to carry out eligible activities. 
Eligible rehabilitation and preservation activities - 570.202
(a)  Types of buildings and improvements eligible for rehabilitation assistance. CDBG funds may be
used to finance the rehabilitation of: 
•  Privately owned buildings and improvements for residential purposes; improvements to a
single-family residential property which is also used as a place of business, which are
required in order to operate the business, need not be considered to be rehabilitation of
a commercial or industrial building, if the improvements also provide general benefit to
the residential occupants of the building; 
•  Low-income public housing and other publicly owned residential buildings and
improvements; 
•  Publicly or privately owned commercial or industrial buildings, except that the
rehabilitation of such buildings owned by a private for-profit business is limited to
improvements to the exterior of the building and the correction of code violations; 
•  Nonprofit-owned nonresidential buildings and improvements
•  Manufactured housing when such housing that is part of the community's permanent
housing stock. 
14
Page 23
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
(b)  Types of assistance. CDBG funds may be used to finance the following types of activities, and
related costs: 
▪  Assistance to private individuals and entities, including profit making and nonprofit
organizations, to acquire for the purpose of rehabilitation, and to rehabilitate properties, 
for use or resale for residential purposes; 
•  Labor, materials, and other costs of rehabilitation of properties, including repair directed
toward an accumulation of deferred maintenance, replacement of principal fixtures and
components of existing structures, installation of security devices, including smoke
detectors and deadbolt locks, and renovation through alterations, additions to, or
enhancement of existing structures, which may be undertaken singly, or in combination; 
•  Loans for refinancing existing indebtedness secured by a property being rehabilitated; 
•  Improvements to increase the efficient use of energy in structures through such means as
installation of storm windows and doors, siding, wall and attic insulation, and conversion, 
modification, or replacement of heating and cooling equipment, including the use of solar
energy equipment; 
•  Improvements to increase the efficient use of water through such means as water savings
faucets and shower heads and repair of water leaks; 
•  Connection of residential structures to water distribution lines or local sewer collection
lines; 
•  For rehabilitation carried out with CDBG funds, costs of: Initial homeowner warranty
premiums; Hazard insurance premiums, except where assistance is provided in the form
of a grant; and Flood insurance premiums for properties covered by the Flood Disaster
Protection Act of 1973; and Procedures concerning inspection and testing for and
abatement of lead-based paint. 
•  Costs of acquiring tools to be lent to owners, tenants, and others who will use such tools
to carry out rehabilitation; 
•  Rehabilitation services, such as rehabilitation counseling, energy auditing, preparation of
work specifications, loan processing, inspections, and other services related to assisting
owners, tenants, contractors, and other entities, participating or seeking to participate in
rehabilitation activities
•  Assistance for the rehabilitation of housing under section 17 of the United States Housing
Act of 1937; 
•  Improvements designed to remove material and architectural barriers that restrict the
mobility and accessibility of elderly or severely disabled persons to buildings and
improvements eligible for assistance under paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Costs incurred for inspection for code violations and enforcement of codes
(e.g., salaries and related expenses of code enforcement inspectors and legal proceedings, but
not including the cost of correcting the violations) in deteriorating or deteriorated areas when 
15
Page 24
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
such enforcement together with public or private improvements, rehabilitation, or services to be
provided may be expected to arrest the decline of the area. 
(d)  Historic preservation. CDBG funds may be used for the rehabilitation, preservation or restoration
of historic properties, whether publicly or privately owned. Historic properties are those sites or
structures that are either listed in or eligible to be listed in the National Register of Historic Places, 
listed in a State or local inventory of historic places, or designated as a State or local landmark or
historic district by appropriate law or ordinance. Historic preservation, however, is not
authorized for buildings for the general conduct of government. 
(e)  Renovation of closed buildings. CDBG funds may be used to renovate closed buildings, such as
closed school buildings, for use as an eligible public facility or to rehabilitate such buildings for
housing. 
(f)  Lead-based paint activities. Lead-based paint activities as set forth in part 35 of this title. 
Special economic development activities - 570.203
A recipient may use CDBG funds for special economic development activities as part of an economic
development project. The recipient must ensure that the appropriate level of public benefit will be
derived before obligating funds. Special activities authorized under this section do not include assistance
for the construction of new housing. Special economic development activities include: 
(a)  The acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or installation of commercial or
industrial buildings, structures, and other real property equipment and improvements, including
railroad spurs or similar extensions. 
(b)  The provision of assistance to a private for-profit business, including, but not limited to, grants, 
loans, loan guarantees, interest supplements, technical assistance, and other forms of support, 
for any activity where the assistance is appropriate to carry out an economic development
project. 
(c)  Economic development services include, but are not limited to, outreach efforts to market
available forms of assistance; screening of applicants; reviewing and underwriting applications
for assistance; preparation of all necessary agreements; management of assisted activities; and
the screening, referral, and placement of applicants for employment opportunities generated by
CDBG-eligible economic development activities, including the costs of providing necessary
training for persons filling those positions. 
Special activities by Community-Based Development Organizations (CBDOs). – 570.204
(a) Eligible activities. CDBG funds may be used by CBDO to carry out a neighborhood revitalization, 
community economic development, or energy conservation project, including: 
▪  Activities listed as eligible; and 
16
Page 25
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
▪  Activities not otherwise listed as eligible – excluding buildings for the general conduct of
government business, general government expenses, and political activities. 
(b) Activities must: 
•  Meet the public service requirements, although services specifically designed to increase
economic opportunities through job training and placement and other employment support
services; 
•  Meet the requirements of the guidelines for evaluating and selecting economic development
project under Section 570.209; and
•  Must not result in the recipient exceeding the 20% limit on planning and administrative costs. 
(c) Eligible Entities are: 
•  Non-profit or for-profit organizations engaged in community development activities primarily
within an identified geographic area and whose primary purpose is the improvement physical, 
economic and social environment; 
•  Section 301 (d) Small Business Investment Companies; including those which are profit making; 
State or local Development Companies; or Community Housing Development Organizations
(CHDOs);
•  Organization similar in purpose, function and scope. 
Eligible planning, urban environmental design and policy-planning management-capacity building
activities – 570.205
a) Planning activities which consist of all costs of gathering data, studies, analysis, and preparation of
plans and the identification of actions that will implement such plans, including, but not limited to: 
▪  Comprehensive plans; 
▪  Community development plans; 
▪  Functional plans, in areas such as: 
▪  Housing, including the development of a consolidated plan; 
▪  Land use and urban environmental design; 
▪  Economic development; 
▪  Open space and recreation; 
▪  Energy use and conservation; 
▪  Floodplain and wetlands management in accordance with the requirements of Executive Orders
11988 and 11990; 
▪  Transportation; 
▪  Utilities; and Historic preservation. 
▪  Other plans and studies such as: 
▪  Small area and neighborhood plans; 
▪  Capital improvements programs; 
17
Page 26
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
▪  Reasonable costs of general environmental, urban environmental design and historic
preservation studies. 
▪  Strategies and action programs to implement plans, including the development of codes, 
ordinances and regulations; 
▪  Support of clearinghouse functions, such as those specified in Executive Order 12372; and
▪  Analysis of impediments to fair housing choice. 
•  Policy planning/management/capacity building activities which will enable the recipient to
determine its needs; 
▪  Set long-term goals and short-term objectives, including those related to urban environmental
design; 
▪  Devise programs and activities to meet these goals and objectives; 
▪  Evaluate the progress of such programs and activities in accomplishing these goals and
objectives; and
▪  Carry out management, coordination and monitoring of activities necessary for effective
planning implementation, but excluding the costs necessary to implement such plans. 
Program administrative costs – 570.206
a) General management, oversight and coordination. Reasonable costs of overall program management, 
coordination, monitoring, and evaluation, including: 
•  Salaries, wages, and related costs of staff engaged in program administration. Program
administration includes the following types of assignments; 
•  Providing local officials and citizens with information about the program; 
•  Preparing program budgets and schedules, and amendments thereto; 
•  Developing systems for assuring compliance with program requirements; 
•  Developing interagency agreements and agreements with sub-recipients and contractors to
carry out program activities; 
•  Monitoring program activities for progress and compliance with program requirements; 
•  Preparing reports and other documents related to the program for submission to HUD; 
•  Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring findings; 
•  Evaluating program results against stated objectives; and
•  Managing or supervising persons whose primary responsibilities with regard to the program
include such assignments as those described in paragraph (a)(1)(i) through (viii) of this section. 
•  Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the program; 
•  Administrative services performed under third party contracts or agreements, including such
services as general legal services, accounting services, and audit services; and
•  Other costs for goods and services required for administration of the program, including such
goods and services as rental or purchase of equipment, insurance, utilities, office supplies, and
rental and maintenance (but not purchase) of office space. 
18
Page 27
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
(b) Public information. The providing of information and other resources to residents and citizen
organizations participating in the planning, implementation, or assessment of activities being
assisted with CDBG funds. 
(c) Fair housing activities. Provision of fair housing services designed to further the fair housing
objectives of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601–20) by making all persons, without regard to race, 
color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status or handicap, aware of the range of housing
opportunities available to them; 
(d) Indirect costs. Indirect costs may be charged to the CDBG program under a cost allocation plan
prepared in accordance with OMB Circular A–21, A–87, or A–122 as applicable. 
(e) Submission of applications for federal programs. Preparation of documents required for submission
to HUD to receive funds under the CDBG and UDAG programs. In addition, CDBG funds may be used
to prepare applications for other Federal programs where the recipient determines that such
activities are necessary or appropriate to achieve its community development objectives. 
(f) Administrative expenses to facilitate housing. CDBG funds may be used for necessary administrative
expenses in planning or obtaining financing for housing; 
(g) Section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. Reasonable costs for overall program
management of the Rental Rehabilitation and Housing Development programs authorized under
section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, whether or not such activities are otherwise
assisted with funds provided under this part. 
(h) Reasonable costs equivalent to those described in paragraphs (a), (b), (e), and (f) of this section for
overall program management of: 
(i) A Federally designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community;and
(j) The HOME program under title II of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42
U.S.C. 12701 note).
Ineligible activities – 570.207
The general rule is that any activity that is not authorized under the provisions of §§570.201–570.206 is
ineligible to be assisted with CDBG funds. This section identifies specific activities that are ineligible and
provides guidance in determining the eligibility of other activities frequently associated with housing
and community development. 
(a) The following activities may not be assisted with CDBG funds: 
•  Buildings or portions thereof, used for the general conduct of government General
government expenses;  Political activities. 
(b) The following activities may not be assisted with CDBG funds unless carried out as a special
economic development activity, or as a public service, or by an eligible community-based
development organization, or by the recipient as specifically authorized. 
•  Purchase of equipment; 
19
Page 28
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
•  Construction equipment; 
•  Fire protection equipment. Fire protection equipment is considered for this purpose to be
an integral part of a public facility and thus, purchase of such equipment would be eligible
under §570.201(c);
•  Furnishings and personal property; 
•  Operating and maintenance expenses; 
•  Payment of salaries for staff, utility costs and similar expenses necessary for the operation
of public works and facilities; New housing construction; Income payments. 
20
Page 29
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
APPENDIX C: 
21
Page 30
Logic Model Example: Completion of Treatment for Tuberculosis Disease by Using Incentives and Enabler1
Inputs  Activities Outputs
(No. and%) 
Short-Term
Outcomes(% 
Intermediate-Term
Outcomes(%) 
Long-Term
Outcomes(%)
Funding to support
bus passes or
extended clinic
hours
Adequate staffing
to conduct
activities
Support from
management for
conducting
activities, including
extended clinic
hours 
Provide incentives
to patients
Extend hours for in­ 
patient DOT
Train staff on
strategies for
following up after
missed
appointments
Follow up same day
after missed
appointments 
Patients who are
given bus passes
Patients who come
to clinic during
extended hours
Staff trained on
strategies for
following up after
missed
appointments
Patients who miss
visits and are
rescheduled within
24 hours 
Decrease in
patients who
experi•ence
transportation and
scheduling barriers
Increase in patients
who arrive at the
clinic for in-person
DOT 
Decrease in
patients with
missed doses of in­ 
person DOT 
Increase in patients
completing TB
treatment
Abbreviations: DOT, directly observed therapy; TB, tuberculosis. 
* See Completion of Treatment for Tuberculosis Disease by Using Incentives and Enablers for the accompanying program evaluation plan
Page 31
example. 
