REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
A. APPLICATION
I. Project Eligibility 
Project meets at least ONE of the HUD National Objectives listed below (please check all applicable; 
definitions are included as attachments):
X Benefits low/moderate income individuals/households 
❑ Addresses the prevention or elimination of slums or blight 
❑ Meets an urgent community need threatening health and welfare 
Check all statements that describe HOW this project or activity meets at least one of the National
Objectives listed above: 
❑ Area Benefit Activities: The proposed project or activity meets the needs of low/moderate income
persons residing in an area where at least 51% of those residents have incomes within 80% of the Area
Median Income. The benefits of this activity are available to all persons regardless of income. Examples
may include street improvements, water/sewer lines, neighborhood facilities, and faĕade improvements
in neighborhood commercial districts. 
X Limited Clientele Activities: The proposed project benefits a specific group of people (rather than all
residents in a particular area), where 51% of the people are documented or presumed to be
low/moderate income persons. Examples may include construction of a senior center, public services for
the homeless, meals on wheels for the elderly, construction of a job training facility for the
handicapped. 
❑ Housing Activities: The proposed project creates or improves permanent residential units that will
be occupied by low/moderate income persons upon completion. Housing can be either owner occupied
or rental one family or multi-family units. Examples may include property acquisition for permanent
housing, permanent housing rehabilitation, and conversion of non- residential units into permanent
housing. 
❑ Job Creation or Retention: The proposed project creates or retains permanent jobs. At least 51% of
those jobs must be available to low- and moderate-income persons. Examples may include loans to pay
for the expansion of a factory, assistance to a business which has publicly announced its intention to
close resulting in loss of employment for low/moderate income persons. 
❑ Slum or Blighted Area: The proposed project is located in a slum/blighted area and the anticipated
results of the project addresses one or more of the conditions that qualify in the area. 
❑ Spot Blight: The proposed project will eliminate specific conditions of blight or physical decay outside
of a blighted area. Activities are limited to demolition/clearance, historic preservation, and
rehabilitation of buildings (to the extent necessary to eliminate public health and safety issues).
II. Project Type (for clarification on the categories, please see Appendix B) 
❑ Housing Rehabilitation 
X Social/Public Service 
❑ Infrastructure/Public Facility Improvements 
1
Page 2
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
❑ Economic Development 
❑ Slum/Blight Eradication 
❑ Other 
III. GENERAL PROJECT INFORMATION 
1. Project Name: Circle of Hope Support for Homeless Families and Students 
2. Project Dates: *: July 1, 2022 ± June 30, 2023 
*CDBG-funded elements of proposed projects supported in Fiscal 2023 should end no later
than June 30, 2023. Programs that cannot be implemented within 12 months may lose
awarded CDBG funds. 
3. CDBG Funds Requested: $15,000 
4. 
Name of Sponsoring
Organization or Individual
Circle of Hope, Inc. 
Address
P.O. Box 920724
1329 Highland Avenue
Needham, MA 02492 
DUNS Number
967820395
5. Person responsible for coordinating and administering this project (if known) 
Name: Barbara Waterhouse
Address: P.O. Box 920724, 1329 Highland Avenue, Needham, MA 02492
Phone: 617-462-3238
Email: bw@circleofhopeonline.org 
6. Location of project or area served (Include Census Tract(s) and Block Group(s) served by
proposed project, if known) (please see map in Appendix D for eligible census tracts:
Tract 
383102.01 
383300.01 
383200.03 
383102.02
383101.01 
Percent Low/ Mod
86.5% 
85.0% 
81.2% 
80.4% 
79.5% 
Check all Tracts that Apply 
2
Page 3
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
383501.02 
383200.01 
383600.02 
383101.02 
383400.03 
383400.02 
383700.03 
383400.01 
79.5% 
75.2% 
74.1% 
72.4% 
71.4% 
58.1% 
55.1% 
52.6% 
N/A: The homeless families and students served by Circle of Hope are located city-wide
throughout Framingham. 
7. Compliance Statement 
For public facility and infrastructure projects requiring more than $2,000 in CDBG funds, 
describe how compliance with Davis/Bacon federal wage, affirmative action and Section 3
requirements will be maintained and documented: 
N/A 
3
Page 4
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
B. Project Narrative
Please provide a narrative description of your proposed project or program by answering the
following questions. We recommend that you include the question as part of your response. 
Responses must not exceed 10 pages. 
1. Need and Outcomes: 
a. Why are you seeking to undertake this work (need)?
From 2007 to 2020, family homelessness across Massachusetts increased by 72%, and Boston
had the third highest rate of family homelessness in the nation. (2020 HUD Annual Homeless
Assessment Report to Congress). The data reported on the number of homeless families
³dReVn¶W cRXnW WhRVe familieV ZhR aUe dRXbled XS, liYing in XnVafe cRndiWiRnV, RU VleeSing in
WheiU caUV.´ (MaVVachXVeWWV CRaliWiRn fRU Whe HRmeleVV). There are thousands of families
living on the edge of homelessness. Many MetroWest residents face severe financial hardship. 
Nine percent of individuals in MetroWest live below the Federal Poverty Level, including the 8
percent of children who live in poverty. (Foundation for MetroWest, Impact MetroWest, 2020).
The COVID-19 pandemic has had catastrophic effects to marginalized families, including job
loss and loss of life. In MetroWest, the high cost of housing, combined with an insufficient stock
of affordable housing, is creating family homelessness at an alarming rate. 
Homeless families often arrive in shelter with only the clothes they are wearing. College and
high school students experiencing homelessness often wear the same clothes day after day. Many
people experiencing homelessness in Framingham, especially those who have immigrated from
warmer countries, do not have clothing and outerwear appropriate for harsh New England
winters. The shelters and schools do not have the resources to provide clothing, coats and winter
accessories, or sufficient toiletries for the families and students. 
b. Why do you believe your organization is best positioned to address this need? 
Circle of Hope has provided clothing, coats, shoes, bedding, essentials for newborns and vital
hygiene supplies to homeless families in Greater Boston since 2008, and has supported homeless
families in Framingham for 6 years. We are a reliable resource for families experiencing
homelessness, and we have a highly efficient system in place to procure the necessary items, 
package them for each shelter, and make safe, contactless deliveries using volunteer drivers from
the community. 
Circle of Hope has made monthly deliveries of clothing, shoes, outerwear, toiletries, sheets, 
towels and blankets to college students experiencing homelessness at Framingham State
University since 2019 in partnership with the Office of the Dean of Students and the RAMS
4
Page 5
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
Resource Center. Circle of Hope responds to emergency requests for students who are suddenly
homeless after being displaced after house or apartment fires. 
Our public health model and expertise, frequent partner communications (text, email, calls), and
agile response to emergencies within 24-48 hours set us apart from other non-profits. Circle
of Hope is a reliable, resourceful responder to critical needs, with specific-sized and culturally
appropriate clothing, hygiene items, newborn essentials, and PPE for people who are homeless. 
No other organization or agency is providing clothing, bedding or hygiene essentials for the
homeless families and students that Circle of Hope serves. According to a Boston Health Care
for the Homeless Program clinician,³Circle of Hope acts in place of the role of family to fill the
gaps for its members in need.´
c. How will you measure success? 
Each member of the families in the Framingham shelters we serve will have weather-appropriate
clothing and outerwear so they can attend school, work, and medical appointments, as they are
able. Each of the college and high school students we serve at Framingham State University and
Framingham High School will have clean, basic essential clothing (underwear, socks, pants, 
sweatpants, leggings, t-shirts, sweatshirts, jackets) and toiletries to maintain good health and
hygiene and reach their fullest academic potential. The high school students will also be able to
participate gym classes with clothing provided by Circle of Hope. According to Jacob Hanson, 
Framingham Public Schools Clinical Care Coordinator ± Regional Homeless Liaison, many
homeless students currently do not participate in gym class because they are required to change
clothes for gym and they do not have spare clothes to change into. 
Circle of Hope will respond within 24-48 hours to all emergency requests from our shelter, 
clinic, university and public school partners, with targeted deliveries of clothing, shoes, winter
coats and boots, essential hygiene supplies, and blankets for homeless individuals based on
immediate need. When a Framingham State University VWXdenW¶V famil\ loVW WheiU home in a fiUe
last February, we immediately brought clothing, toiletries, shoes, towels and comforters for the
family of 5. We will continue to measure our success by our capacity to meet these unpredictable
crises. 
We research multiple sources and purchase high quality items at deeply discounted prices to
stretch grant funding. Our objective is to amplify our existing emergency response capacity to
meet the dramatic increase in family and youth homelessness coinciding with the expiration with
the eviction moratorium. 
d. What do you expect the status of this project to be at the end of FY2023? (Ex: iterative
revision, continuation, end) 
With this grant, at the end of FY2023, we will have been a dependable source of basic clothing
and hygiene needs for families and students for a full fiscal year. Our work is ongoing as new
families cycle in and out of shelter and homeless students needing services access Circle of Hope
5
Page 6
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
donations through our university and high school campus partners. We will continue with these
essential programs as we adjust our capacity to respond to the increasing number of urgent
requests for our help. 
e. Please provide backup data documenting need 
 https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/2020-AHAR-Part-1.pdf
 https://www.impactmw.org
2. Impact: 
a. Who benefits from this work and how? 
With this CDBG grant, Circle of Hope will provide weather appropriate clothing and outerwear, 
shoes, winter boots, vital hygiene supplies, sheets, towels, blankets, essentials for newborns, and
other necessities, on a regular and emergency (within 48 hours) basis, to: 
x  Homeless families at Clinton House Family Shelter in Framingham
x  Homeless families at Pearl Street Family Shelter in Framingham
x  Homeless college students attending Framingham State University and MassBay
Community College who receive services from the RAMS Resource Center and/or the
Office of the Dean of Students at Framingham State University
x  Homeless high school students attending Framingham High School who access services
through the Resiliency for Life Program, through the Adolescent Health Nurses, or
through the Community Resource central office for homeless public school students
b. How many will be served? 
Circle of Hope will serve 400 infants, children, and adults experiencing homelessness. 
c. If this is a request for continued funding, please document the progress of your current
project or program, including the number served and the outcomes achieved thus far. 
This request is for continued funding of CiUcle of HoSe¶V support for homeless families at
Clinton House Family Shelter and Pearl Street Family Shelter. Circle of Hope seeks additional
funding this year for our rapidly expanding support of homeless college students at Framingham
State University. Circle of Hope also needs new funding to launch a pilot program to serve
homeless students at Framingham High School, where 206 students currently are experiencing
homelessness, and school administrators are seeing the highest number of homeless students they
have ever seen. Currently 8% of Framingham high school students are homeless, a dramatic
increase from the previous average of 3-4%. School administration and service providers cannot
6
Page 7
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
keep up with the increased demand for clothing and winter outerwear for these homeless
students. 
Since July 1, 2020, Circle of Hope has meet immediate needs of homeless families at Clinton
and Pearl family shelters with the following donations purchased with City of Framingham grant
funding: 
Clinton/Pearl 
Category  FY21
Adult Clothing Items  737
Children's Clothing Items 1502
Infant Clothing Items  303
Infant Essentials 216
Coats  40
Shoes  33
Underwear/Socks  3794
Toiletries  2399
Linens  48
Face Masks/Gloves  746
Total  9818 
FY22 to Date
188
204
11
17
16
0
433
483
16
750
2118 
3. Solution Design: 
a. Whaƚ iƐ ƚhe eǀidence baƐe ƚo ƐƵpporƚ ƚhiƐ projecƚ͛Ɛ deƐign and oƵƚcomeƐ͍ 
Circle of Hope has a proven history of serving more than 60,000 homeless people since 2008
through our highly impactful programs: Welcome Baby (backpacks filled with newborn
necessities and porta-cribs for homeless infants); Dignity Project (vital hygiene supplies to
protect health); Emergency Response Program (critically needed clothing, coats, and toiletries
delivered to displaced families in crisis); and Get Set (clothing, toiletries, and essentials for
homeless college students).
Family shelter managers and school administrators provide feedback and keep Circle of Hope
apprised of current needs for the people we serve. Circle of Hope treats every person in a
dignified manner and gives the most vulnerable members of our community the opportunity to
protect themselves from the dangers of illness and disease that come from being homeless in
New England. 
³Circle of Hope supports our families in every stage of their journey towards self-reliance and is
truly essential to both Clinton Street Shelter and Pearl Street Shelter.´
--Kimberley Hicks, SMOC Congregate Shelter Director/Scattered Site Liaison 
7
Page 8
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
b. With whom have you consulted/collaborated and how did their input impact the
solution design? 
In 2016, Circle of Hope collaborated with South Middlesex Opportunity Council (SMOC) 
leadership to identity the most underserved family homeless programs in Framingham and
strategically began partnering with Clinton Street Family Shelter and Pearl Street Family Shelter
to meet clothing and hygiene needs for families in shelter. Our ongoing support is highly
impactful given the small size of these partner shelters and lack of adequate resources. 
Circle of Hope launched Get Set in 2019 to provide homeless college students at Framingham
State University with essentials so they could attend class in good health, focus on their studies, 
and have the same opportunities as other students to succeed in college. CiUcle of HoSe¶V
Executive Director regularly meets with university administration and periodically with the
Massachusetts Department of Higher Education leadership to monitor state supports for
homeless students and how Circle of Hope can serve unmet needs. Circle of Hope is the only
organization that fulfills these needs for homeless and impoverished Framingham State
University students who often have no family support and no other access to these critical items. 
CiUcle of HoSe¶V E[ecXWiYe DiUecWoU, OSeUaWionV ManageU, and DeYeloSmenW AVVociaWe have
been meeting with the Program Coordinator for the Resiliency for Life Program at Framingham
High School and the Assistant Director of Health and Wellness, Clinical Care Coordinator -
Regional Homeless Liaison for the school district to collaborate on a new pilot program that is
designed to meet the urgent need for coats, clothing and toiletries for homeless high school
students. Circle of Hope has scheduled an inaugural delivery of winter coats, gloves and hats for
student emergencies this month. With CDBG grant funding, Circle of Hope will be able to
launch the full pilot program with regular deliveries of clothing, outerwear, shoes and other
necessities, based on need, for vulnerable high school students experiencing homelessness. 
c. If you are applying for continued funding, how has your design/methodology
evolved in response to evaluation and feedback? 
Circle of Hope constantly works with our partners to ascertain immediate and ongoing needs and
to modify delivery contents and schedules to most effectively help the people we serve. Regular
communication allows us to bring targeted and needed donations in the appropriate sizes, avoid
waste, and prudently spend grant resources. 
³The communication with the staff at Circle of Hope is amazing; they always make sure they are
sending things for all family members, from expecting moms to dads.´
--Matilde Medina, Shelter Director at Pearl Street Family Shelter
8
Page 9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
d. How have you designed your solution to maximize impact to reach critical needs? 
CiUcle of HoSe¶V oYeUaUching goalV aUe Wo affiUm digniW\ and agency and give vulnerable
families, college students and high school students in Framingham the opportunity to protect
themselves from the dangers of illness and disease that come from being homeless. Clean
clothing, including clean socks and underwear, weather-appropriate outerwear and shoes, and
eVVenWial h\giene VXSSlieV aUe YiWal Wo a SeUVon¶V healWh and digniW\. CiUcle of HoSe idenWified
effective organizations that directly serve people experiencing homelessness and strategically
developed partnerships to meet the deepest needs and directly serve the most vulnerable families
and students in Framingham. 
e. How will you validate your design/methodologies/approach and track and report
impact? 
Circle of Hopes regularly communicates via phone, email and text with our partner shelter
directors, case managers and school partners regarding immediate and ongoing needs of the
families and youth we serve. Circle of Hope continually monitors and evaluates our programs
and deliveries for measurable impact. Circle of Hope monitors and tracks the number of families
and students we serve, the efficiencies of response time to emergency requests, and the
proportion of need we fulfill with deliveries. We strategically plan budget spending for each
grant by fiscal quarter and season and track all spending for each of the shelters and programs we
serve. We track the quantities and specific contents of every delivery. We evaluate outcomes
collaboratively with our partners, who report back to us how our donated items are distributed. 
We evaluate our progress by the number of requests we can successfully fulfill and by data
provided by our partners on improvements in the health and quality of life for the homeless
people we serve. 
Community Engagement: 
a. Describe how your organization has engaged and continues to engage those
intended to benefit from this work in the design, delivery and evaluation of
services to be provided? 
Circle of Hope respects the dignity of each homeless person we serve. We do not contact
families in shelter directly, rather we communicate with their case managers and shelter directors
to make sure families are able to give us feedback through them about our donations and identify
any unmet needs. Similarly, at Framingham State University, Circle of Hope communicates with
college administrators in the Office of the Dean of Students about the immediate needs of
students accessing services at the RAMS Resource Center. 
In Framingham High School, Circle of Hope will rely on the Program Coordinator for the
Resiliency for Life Program and the Assistant Director of Health and Wellness - Regional
Homeless Liaison to amplify the voices of the students we serve and help Circle of Hope
understand how we can best meet immediate and ongoing needs of homeless students. 
9
Page 10
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
b. Describe how your marketing and promotion plans are designed to reach the
targeted constituency 
Circle of hope does not market directly to our targeted constituency, but rather strategically
partners with very effective organizations directly serving people who are homeless that
efficiently deliver Circle of Hope donations directly to families and students based on immediate
need. In addition to our routine communications, we respond to emergencies as they arise. 
c. How do you intend to keep the community informed of your progress? 
Circle of Hope informs the community of our work through our website, monthly newsletters, 
emails to our donors and volunteers, press releases in local news outlets, and regular social
media posts. Circle of Hope participates in regular meetings with nonprofits across multiple
areas of service and mission to listen, learn, and share experiences in communities most
impacted by homelessness. Circle of Hope also participates in City of Framingham public
hearings to learn about other services being provided to homeless families and to coordinate
services where possible. In collaboration with the Framingham Council on Aging, Circle of
Hope distributes hand-knit hats, scarves, mittens and blankets to homeless families at Clinton
and Pearl shelters. 
5. Organizational Capacity: 
a. What experience, skills and leadership does your agency bring to this work? 
BaUbaUa WaWeUhoXVe, CiUcle of HoSe¶V E[ecXWiYe DiUecWoU and foXndeU, haV XndeUgUadXaWe and
advanced degrees in Biology and Public Health, and has had an extensive public health career as
an epidemiologist. She focuses her expertise on the development of safe operational procedures
and deploying volunteers and resources to the highest risk populations we serve, continually
tracking health and homelessness metrics as well as directing all monitoring and strategic
planning. 
Jod\ BaUneW, CiUcle of HoSe¶V OSeUaWions Manager, manages volunteers and coordinates all
shelter requests, order preparation and deliveries. Jody works collaboratively with shelter and
program managers to identify emergency and ongoing needs. 
Stephanie Matern, Administrative Assistant, communicates with shelter directors regarding
deliveries, families in shelter, and income verification forms. Stephanie also tracks all receipts
for grant spending and itemizes purchases for grant reporting. 
Christine Ruddy, Development Associate, prepares all written grant applications and written
reports. Christine also serves as the point of contact for routine CDBG communication. 
10
Page 11
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
b. What other organizations will you be collaborating with to achieve maximum
results (please include letters of collaboration)?
Circle of Hope collaborates and coordinates with SMOC, Clinton House Family Shelter, Pearl
Street Family Shelter, and Framingham State University RAMS Resource Center, and
Framingham Public School Resiliency for Life Program and the Office of Health and Wellness
to meet immediate needs of families in shelter and students in need of clothing, hygiene supplies
and outerwear for health and safety. 
6. Equity: 
a. How will you ensure equitable access and success for underserved populations? 
ETXiW\ and digniW\ aUe aW Whe heaUW of CiUcle of HoSe¶V miVVion. All of the clients Circle of Hope
serves are underserved populations. We meet the deepest needs of clients who need our help in
Framingham. One hundred percent of those benefiting are low income. We rely on the shelter
directors, case managers and direct service providers to ensure the equitable distribution of
CiUcle of HoSe¶V donaWionV. 
b. What barriers to access exist in your community and how will you address them? 
Circle of Hope collaborates closely with our shelter, university and public school partners to
ensure our donations are made accessible based on deepest need. We strategically partner with
organizations that serve underserved families and students in a trusted and respectful
relationship. 
c. How will you ensure marginalized voices in your community are amplified and
consulted in the design, delivery, and evaluation of your project/program? 
Circle of Hope respects the dignity and agency of the homeless people we serve. We customize
the contents of each delivery by seeking input from the shelter directors, case managers and
student service administrators to ensure we are bringing culturally sensitive and appropriate
donations with every delivery. While protecting confidentiality, we seek regular feedback from
our partners. When we learned from our partners at Framingham State University that most
students accessing Circle of Hope toiletries in the food pantry on campus were requesting hair
products for natural and textured hair, we increased the quantity of those products in our
deliYeUieV and VoXghW addiWional fXnding Wo UeVSecW VWXdenWV¶ SeUVonal digniW\. We will continue
to seek input and adjust our service to best meet the needs of the homeless families and students
we serve. 
11
Page 12
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
d. Describe efforts underway within your organization to promote diversity, equity and
inclusion 
CiUcle of HoSe¶V BoaUd cUeaWed an AdYiVoU\ CoXncil in 2016 Wo inclXde leadeUVhiS UeSUeVenWaWion
from the shelters and programs we serve. The Board continues to seek and elevate the voices and
experiences of individuals who are directly impacted by health inequities, systemic racism, and
gender identity discrimination to inform the way we serve the unique needs of BIPOC, LGBTQ+ 
and other people whose homelessness is caused by social injustices. When someone asks for help
or is in crisis, Circle of Hope strives to answer that call with cultural competency and respect. In
2018 the Board committed to increasing diverse identities among members. The Board strategic
planning in progress includes deepening ongoing DEI training for members, staff, and
volunteers. 
7. Sustainability: 
a. Does this work depend entirely on CDBG funds? Please describe your plans for this
work if full funding is not granted. 
Circle of Hope's partnerships with Pearl Street Family Shelter and Clinton House Family
Shelter are currently funded through June 2022 by the City of Framingham CDBG, Middlesex
Savings Charitable Foundation, and MetroWest Health Foundation. We will pursue another
grant from the Basic Human Needs Program at Middlesex Savings Charitable Foundation in
2022. We have a pending grant request for partial support of our Get Set Program at
Framingham State University with Foundation for MetroWest Youth in Philanthropy. We
respectfully request a $15,000 Community Development Block Grant to help extend our
Framingham shelter and university partnerships through FY2023 and to help launch our pilot
program supporting Framingham Public High School students who are experiencing
homelessness. 
If full funding is not granted, Circle of Hope will prioritize pregnant women, newborns, 
infants, and toddlers in the family shelters. We will continue our current partnership at
Framingham State University and deliver items as our budget allows. However, without
funding we will not be able to launch a new partnership to serve homeless students at
Framingham High School at this time, as we do not have the resources to purchase and
distribute new winter coats, boots, and clothing. 
b. How do you plan to sustain this work once CDBG support ends, keeping in mind
that sustainability means more than replacing funding? 
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Circle of Hope provided gently used, in-kind donations to
meet many of the clothing and outerwear needs for homeless people we serve in Framingham. 
Since the emergence of COVID-19, our shelter and school partners are urgently requesting new
items to protect homeless people at high risk of COVID-19. We will continue to use grant funds
12
Page 13
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
to purchase new coats and clothing to protect health. When safe, we will welcome back in-kind
donations of gently used clothing and the full corps of our 150 volunteers who normally sort, 
package, and deliver our donations. 
8. Additional Proposal Narrative:
What else would you like us to know about your proposed project? 
In Framingham, many families who are suddenly homeless have no other supports for clothing
and basic necessities. When a mother is discharged from the hospital to a shelter with her
newborn, Circle of Hope immediately delivers a porta-crib and a Welcome Baby Bag containing
baby blankets, changing pads, baby bottles, wipes, onesies, baby wash, ointment, and a
thoughtful handwritten note of welcome and support. Our donations are critically important to
keep homeless newborns safe, warm, clean and healthy. Circle of Hope also keeps pace with
rapidly growing toddlers and children in shelters, bringing appropriately sized clothing and
winter coats on regular basis. Many families moving into Framingham come from warmer
climates. We are proud to serve these families, meet vital needs, and help share hope. 
The disparities in access to basic necessities between homeless students and safely-housed
students grew exponentially during the pandemic. Homeless students were hit especially hard
when high schools, colleges and universities shut down, cutting them off from vital support
services and on-campus employment. Approximately 25% of homeless college students aged out
of foster care and have no family to care for them. Many students are too scared or ashamed to
admiW Whe\¶Ye been VleeSing in caUV and libUaUieV oU ³coXch VXUfing.´ Our goal with seeking
additional funding this year to support homeless students at Framingham State University and
Framingham High School is to respect and enhance VWXdenWV¶ personal dignity and help the youth
we serve attend school, graduate, seek employment or higher education, and achieve their full
potential. 
13
Page 14
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
C. Logic Model 
Use this template to develop and submit a logic model for your proposed project. If you need
help in developing a logic model for your grant proposal, please reach out to us at
communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov or 508-532-5457 or the next page has a sample
one. 
INPUTS ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS 
SHORT-TERM
OUTCOMES 
LONG-TERM- 
OUTCOMES 
Resources to be used
to undertake this
project or program. 
Specific events, Artifacts and
actions, partnerships, evidence of the
and processes. activities. 
Measurable changes
that will occur in the
next year. 
Long-term intended
effects. 
Funding to purchase  Make regularly
clothing, shoes, winter
coats, winter boots, 
hygiene supplies, 
sheets, blankets, 
towels, essentials for 
Communicate directly
with shelter directors, 
university partners, and
public school partners 
scheduled
monthly
deliveries of
items based on
specific current
newborns  needs 
Family members in  Families who receive
shelters will be able to support while in stable
attend school, work, shelter housing may be
medical appointments able to move to
in good health and transitional or permanent
dignity  housing
Staffing to conduct
activities 
Purchase essential
supplies for delivery
and monitor supply
chain complexities 
Keep pace with
emergency
requests and
make emergency
deliveries within
24-48 hours 
College students will
be able to attend class
in good health and
dignity 
College students who
receive support now may
be able to stay in school, 
graduate, gain
employment and break
the cycle of chronic
homelessness
Support from  Prepare orders, 
management to  schedule deliveries, 
monitor public health deploy volunteer
data, evaluate drivers to make
partnerships for  contactless deliveries, 
effective collaboration, and conduct post-
and track impact delivery follow-up 
High school students Students who are at risk
will be able to attend of not graduating may
class, appropriately stay in school with
dressed, with  support and stay on track
confidence and dignity to graduate high school
14
Page 15
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
D. PROJECT COSTS 
1. Detailed Project Budget: 
Budget Item (A) 
i.e. Personnel, Office
Supplies, etc. 
Support for Homeless
Families at Clinton
and Pearl SheltersͶ
salaries and supplies
for donation
Support for Homeless
Students at
Framingham State
UniversityͶsalaries
and supplies for
donation
Support for Homeless
Students at
Framingham High
SchoolͶsalaries and
supplies for donation 
CDBG Funds (B) 
$5,000
$5,000
$5,000 
Other Sources (C)  Total (B + C) 
$20,300  $25,300
$16,000  $21,000
$0  $5,000
Total Project Cost $15,000  $36,300  $51,300
15
Page 16
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
Ϯ͘ AŶƚŝcŝƉaƚĞĚ PƌŽũĞcƚ FƵŶĚŝŶŐ SŽƵƌcĞƐ ;IŶcůƵĚĞ aůů ĨƵŶĚŝŶŐ ƐŽƵƌcĞƐ ĨŽƌ ǁŚŝcŚ ǇŽƵ͛ve applied
a) Other sources (Please Specify
which are projected and which are
committed):
CDBG 
Middlesex Savings Charitable
Foundation
Private Individual Donor
MetroWest Health Foundation
Foundation for MetroWest Youth in
Philanthropy 
Projected
$15,000
$20,000
$5,000 
Committed Amount 
$4,000 
$1,000 
$300 
b) Donations for project use 
c) In kind Donations (please specify) $3,000
Clothing, Coats, Toiletries
d) Total CDBG Amount 
$3,000 
*Total Project Funding: $43,000  $8,300  $51,300
*Project costs in Table 2 must match Table 1 Total Project Costs. 
E. DOCUMENTED CAPABILITY 
Organizations must submit copies of their most recently completed audits or audited and
certified financial statements. 
If you are applying as a new entity or organization and do not have existing evaluations or
reports, please provide letters of support. 
Please note, if there are any irregularities identified in this documentation, you may be
contacted by a member of the staff for further clarification. 
16
Page 17
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023
CIRCE OF HOPE, INC. 
FAILURE TO INCLUDE THIS INFORMATION MAY RENDER THIS APPLICATION INCOMPLETE AND
INELIGIBLE FOR FUNDING. 
F. SIGNATURE AND CERTIFICATION STATEMENT 
On behalf of this organization, I affirm that all activities to be supported with these funds shall
comply with the provisions of applicable federal and state statutes, regulations, directives, 
guidelines, ordinances, and orders which encourage the inclusion and participation of all
segments of the community and prohibit discrimination against individuals based on race, 
color, national origin, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or age. Under penalties of perjury, I
affirm that the information contained in this proposal is complete and accurate. I represent that
the organization has the capacity and resources to carry out the activities and achieve the
outcomes cited in this proposal. 
Barbara Waterhouse
Name 
Signature 
Executive Director 
Title (type or print) 
12/09/2021
Date 
17
Page 18
Page 19
Page 20
Page 21
From: Robin Kurkomelis <rkurkomelis@framingham.edu> 
Subject: RE: COH December delivery to FSU 
Date: December 9, 2021 at 12:58:43 PM EST 
To: "jody@circleofhopeonline.org" <jody@circleofhopeonline.org> 
Cc: 'Christine Ruddy' <christine@circleofhopeonline.org> 
Thank you to Circle of Hope for the support that they have given to the FSU Community. As a result of
their donations, members of our community are warmer because they have the correct clothing and
bedding for the winter months, and feeling better about themselves because they have access to
toiletries and towels to help take care of themselves, and their families. The caliber of the employees at
COH is truly extraordinary and we feel proud to be part of their outreach. Thank you COH for all that
you do! 
Best, 
Robin 
Robin Hamilton KurKomelis, MHR 
Framingham State University 
Dean of Students Office 
McCarthy Center, Fifth Floor, Room 504 
100 State Street, Framingham, MA 01701-9101 
(508) 626-4596 
This email and any files transmitted with it are confidential and intended solely for the use of the
individual(s) to whom they are addressed. If you are not the intended recipient, you are notified that
disclosing, copying, distributing, or taking any action in reliance on the contents of this information is
strictly prohibited. If you have received this email in error, please notify the sender immediately and
delete this email from your system. 
Page 22
Page 23
Page 24
Page 25
Page 26
Page 27
Page 28
Page 29
Page 30
Page 31
Page 32
Page 33
Page 34
