DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Overview ............................................................................................................................................................... 1
Application ............................................................................................................................................................ 3
Appendix A: Evaluation Criteria ........................................................................................................................... 11
Appendix B: Eligible and Ineligible Activities ....................................................................................................... 12
Appendix C: Eligible Census Tracts Map ............................................................................................................. 21
Appendix D: Sample Logic Model............................................................................................................................... 22
OVERVIEW
The City of Framingham’s Community Development Program invites local nonprofit organizations or City
departments to submit Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program proposals for fiscal year 2023
starting on July 1, 2022, and ending on June 30, 2023. CDBG funds are allocated to the city by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to impact a wide range of services and programs, 
principally for low- and moderate-income residents. 
The City of Framingham receives an average of $525,000 CDBG funding annually. Final figures will not be known
until after the federal budget is passed and HUD announces allocation amount. The chart below lists the
approximate amount awarded to various projects. 
Project  Approximate Amount Notes
Administration  $105,000 City can spend 20% on administration
Public Services (Non-Profits)  $77,000 City can spend up to 15% on public services
Housing Rehab, code enforcement, 
economic development projects, 
public facilities 
$343,000 CD Committee and mayor final decision on how
these funds are distributed
All organizations requesting funding from the Framingham Community Development Block Grant Program must
email complete applications by December 10, 2021, at 5:00 pm to
 communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov. CD staff will email applicants for more information for
clarification if needed after the deadline. CD staff will review applications for compliance with minimum
requirements. 
Eligibility criteria include, but are not limited to: 
● Compliance with federal eligibility standards
● Overall benefit to low- and moderate-income persons
● How such benefits will be measured/reported
● Project goals
● Need for the proposed activity
● How the proposed project is unique, complementing and not duplicating existing services.
1
Page 2
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
● The experience and capability of applicants to provide proposed activities
● Documentation of support for the project
● Availability of matching funds for the activity will also be considered.
Eligible projects will be forwarded to the committee to make funding recommendations for final approval by the
Mayor. Applicants can contact the CD office by email or call (508) 532-5457 by December 3rd to ask questions
about the application. 
The Community Development Program and the City reserve the right to reject any proposals that are incomplete
and unresponsive to the information requested in the proposal package. The Community Development Program
can recommend or reject any proposal, in whole or in part, determined not to be in its interest. Note that CDBG
funds must be used conforming to applicable city, state and federal laws that include procurement policies, equal
employment opportunity/Section 3 requirements, anti-kickback rules, Davis-Bacon Act (prevailing wages for
construction projects in excess of $2,000 or housing of eight units or more), bonding and insurance regulations, 
and environmental requirements. 
Timeline: 
October 22th: Application Posted 
December 10: Applications Due by 5pm to [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov
December 17: Applications sent to community development committee for review
Week of January 25, 2022: Committee will schedule two public hearings on Public Services and non-public
services 
February 1, 2022 Committee makes recommendations 
2
Page 3
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
A. APPLICATION 
I. Project Eligibility
Project meets at least ONE of the HUD National Objectives listed below (please check all applicable; 
definitions are included as attachments):
❑ Benefits low/moderate income individuals/households 
❑ Addresses the prevention or elimination of slums or blight 
❑ Meets an urgent community need threatening health and welfare
Check all statements that describe HOW this project or activity meets at least one of the National
Objectives listed above: 
❑ Area Benefit Activities: The proposed project or activity meets the needs of low/moderate
income persons residing in an area where at least 51% of those residents have incomes within
80% of the Area Median Income. The benefits of this activity are available to all persons
regardless of income. Examples may include street improvements, water/sewer lines, 
neighborhood facilities, and façade improvements in neighborhood commercial districts. 
❑ Limited Clientele Activities: The proposed project benefits a specific group of people (rather 
than all residents in a particular area), where 51% of the people are documented or presumed
to be low/moderate income persons. Examples may include construction of a senior center, 
public services for the homeless, meals on wheels for the elderly, construction of a job training
facility for the handicapped. 
❑ Housing Activities: The proposed project creates or improves permanent residential units that 
will be occupied by low/moderate income persons upon completion. Housing can be either
owner occupied or rental one family or multi-family units. Examples may include property
acquisition for permanent housing, permanent housing rehabilitation, and conversion of non-
residential units into permanent housing. 
❑ Job Creation or Retention: The proposed project creates or retains permanent jobs. At least 51% 
of those jobs must be available to low- and moderate-income persons. Examples may include
loans to pay for the expansion of a factory, assistance to a business which has publicly announced
its intention to close resulting in loss of employment for low/moderate income persons. 
❑ Slum or Blighted Area: The proposed project is located in a slum/blighted area and the
anticipated results of the project addresses one or more of the conditions that qualify in the
area. 
❑ Spot Blight: The proposed project will eliminate specific conditions of blight or physical decay
outside of a blighted area. Activities are limited to demolition/clearance, historic preservation, 
and rehabilitation of buildings (to the extent necessary to eliminate public health and safety
issues).
II. Project Type (for clarification on the categories, please see Appendix B)
❑ Housing Rehabilitation
❑ Social/Public Service
❑ Infrastructure/Public Facility Improvements
3
Page 4
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
❑ Economic Development
❑ Slum/Blight Eradication
❑ Other
III. GENERAL PROJECT INFORMATION
1.  Project Name: 
Downtown Framingham, Inc Main Streets Program
2.  Project Dates: *: 
July 1, 2022 - June 30, 2023
*CDBG-funded elements of proposed projects supported in Fiscal 2023 should end no later than June
30, 2023. Programs that cannot be implemented within 12 months may lose awarded CDBG funds. 
3.  CDBG Funds Requested: 
70000.00
4. 
Name of Sponsoring
Organization or Individual 
Address  DUNS Number
Downtown Framingham, Inc. 12 Irving St. Suite 205 Framingham MA 01702079802342
5.  Person responsible for coordinating and administering this project (if known)
Name: Anthony Lucivero
Address: 
12 Irving St. Suite 205 Framingham MA 01702
Phone: 
508-656-0168
Email: anthony@downtownframinghaminc.org
6.  Location of project or area served (Include Census Tract(s) and Block Group(s) served by proposed
project, if known) (please see map in Appendix D for eligible census tracts:
Tract  Percent Low/ Mod  Check all Tracts
that Apply 
383102.01
383300.01
383200.03
383102.02 
86.5% 
85.0% 
81.2% 
80.4% 
x
x
x
x
4
Page 5
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
383101.01
383501.02
383200.01
383600.02
383101.02
383400.03
383400.02
383700.03
383400.01 
79.5% 
79.5% 
75.2% 
74.1% 
72.4% 
71.4% 
58.1% 
55.1% 
52.6% 
x
x
x
x
x
7. Compliance Statement
For public facility and infrastructure projects requiring more than $2,000 in CDBG funds, describe how
compliance with Davis/Bacon federal wage, affirmative action and Section 3 requirements will be
maintained and documented: 
5
Page 6
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
B. Project Narrative
Please provide a narrative description of your proposed project or program by answering the
following questions. We recommend that you include the question as part of your response. 
Responses must not exceed 10 pages. 
1. Need and Outcomes:
a. Why are you seeking to undertake this work (need)?
b. Why do you believe your organization is best positioned to address this need?
c. How will you measure success?
d. What do you expect the status of this project to be at the end of FY2023? (Ex: iterative revision,
continuation, end)
e. Please provide backup data documenting need
2. Impact:
a. Who benefits from this work and how?
b. How many will be served?
c. If this is a request for continued funding, please document the progress of your current project
or program, including the number served and the outcomes achieved thus far.
3. Solution Design:
a. What is the evidence base to support this project’s design and outcomes?
b. With whom have you consulted/collaborated and how did their input impact the solution design?
c. If you are applying for continued funding, how has your design/methodology evolved in response
to evaluation and feedback?
d. How have you designed your solution to maximize impact to reach critical needs?
e. How will you validate your design/methodologies/approach and track and report impact?
4. Community Engagement:
a. Describe how your organization has engaged and continues to engage those intended to benefit
from this work in the design, delivery and evaluation of services to be provided?
b. Describe how your marketing and promotion plans are designed to reach the targeted
constituency
c. How do you intend to keep the community informed of your progress?
6
Page 7
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
5. Organizational Capacity:
a. What experience, skills and leadership does your agency bring to this work?
b. What other organizations will you be collaborating with to achieve maximum results (please
include letters of collaboration)?
6. Equity:
a. How will you ensure equitable access and success for underserved populations?
b. What barriers to access exist in your community and how will you address them?
c. How will you ensure marginalized voices in your community are amplified and consulted in the
design, delivery, and evaluation of your project/program?
d. Describe efforts underway within your organization to promote diversity, equity and inclusion
7. Sustainability:
a. Does this work depend entirely on CDBG funds? Please describe your plans for this work if full
funding is not granted.
b. How do you plan to sustain this work once CDBG support ends, keeping in mind that
sustainability means more than replacing funding?
c. Additional Proposal Narrative:
What else would you like us to know about your proposed project?
7
Page 8
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
C. Logic Model
Use this template to develop and submit a logic model for your proposed project. If you need help in developing a logic model
for your grant proposal, please reach out to us at [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov or 508-532-5457 or the next page
has a sample one. 
INPUTS
Resources to be used to
undertake this project or
program. 
ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS SHORT-TERM
OUTCOMES 
LONG-TERM-
OUTCOMES
Specific events, actions, 
partnerships, and processes. 
Artifacts and evidence of the Measurable changes that will
activities.  occur in the next year. 
Long-term intended effects. 
8
Page 9
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
D. PROJECT COSTS 
1. Detailed Project Budget:
Budget Item (A)  CDBG Funds (B) 
i.e. Personnel, Office
Supplies, etc. 
Other Sources (C)  Total (B + C) 
Executive Director Salary 55000
Business Coordinator Salary 15000
Rent, Marketing, office 
$20,000.00
$5,000.00
$5,000.00 
$75,000.00
$20,000.00
$5,000.00
Total Project Cost 
$70,000.00 $25, 00.00  30,000.00 $95,000.00 $100,000.00 
2. Anticipated Project Funding Sources (Include all funding sources for which you’ve applied
CDBG  Projected Committed Amount
a) Other sources (Please Specify which
are projected and which arecommitted):
b) Donations for project use
c) In kind Donations (please specify)
d) Total CDBG Amount  $70,000.00  $70,000.00 
FY23 MA State Budget Line Item $20,000.00  $20,000.00 
FY23 Event Fundraising $5,000.00  $5,000.00 
FY23 Individual & Business Contributions $5,000.00 
*Total Project Funding: 
$5,000.00 
$100,000.00 
*Project costs in Table 2 must match Table 1 Total Project Costs.
9
Page 10
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
E. DOCUMENTED CAPABILITY 
Organizations must submit copies of their most recently completed audits or audited and certified
financial statements. 
If you are applying as a new entity or organization and do not have existing evaluations or reports, 
please provide letters of support. 
Please note, if there are any irregularities identified in this documentation, you may be contacted by
a member of the staff for further clarification. 
FAILURE TO INCLUDE THIS INFORMATION MAY RENDER THIS APPLICATION INCOMPLETE AND
INELIGIBLE FOR FUNDING. 
F. SIGNATURE AND CERTIFICATION STATEMENT 
On behalf of this organization, I affirm that all activities to be supported with these funds shall comply
with the provisions of applicable federal and state statutes, regulations, directives, guidelines, 
ordinances, and orders which encourage the inclusion and participation of all segments of the community
and prohibit discrimination against individuals based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, 
disability, familial status, or age. Under penalties of perjury, I affirm that the information contained in this
proposal is complete and accurate. I represent that the organization has the capacity and resources to
carry out the activities and achieve the outcomes cited in this proposal. 
Anthony Lucivero
Name
Signature 
Executive Director
Title (type or print) 
12/9/2021
Date 
10 
Page 11
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
Appendix A
Evaluation Criteria
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds are awarded through a competitive proposal
evaluation process. The evaluation considers all aspects of the proposal as described in the RFP and
proposal application. 
Proposals are checked first by the City’s Planning and Community Division staff for completeness of
application, content and eligibility under CDBG guidelines. Eligible applicants will have proposals
reviewed and ranked by members of the Community Development Committee using the City of
Framingham’s Application Evaluation Worksheet. If a question arises during its review, the committee
reserves the right to contact the applicant for clarification. Based on the committee’s review and
ranking of proposals, recommendations will be presented to the Mayor’s Office, which will render the
final decision on grant awards. Ultimately, the City Council votes to accept or reject the annual
aggregate federal funds before the Annual Action Plan is submitted and the funds dispersed. 
The Division of Planning and Community Development and the Community Development Committee
will have sole discretion on the approval of funds. Committee has discretion to partially or fully fund a
proposal. Please note that a well-written application is no guarantee of funding since this is a highly
competitive process. Applicants should give adequate attention to the completeness, conciseness, and
responsiveness of the information provided in response to the questions asked within the application. 
The RFP will be the only time for organizations to present proposals since no future meetings or
hearings are scheduled between the submission date and allocation date. Please contact the
Community Development Department at communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov if you have any
questions concerning the Evaluation Worksheet or the application. 
11 
Page 12
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
APPENDIX B
SUMMARY OF ELIGIBLE AND INELIGIBLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT ACTIVITIES 
This is a summary of the activities that are eligible and ineligible for assistance under the Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program pursuant to governing regulations of the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 24, Part 570, Sections 570.200 – 570.207. This summary is based upon the Final Rules
published in March 1996 and is meant to be a guide. Please check with CD staff or the HUD website for
any changes that may have occurred since 1996. 
General Policies – 570.200 
The primary objective of the CDBG Program is the development of viable communities, by providing
decent housing and sustainable living environment, and expanding economic opportunities, principally
for persons of low and moderate-income. Funds must be used so as to give maximum feasible priority to
activities that will carry out one of the three broad national objectives of: benefit to low and moderate-
income families, aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or blight, or activities that meet an urgent
community need due to existing conditions that pose a serious and immediate threat to the health or
welfare of the community where other financial resources are not available to meet such needs. At least
70% of the total CDBG funds must be used for activities that benefit low and moderate-income persons; 
and at least 51% of the beneficiaries of the individual activities must be low to moderate-income persons. 
Basic Eligible Activities – 570.201 
CDBG funds may be used for the following activities: 
(a)  Acquisition. Acquisition in whole or in part by purchase, long-term lease, donation, or otherwise, 
of real property (including air rights, water rights, rights-of-way, easements, and other interests
therein) for any public purpose. 
(b)  Disposition. Disposition, through sale, lease, donation, or otherwise, of any real property acquired
with CDBG funds or its retention for public purposes, including reasonable costs of temporarily
managing such properties. 
(c)  Public facilities and improvements. Acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
installation of public facilities and improvements, except buildings for the general conduct of
government. Activities may include: 
•  Removal of material and architectural barriers that restrict the mobility and accessibility of
elderly or severely disabled persons to public facilities and improvements; 
•  Design features and improvements that promote energy: 
•  Architectural design features, and similar treatments intended to enhance the aesthetic 
quality of facilities and improvements receiving CDBG assistance: 
•  Eligible facilities include shelters for the homeless; convalescent homes; hospitals, nursing
homes; battered spouse shelters; halfway houses for run-away children, drug offenders or
12 
Page 13
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
parolees; group homes for intellectually challenged persons and temporary housing for
disaster victims: 
(d)  Clearance activities. Clearance, demolition, and removal of buildings and improvements, 
including movement of structures to other sites. Demolition of HUD-assisted or HUD-owned
housing units may be undertaken only with the prior approval of HUD. 
(e)  Public services. Provision of public services (including labor, supplies, and materials) including but
not limited to those concerned with employment, crime prevention, child care, health, drug
abuse, education, fair housing counseling, energy conservation, homebuyer down payment
assistance, or recreational needs. To be eligible for CDBG assistance, a public service must meet
each of the following criteria: 
•  A new service or a quantifiable increase in the level of an existing service above that which
has been provided with State and Local funds in the previous 12 calendar months; and
•  The amount of CDBG funds obligated for public services shall not exceed 15 percent of the
annual grant, and 15 percent of program income received during the immediately preceding
program year. 
(f)  Interim assistance. Activities may be undertaken on an interim basis in areas exhibiting
objectively determinable signs of physical deterioration where immediate action is needed and
where permanent improvements will be carried out as soon as practicable in order to alleviate
emergency conditions threatening the public health and safety in areas where an emergency
condition exists and requires immediate resolution. 
(g)  Payment of non-Federal share. Payment of the non-Federal share required in connection with a
Federal grant-in-aid program undertaken as part of CDBG activities. 
(h)  Urban renewal completion. Payment of the cost of completing an urban renewal project funded
under title I of the Housing Act of 1949 as amended. 
(i)  Relocation. Relocation payments and other assistance for permanently and temporarily relocated
individuals, families, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farm operations. 
(j)  Loss of rental income.  Payments to housing owners for losses of rental income incurred in
holding, for temporary periods, housing units to be used for the relocation of individuals and
families displaced by program activities assisted under this part.
(k)  Housing services. Housing services such as tenant counseling in connection with tenant-based
rental assistance and affordable housing projects, energy auditing, preparation of work
specifications, loan processing, inspections, tenant selection, management of tenant-based rental
assistance, and other services related to assisting owners, tenants, contractors, and other entities
participating or seeking to participate in housing activities assisted under title II of the Cranston-
Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act. 
(l)  Privately owned utilities. CDBG funds may be used to acquire, construct, reconstruct, 
rehabilitate, or install the distribution lines and facilities of privately-owned utilities, including the
placing underground of new or existing distribution facilities and lines. 
13 
Page 14
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
(m) Construction of housing. CDBG funds may be used for the construction of housing assisted under
section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. 
(n)  Homeownership assistance. CDBG funds may be used to provide direct homeownership
assistance to low- or moderate-income households in accordance with section 105(a) of the Act. 
(o)  Facilitate economic development. CDBG funds may facilitate economic development by: 
•  Providing credit, including, but not limited to, grants, loans, loan guarantees, and other forms of
financial support, for the establishment, stabilization, and expansion of micro enterprises; 
•  Providing technical assistance, advice, and business support services to owners of micro
enterprises and persons developing micro enterprises; and
•  Providing general support, including, but not limited to, peer support programs, counseling, 
childcare, transportation, and other similar services, to owners of micro enterprises and persons
developing micro enterprises. 
(p)  Technical assistance. Provision of technical assistance to public or nonprofit entities to increase
the capacity of such entities to carry out eligible neighborhood revitalization or economic
development activities. 
(q)  Assistance to institutions of higher education. Provision of assistance to institutions of higher
education if such institution has demonstrated a capacity to carry out eligible activities. 
Eligible rehabilitation and preservation activities - 570.202 
(a)  Types of buildings and improvements eligible for rehabilitation assistance. CDBG funds may be
used to finance the rehabilitation of: 
•  Privately owned buildings and improvements for residential purposes; improvements to a
single-family residential property which is also used as a place of business, which are
required in order to operate the business, need not be considered to be rehabilitation of
a commercial or industrial building, if the improvements also provide general benefit to
the residential occupants of the building; 
•  Low-income public housing and other publicly owned residential buildings and
improvements; 
•  Publicly or privately owned commercial or industrial buildings, except that the
rehabilitation of such buildings owned by a private for-profit business is limited to
improvements to the exterior of the building and the correction of code violations; 
•  Nonprofit-owned nonresidential buildings and improvements
•  Manufactured housing when such housing that is part of the community's permanent
housing stock. 
14 
Page 15
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
(b)  Types of assistance. CDBG funds may be used to finance the following types of activities, and
related costs: 
▪  Assistance to private individuals and entities, including profit making and nonprofit
organizations, to acquire for the purpose of rehabilitation, and to rehabilitate properties, 
for use or resale for residential purposes; 
•  Labor, materials, and other costs of rehabilitation of properties, including repair directed
toward an accumulation of deferred maintenance, replacement of principal fixtures and
components of existing structures, installation of security devices, including smoke
detectors and deadbolt locks, and renovation through alterations, additions to, or
enhancement of existing structures, which may be undertaken singly, or in combination; 
•  Loans for refinancing existing indebtedness secured by a property being rehabilitated; 
•  Improvements to increase the efficient use of energy in structures through such means as
installation of storm windows and doors, siding, wall and attic insulation, and conversion, 
modification, or replacement of heating and cooling equipment, including the use of solar
energy equipment; 
•  Improvements to increase the efficient use of water through such means as water savings
faucets and shower heads and repair of water leaks; 
•  Connection of residential structures to water distribution lines or local sewer collection
lines; 
•  For rehabilitation carried out with CDBG funds, costs of: Initial homeowner warranty
premiums; Hazard insurance premiums, except where assistance is provided in the form
of a grant; and Flood insurance premiums for properties covered by the Flood Disaster
Protection Act of 1973; and Procedures concerning inspection and testing for and
abatement of lead-based paint. 
•  Costs of acquiring tools to be lent to owners, tenants, and others who will use such tools
to carry out rehabilitation; 
•  Rehabilitation services, such as rehabilitation counseling, energy auditing, preparation of
work specifications, loan processing, inspections, and other services related to assisting
owners, tenants, contractors, and other entities, participating or seeking to participate in
rehabilitation activities
•  Assistance for the rehabilitation of housing under section 17 of the United States Housing
Act of 1937; 
•  Improvements designed to remove material and architectural barriers that restrict the
mobility and accessibility of elderly or severely disabled persons to buildings and
improvements eligible for assistance under paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Costs incurred for inspection for code violations and enforcement of codes
(e.g., salaries and related expenses of code enforcement inspectors and legal proceedings, but
not including the cost of correcting the violations) in deteriorating or deteriorated areas when
15 
Page 16
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
such enforcement together with public or private improvements, rehabilitation, or services to be
provided may be expected to arrest the decline of the area. 
(d)  Historic preservation.  CDBG funds may be used for the rehabilitation, preservation or
restoration of historic properties, whether publicly or privately owned. Historic properties are
those sites or structures that are either listed in or eligible to be listed in the National Register of
Historic Places, listed in a State or local inventory of historic places, or designated as a State or
local landmark or historic district by appropriate law or ordinance. Historic preservation, 
however, is not authorized for buildings for the general conduct of government. 
(e)  Renovation of closed buildings. CDBG funds may be used to renovate closed buildings, such as
closed school buildings, for use as an eligible public facility or to rehabilitate such buildings for
housing. 
(f)  Lead-based paint activities. Lead-based paint activities as set forth in part 35 of this title. 
Special economic development activities - 570.203 
A recipient may use CDBG funds for special economic development activities as part of an economic
development project. The recipient must ensure that the appropriate level of public benefit will be
derived before obligating funds. Special activities authorized under this section do not include assistance
for the construction of new housing. Special economic development activities include: 
(a) The acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or installation of commercial or
industrial buildings, structures, and other real property equipment and improvements, including
railroad spurs or similar extensions. 
(b)  The provision of assistance to a private for-profit business, including, but not limited to, grants, 
loans, loan guarantees, interest supplements, technical assistance, and other forms of support, 
for any activity where the assistance is appropriate to carry out an economic development
project. 
(c)  Economic development services include, but are not limited to, outreach efforts to market
available forms of assistance; screening of applicants; reviewing and underwriting applications
for assistance; preparation of all necessary agreements; management of assisted activities; and
the screening, referral, and placement of applicants for employment opportunities generated by
CDBG-eligible economic development activities, including the costs of providing necessary
training for persons filling those positions. 
Special activities by Community-Based Development Organizations (CBDOs). – 570.204 
(a) Eligible activities. CDBG funds may be used by CBDO to carry out a neighborhood revitalization, 
community economic development, or energy conservation project, including: 
▪  Activities listed as eligible; and 
16 
Page 17
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
▪  Activities not otherwise listed as eligible – excluding buildings for the general conduct of
government business, general government expenses, and political activities. 
(b) Activities must: 
•  Meet the public service requirements, although services specifically designed to increase
economic opportunities through job training and placement and other employment support
services; 
•  Meet the requirements of the guidelines for evaluating and selecting economic development
project under Section 570.209; and 
•  Must not result in the recipient exceeding the 20% limit on planning and administrative costs. 
(c) Eligible Entities are: 
•  Non-profit or for-profit organizations engaged in community development activities primarily
within an identified geographic area and whose primary purpose is the improvement physical, 
economic and social environment; 
•  Section 301 (d) Small Business Investment Companies; including those which are profit making; 
State or local Development Companies; or Community Housing Development Organizations
(CHDOs);
•  Organization similar in purpose, function and scope. 
Eligible planning, urban environmental design and policy-planning management-capacity building
activities – 570.205 
a) Planning activities which consist of all costs of gathering data, studies, analysis, and preparation of
plans and the identification of actions that will implement such plans, including, but not limited to: 
▪  Comprehensive plans; 
▪  Community development plans; 
▪  Functional plans, in areas such as: 
▪  Housing, including the development of a consolidated plan; 
▪  Land use and urban environmental design; 
▪  Economic development; 
▪  Open space and recreation; 
▪  Energy use and conservation; 
▪  Floodplain and wetlands management in accordance with the requirements of Executive Orders
11988 and 11990; 
▪  Transportation; 
▪  Utilities; and Historic preservation. 
▪  Other plans and studies such as: 
▪  Small area and neighborhood plans; 
▪  Capital improvements programs; 
17 
Page 18
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
▪  Reasonable costs of general environmental, urban environmental design and historic
preservation studies. 
▪  Strategies and action programs to implement plans, including the development of codes, 
ordinances and regulations; 
▪  Support of clearinghouse functions, such as those specified in Executive Order 12372; and 
▪  Analysis of impediments to fair housing choice. 
•  Policy planning/management/capacity building activities which will enable the recipient to
determine its needs; 
▪  Set long-term goals and short-term objectives, including those related to urban environmental
design; 
▪  Devise programs and activities to meet these goals and objectives; 
▪  Evaluate the progress of such programs and activities in accomplishing these goals and
objectives; and 
▪  Carry out management, coordination and monitoring of activities necessary for effective
planning implementation, but excluding the costs necessary to implement such plans. 
Program administrative costs – 570.206 
a) General management, oversight and coordination. Reasonable costs of overall program management, 
coordination, monitoring, and evaluation, including: 
•  Salaries, wages, and related costs of staff engaged in program administration. Program
administration includes the following types of assignments; 
•  Providing local officials and citizens with information about the program; 
•  Preparing program budgets and schedules, and amendments thereto; 
•  Developing systems for assuring compliance with program requirements; 
•  Developing interagency agreements and agreements with sub-recipients and contractors to
carry out program activities; 
•  Monitoring program activities for progress and compliance with program requirements; 
•  Preparing reports and other documents related to the program for submission to HUD; 
•  Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring findings; 
•  Evaluating program results against stated objectives; and
•  Managing or supervising persons whose primary responsibilities with regard to the program
include such assignments as those described in paragraph (a)(1)(i) through (viii) of this section. 
•  Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the program; 
•  Administrative services performed under third party contracts or agreements, including such
services as general legal services, accounting services, and audit services; and
•  Other costs for goods and services required for administration of the program, including such
goods and services as rental or purchase of equipment, insurance, utilities, office supplies, and
rental and maintenance (but not purchase) of office space. 
18 
Page 19
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
(b) Public information. The providing of information and other resources to residents and citizen
organizations participating in the planning, implementation, or assessment of activities being
assisted with CDBG funds. 
(c) Fair housing activities. Provision of fair housing services designed to further the fair housing
objectives of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601–20) by making all persons, without regard to race, 
color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status or handicap, aware of the range of housing
opportunities available to them; 
(d) Indirect costs.  Indirect costs may be charged to the CDBG program under a cost allocation plan
prepared in accordance with OMB Circular A–21, A–87, or A–122 as applicable. 
(e) Submission of applications for federal programs. Preparation of documents required for submission
to HUD to receive funds under the CDBG and UDAG programs. In addition, CDBG funds may be used
to prepare applications for other Federal programs where the recipient determines that such
activities are necessary or appropriate to achieve its community development objectives. 
(f) Administrative expenses to facilitate housing. CDBG funds may be used for necessary administrative
expenses in planning or obtaining financing for housing; 
(g) Section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. Reasonable costs for overall program
management of the Rental Rehabilitation and Housing Development programs authorized under
section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, whether or not such activities are otherwise
assisted with funds provided under this part. 
(h) Reasonable costs equivalent to those described in paragraphs (a), (b), (e), and (f) of this section for
overall program management of: 
(i) A Federally designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community; and
(j) The HOME program under title II of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42
U.S.C. 12701 note).
Ineligible activities – 570.207
The general rule is that any activity that is not authorized under the provisions of §§570.201–570.206 is
ineligible to be assisted with CDBG funds. This section identifies specific activities that are ineligible and
provides guidance in determining the eligibility of other activities frequently associated with housing
and community development. 
(a) The following activities may not be assisted with CDBG funds: 
•  Buildings or portions thereof, used for the general conduct of government  General
government expenses;  Political activities.
(b) The following activities may not be assisted with CDBG funds unless carried out as a special
economic development activity, or as a public service, or by an eligible community-based
development organization, or by the recipient as specifically authorized. 
•  Purchase of equipment; 
19
Page 20
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
•  Construction equipment; 
•  Fire protection equipment. Fire protection equipment is considered for this purpose to be
an integral part of a public facility and thus, purchase of such equipment would be eligible
under §570.201(c);
•  Furnishings and personal property; 
•  Operating and maintenance expenses; 
•  Payment of salaries for staff, utility costs and similar expenses necessary for the operation
of public works and facilities; New housing construction; Income payments. 
20 
Page 21
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
APPENDIX C: 
21
Page 22
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
Page 23
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
FY23 CDBP RFP
Downtown Framingham, Inc. (DFI)
Project Narrative
1. Need and Outcomes
a. Why are you seeking to undertake this work (need)?
Downtown Framingham, Inc (DFI) is a Main Streets organization whose mission is to make the
downtown area of Framingham a place where people want to “live, work and play.” The need for
DFI’s work has been realized for years in the downtown Framingham area and other municipalities
facing the same issues, even prior to COVID. Every small business district must transform and
modernize its brick-and-mortar businesses from transaction-only venues into centers for gathering
and creating memorable experiences. The need to preserve Downtown Framingham’s multi-cultural
business landscape is critical to the economic prosperity of the area.
DFI places a special focus on area promotion, green-space amenities, and the arts and
entertainment venues in the downtown area, while also encouraging new businesses to open and
meet the needs of the downtown area. Downtown Framingham is home to a strong retail,
restaurant, manufacturing, services, and life sciences business sectors. DFI’s work seeks to continue
endeavoring to achieve these goals with the FY23 CDBG funding.
b. Why do you believe your organization is best positioned to address this need?
Since its formation in 2009, DFI has been a known and trusted leader in the downtown Framingham
community. DFI has built a relationship of trust and understanding with the area’s stakeholders
through face-to-face interactions with business owners and community residents, hosting
community events, and completing placemaking projects that create a sense of civic pride. DFI
works to promote the businesses, diverse cultural assets and robust artistic community that are the
engine of our local economy.
c. How will you measure success?
To determine success, DFI will canvass local businesses to assess the personal impacts of DFI’s
efforts to bring people to the downtown area through its annual business climate survey and
monitoring and anecdotally reporting on the business landscape for new development trends. DFI
will also survey prospective business owners on their use and experience in navigating business
start-up through the tools offered through the BRC. These results will be shared with the local
government leaders and the general public through the DFI website.
d. What do you expect the status of this project to be at the end of FY2023? (Ex: iterative revision,
continuation, end)
DFI expects to continue its operations past the end of FY2023 and will apply for the next CDBG fiscal
year.
e. Please provide backup data documenting need
Page 24
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
DFI’s need is shown through several sources, including the [URL: "https://downtownframinghaminc.org/blog/on2020"] annual business climate survey , [URL: "https://downtownframinghaminc.org/blog/marketingtrends2019"] business
 marketing survey, and community surveys of immediately adjacent downtown neighborhoods
within the Main Streets District. Furthermore, the COVID pandemic has continued to prove a need
for DFI’s work of supporting downtown businesses in their recovery efforts. Throughout the
pandemic (and for the foreseeable future), DFI has partnered with local government leaders to
assist local businesses with COVID-recovery grant applications along with translating government
communications.
Through in-person canvassing of local businesses, DFI can prioritize and plan grant-funded projects
and GoFundMe campaigns to meet community needs, including the [URL: "https://www.metrowestdailynews.com/story/news/2021/08/20/flower-garden-in-downtown-framingham-ma-native-plants-to-attract-pollinators-people/5565673001/"] 2021 Planter Box Project, the
return of [URL: "https://downtownframinghaminc.org/cuts"] Clips for Confidence, or the [URL: "https://downtownframinghaminc.org/burkissquare"] 2019 Burkis Square outreach program that produced
 measurable outcomes for [URL: "https://downtownframinghaminc.org/blog/2019/7/26/kindnessdeliversresults"] businesses and the community.
2. Impact
a. Who benefits from this work and how?
All residents and businesses of the downtown Framingham area, as well as the surrounding area,
will benefit from DFI’s work. The benefits of a prosperous downtown stretch throughout cities, and
visitors to the area will also be able to enjoy the amenities and events of the downtown area.
Business owners benefit directly from DFI’s work by obtaining free technical assistance for grant
applications, business permits, and business operation questions. They also benefit from the
marketing of the downtown area done by DFI that promotes visitation to the area.
The City government also benefits from DFI’s work, as we offer a bridge between the public and
municipal services. We are able to visit people in-person to follow-up on permit and grant
applications, and communicate news and feedback between each party.
b. How many will be served?
Approximately 16,500 residents live in the area that DFI serves.1
c. If this is a request for continued funding, please document the progress of your current project or
program, including the number served and the outcomes achieved thus far.
DFI has implemented several projects during 2021 while also maintaining the business support
outreach to the business community and planning an Oktoberfest event. DFI has also provided
assistance to over 50 businesses to apply for grants and renew or submit permitting requirements.
The downtown district has seen only a few business closures during 2021, which is a positive sign of
the downtown area’s resiliency. Indeed, several new businesses have opened downtown over the
past year. DFI has also applied for project-specific grants to create marketing billboards for the
downtown area that were placed along high-traffic roadways and install planter boxes beside the
bus stop on Waverly Street in an effort to beautify the area and provide a sense of place.
3. Solution Design
1 http://www.city-data.com/city/Framingham-Massachusetts.html
Page 25
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
a. What is the evidence base to support this project’s design and outcomes?
DFI is a Main Streets program that follows the highly effective model of the [URL: "https://www.mainstreet.org/home"] Main Street America
organization. This model allows DFI to create targeted programs that address economic vitality,
urban design, area promotion and organizational partnerships. DFI’s small staff allow us to remain
flexible within the Main Street America model by providing incremental changes and initiatives that
require approximately one-year of pre-planning. As previously mentioned, there have been only a
few business closures in the downtown area in the past year. Community feedback to DFI’s work has
been overwhelmingly popular, and business owners will regularly reach out to DFI for assistance.
DFI’s mission and projects are also included in the City of Framingham’s Master Plan.
Framingham’s historic downtown originated around the intersection of several critical rail lines
serving downtown factories. The downtown area was heavily impacted by the automotive industry’s
decline and new retail centers being built to the north at the highway interchanges. Using proven
Main Streets America principles for revitalizing downtown areas, DFI seeks to sustain the
revitalization of downtown Framingham that has been occurring since 2012.
b. With whom have you consulted/collaborated and how did their input impact the solution design?
DFI consults directly with the population it serves and thus is able to design its programs with their
feedback and concerns. DFI also collaborates regularly with organizations from around the
MetroWest area including the Framingham Maker Space, the City’s Community Development
Department and Economic Development and Industrial Corporation, and the MetroWest Business
Association.
c. If you are applying for continued funding, how has your design/methodology evolved in response
to evaluation and feedback?
The methodology of DFI has been a great success in the community and therefore has not deviated
from past years. Through in-person interactions with business owners and residents, as well as
collaborating with the City, DFI’s methodology has proven to be effective.
d. How have you designed your solution to maximize impact to reach critical needs?
According to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Community Planning and
Development Director Bob Shumeyko. all four tenets of the Main Street America Program are
allowable activities for CDBG funding. The four “Transformation Strategies” of the Main Street
American model include economic vitality, urban design, area promotion, and organizational
partnerships. The following is a break-down of how DFI’s programs and initiatives fall under each
strategy.
Economic Vitality
● DFI’s ability to interact directly with businesses and help them with all necessary paperwork
for permitting, licensing, and grant applications is one of our organization’s primary
functions. Businesses in the area routinely contact us to provide support. Oftentimes, we
receive support requests from businesses outside the downtown area, who we also try to
Page 26
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
assist. For instance, with the advent of COVID, outdoor seating at restaurants has become
essential to their continued existence. With Governor Baker’s extension of the emergency
outdoor seating ordinance until April 2022, DFI will work with restaurants looking to add
permanent outdoor seating plans to their floor plans. This will involve updating several
forms, including their Entertainment License, Common Victualler License, local and state
liquor licenses, and food establishment permit. Doing so will enable these restaurants to
have outdoor (patio and sidewalk) seating beyond the emergency allowances. DFI will
partner closely with the City’s Licensing Department to ensure all appropriate forms are
completed in accordance with zoning and licensing ordinances and bylaws. DFI has been
awarded grant funds from MutualOne Bank to fully or partially reimburse restaurant owners
for the associated license fees, which will encourage these businesses to complete their
forms.
● New or prospective business owners, especially non-English speaking individuals, need help
navigating the many application forms and processes that go into opening a business in
Framingham. Oftentimes these business owners must hire a business consultant to assist
them in completing these requirements. The Business Resource Center at the Framingham
Public Library provides resources for career skills improvement and career advancement. DFI
will seek to expand these services to provide in-person business trainers who visit the
downtown businesses to offer expertise in accounting, marketing, and other business
practices.
● DFI will assist business owners with their application to the City’s new Microenterprise Grant
program. This Community Development Program seeks to help small businesses by
providing up to $5,000.00 to applicants who do not qualify for traditional bank loans
because they lack the necessary credit rating or a business history. This grant program will
stimulate Framingham’s local economy by empowering new businesses to open and thus
create jobs . DFI will reach out to potential applicants and help them complete their
applications in order to make this program a success.
Urban Design
● DFI seeks to address urban blight by completing placemaking and beautification projects
whenever possible. Projects that DFI will pursue include murals on the sides of buildings,
greenscaping projects, and micro-art exhibits in collaboration with the Framingham Maker
Space. Creating a sense of place and civic pride in an area that residents can enjoy is of great
importance when considering the economic and social well-being of a downtown district. By
creating a desirable environment that people enjoy being in, DFI enriches the local economy
and cultural landscape by bringing people together.
● DFI will continue the upkeep and updating of the Harmony Grove Welcome Arch that depicts
historic social justice by installing new pieces of artwork from local artists.
● Promote the use of Pratt Street Community Garden.
Page 27
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
● Promote the future use and success of Framingham’s Dog Park.
● Wayfinding signage has been a long-realized need for the downtown area. DFI will work to
bring upgraded parking signage to Hollis Court and the South Framingham Post Office
through partnership with the City of Framingham.
● DFI will continue the sixth year of the holiday storefront decoration contest which has
storefronts decorating their stores. This drives foot traffic to the area and creates a sense of
community togetherness.
Organizational Partnerships
● DFI will rekindle a partnership internship project with Sudbury Valley Trustees to assess how
open spaces are routinely used and who uses downtown green spaces. Determine how
sidewalk and urban forestry ambiance encourages walking and cycling transportation
mediums and identify strategies for improvement.
● Partner with Jack’s Abby to host a 5K race within the 2022 calendar year.
● Partner with downtown restaurants to produce a Taste of Downtown Framingham event.
● Partner with the Framingham Public Library to enhance the Business Resource Center by
obtaining grant funding for in-person business trainers.
● Continue fundraising events throughout the MetroWest and Greater Boston that highlight
DFI and downtown enhancements, specifically partnering with the MetroWest Visitors
Bureau and MetroWest Business Association.
● Partner with downtown businesses to create targeted programs that address local issues.
For example, the Clips for Confidence program had DFI partner with Twins Barbershop to
provide neighborhood elementary school students with free haircuts and a back-to-school
supply bundle.
● Partner with the Framingham High School Out-of-School program to connect students to the
community through acts of service or event volunteering.
Area Promotion
● DFI’s marketing platforms highlight the many amenities and events in the downtown area.
Social media websites and apps, email newsletters, and local news outlets to demonstrate
tangible results in the area. This includes business openings, economic studies of the area,
green space projects, and arts and cultural events. Social media posts are regularly
“boosted” through paid social media marketing to reach even greater audiences.
● DFI regularly partners with downtown businesses to produce events that promote the area.
These events include the Taste of Downtown Framingham, cultural tours, and street
festivals/block parties.
Page 28
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
● The DFI blog will be unkempt to contain posts about the historic nature of the City of
Framingham and on the results of DFI initiatives, as well as the results of the annual business
climate survey, community engagement surveys, and small business-owner interviews.
e. How will you validate your design/methodologies/approach and track and report impact?
DFI works each winter from January to February to plan the projects and events that are then
enacted during the spring, fall, and holiday (early winter) seasons. Feasibility of each project is
assessed by the amount of support of DFI’s partners and budget. Each year, DFI’s Board of Directors
hold a strategy session to effectively assess outstanding needs and current performance of ongoing
initiatives to plan for the upcoming event calendar year and fiscal year. The impact of DFI programs
are studied through analytics, including event attendance, marketing analytics, business revenue
surveys, and consumer satisfaction neighborhood surveys.
4. Community Engagement
a. Describe how your organization has engaged and continues to engage those intended to benefit
from this work in the design, delivery and evaluation of services to be provided?
Community engagement is one of the bedrocks of DFI’s successful operating mode. Much of our
work involves face-to-face meetings with over 80 storefronts in Framingham’s downtown, where we
get feedback directly from business owners. We are also regularly contacted by local businesses to
assist with a wide variety of needs, including assistance with signage programs and grant support.
b. Describe how your marketing and promotion plans are designed to reach the targeted
constituency
DFI makes use of both physical marketing and promotional materials in the downtown area, and a
digital marketing presence. Physical marketing assets, such as flyers, billboards, pamphlets, etc are
given out on an in-person basis or posted in publicly visible locations in the downtown area. The
digital marketing platforms (such as Facebook, Mailchimp, and Google) that DFI uses allow for
audience-specific algorithms to reach the geographic distribution of residents DFI seeks to serve.
c. How do you intend to keep the community informed of your progress?
DFI maintains regular communications with the downtown community through multiple channels.
This includes digital newsletters, social media announcements, and direct email messages
containing news updates about DFI programs and initiatives. DFI also regularly canvases the
downtown area with important announcements, telling business owners in-person or leaving
printed materials with the relevant information. The Business Coordinator is key to this work, as
they provide translations to Portuguese and Spanish.
5. Organizational Capacity
a. What experience, skills and leadership does your agency bring to this work?
The Executive Director of DFI brings knowledge of the downtown residents and business owners, as
well as project management, administrative, outreach, community engagement, and event planning
Page 29
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
experience. The Business Outreach Coordinator has a knowledge of the downtown landscape as
well as a fluency in Portuguese, one of the primary languages spoken in the downtown area,
especially by business owners. The Board of Directors is composed of individuals who have
dedicated part of their lives to the well-being of the City of Framingham, and each brings a unique
perspective and understanding of the city’s history and landscape.
b. What other organizations will you be collaborating with to achieve maximum results?
DFI collaborates regularly with the City of Framingham’s Community Development Department and
Economic Development Industrial Corporation. DFI also collaborates at higher levels with the
MetroWest Chamber of Commerce, MetroWest Business Association, MetroWest Visitors Bureau,
Framingham Public Library, and the MetroWest Economic Research Center.
6. Equity
a. How will you ensure equitable access and success for underserved populations?
Our focus is on delivering services to underserved populations by visiting business owners in-person
and creating events that are accessible to everyone. This method builds lasting trust, and also
ensures that business owners who are not able to leave their storefronts to go to City Hall or other
informational meetings. This level of accessibility makes the DFI’s operating model much more
unique than higher-level organizations at the regional level.
b. What barriers to access exist in your community and how will you address them?
The downtown district’s businesses have a large percentage of business owners who do not speak
English, and thus, there is a language barrier between those individuals and the City’s programs. DFI
seeks to address this by utilizing the multilingual Business Coordinator DFI staff member to cross the
language barrier not only between DFI and its clientele, but also between the City and its residents.
c. How will you ensure marginalized voices in your community are amplified and consulted in the
design, delivery, and evaluation of your project/program?
DFI interacts directly with downtown residents and gladly accepts any and all input and feedback
regarding its programs. Voices of marginalized populations are paid heed to especially closely, as
they have borne the brunt of the historic economic downturn of the downtown area and have
endeavored to turn the area around by starting businesses and making their lives here.
d. Describe efforts underway within your organization to promote diversity, equity and inclusion.
DFI performs in-person business canvassing with our multilingual Business Outreach Coordinator.
The DFI website and newsletter also includes translation features, as well as DFI social media
(Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and LinkedIn). DFI also has an internal email directory for important
business-related announcements. Through these outreach efforts, DFI can effectively engage
vulnerable businesses and residents. DFI tracks outreach efforts through its business assistance
tracker and technical assistance aggregate report that is submitted to the City’s Community
Development Department. These trackers include outreach support activities and dates for each
Page 30
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
specific business, demonstrating that DFI is reaching its targeted group in an equitable and inclusive
way.
7. Sustainability
a. Does this work depend entirely on CDBG funds? Please describe your plans for this work if full
funding is not granted.
DFI is dependent on CDBG funds to cover the majority of its payroll, specifically the salary of a
full-time Executive Director and a part-time Business Coordinator. Any loss of CDBG funding will
result in a major setback to DFI’s operations with the loss of a full-time Executive Director and its
Business Outreach Coordinator.
b. How do you plan to sustain this work once CDBG support ends, keeping in mind that sustainability
means more than replacing funding?
To fund its operations and support its projects now and into the future, DFI actively searches for and
applies to grants that can provide funding for its mission. DFI’s Board of Directors will also be utilized
to generate higher levels of donations from citizens and businesses. Having said that, DFI would
appreciate having CDBG funds now and into the future. Having DFI fully-funded enables the City and
DFI to maintain their important partnership.
In previous years, DFI was fortunate to receive state earmark funds in the State’s Budget, which
allowed for the expansion of DFI’s services, such as urban design installations, landscaping, holiday
lights, and murals throughout the urban core. While DFI did not receive these earmark funds in
FY21, it will receive them again in FY22. Project specific sponsors are also sought out, as was the
case for the 2021 Oktoberfest. DFI’s events also raise some funding through ticket sales and
donations.
DFI is extremely grateful to also receive funding support for projects from the Framingham
Economic Development Industrial Corporation. In-kind support from the Department of Public
Works and the Department of Parks and Recreation has also been received to make events possible.
Page 31
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
FY23 CDBP RFP
Downtown Framingham, Inc. (DFI)
Logic Model
Inputs Activities Outputs Short-term
Outcomes 
Long-term
Outcomes
Business
Technical
Support 
DFI provides
assistance with
licenses and
permitting for
businesses. 
Businesses are
able to submit
license/permit
applications
correctly. 
Business
applications are
streamlined 
More
businesses
come to the
downtown area
Community
Events & Area
Promotion 
DFI partners
with downtown
businesses and
area
organizations to
produce events,
whether those
are small weekly
events or bigger
quarterly events
(such as block
parties or
concerts) 
Visitors come to
the downtown
area for the
events, have
positive
experiences and
get to know the
area. 
People continue
to return to the
area, visiting
businesses 
The downtown
area continues
to grow with new
visitors and its
economy is
stimulated.
Community
Engagement 
Business
Climate Survey
and other
surveys of the
area’s residents
and business
owners. 
Residents and
business
owners,
especially those
from
underserved
and/or
marginalized
populations, get
their voices
heard. 
Residents are
encouraged that
their voices are
influencing
policy decisions
and programs. 
Framingham
ordinances and
bylaws are
influenced by
new
perspectives
from its
populations.
Public
art/placemaking
projects 
Murals, art
exhibits, green
space projects
(such as
planters,
greenwalls, etc) 
Beautiful public
art projects and
greenspace
amenities 
Residents can
enjoy the art and
green space
amenities, which
also creates a
sense of civic
pride. 
More people
visit the
downtown area
to enjoy the
amenities.
Page 32
DocuSign Envelope ID: 198B6697-5EEB-4426-B5E5-AD1375D06BC9
