REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Overview ............................................................................................................................................................... 1
Application ............................................................................................................................................................ 3
Appendix A: Evaluation Criteria ........................................................................................................................... 11
Appendix B: Eligible and Ineligible Activities ....................................................................................................... 12
Appendix C: Eligible Census Tracts Map ............................................................................................................. 21
Appendix D: Sample Logic Model............................................................................................................................... 22
OVERVIEW
The City of Framingham’s Community Development Program invites local nonprofit organizations or City
departments to submit Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program proposals for fiscal year 2023
starting on July 1, 2022, and ending on June 30, 2023. CDBG funds are allocated to the city by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to impact a wide range of services and programs, 
principally for low- and moderate-income residents. 
The City of Framingham receives an average of $525,000 CDBG funding annually. Final figures will not be known
until after the federal budget is passed and HUD announces allocation amount. The chart below lists the
approximate amount awarded to various projects. 
Project  Approximate Amount Notes
Administration  $105,000 City can spend 20% on administration
Public Services (Non-Profits)  $77,000 City can spend up to 15% on public services
Housing Rehab, code enforcement, 
economic development projects, 
public facilities 
$343,000 CD Committee and mayor final decision on how
these funds are distributed
All organizations requesting funding from the Framingham Community Development Block Grant Program must
email complete applications by December 10, 2021, at 5:00 pm to
 communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov. CD staff will email applicants for more information for
clarification if needed after the deadline. CD staff will review applications for compliance with minimum
requirements. 
Eligibility criteria include, but are not limited to: 
● Compliance with federal eligibility standards
● Overall benefit to low- and moderate-income persons
● How such benefits will be measured/reported
● Project goals
● Need for the proposed activity
● How the proposed project is unique, complementing and not duplicating existing services.
1
Page 2
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
● The experience and capability of applicants to provide proposed activities
● Documentation of support for the project
● Availability of matching funds for the activity will also be considered.
Eligible projects will be forwarded to the committee to make funding recommendations for final approval by the
Mayor. Applicants can contact the CD office by email or call (508) 532-5457 by December 3rd to ask questions
about the application. 
The Community Development Program and the City reserve the right to reject any proposals that are incomplete
and unresponsive to the information requested in the proposal package. The Community Development Program
can recommend or reject any proposal, in whole or in part, determined not to be in its interest. Note that CDBG
funds must be used conforming to applicable city, state and federal laws that include procurement policies, equal
employment opportunity/Section 3 requirements, anti-kickback rules, Davis-Bacon Act (prevailing wages for
construction projects in excess of $2,000 or housing of eight units or more), bonding and insurance regulations, 
and environmental requirements. 
Timeline: 
October 22th: Application Posted
December 10: Applications Due by 5pm to [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov
December 17: Applications sent to community development committee for review
Week of January 25, 2022: Committee will schedule two public hearings on Public Services and non-public
services
February 1, 2022 Committee makes recommendations 
2
Page 3
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
A. APPLICATION
I. Project Eligibility
Project meets at least ONE of the HUD National Objectives listed below (please check all applicable;
definitions are included as attachments):
❑ Benefits low/moderate income individuals/households
❑ Addresses the prevention or elimination of slums or blight
❑ Meets an urgent community need threatening health and welfare
Check all statements that describe HOW this project or activity meets at least one of the National
Objectives listed above: 
❑ Area Benefit Activities: The proposed project or activity meets the needs of low/moderate
income persons residing in an area where at least 51% of those residents have incomes within
80% of the Area Median Income. The benefits of this activity are available to all persons
regardless of income. Examples may include street improvements, water/sewer lines,
neighborhood facilities, and façade improvements in neighborhood commercial districts.
❑ Limited Clientele Activities: The proposed project benefits a specific group of people (rather
than all residents in a particular area), where 51% of the people are documented or presumed
to be low/moderate income persons. Examples may include construction of a senior center,
public services for the homeless, meals on wheels for the elderly, construction of a job training
facility for the handicapped.
❑ Housing Activities: The proposed project creates or improves permanent residential units that
will be occupied by low/moderate income persons upon completion. Housing can be either
owner occupied or rental one family or multi-family units. Examples may include property
acquisition for permanent housing, permanent housing rehabilitation, and conversion of non-
residential units into permanent housing.
❑ Job Creation or Retention: The proposed project creates or retains permanent jobs. At least 51%
of those jobs must be available to low- and moderate-income persons. Examples may include
loans to pay for the expansion of a factory, assistance to a business which has publicly announced
its intention to close resulting in loss of employment for low/moderate income persons.
❑ Slum or Blighted Area: The proposed project is located in a slum/blighted area and the
anticipated results of the project addresses one or more of the conditions that qualify in the
area.
❑ Spot Blight: The proposed project will eliminate specific conditions of blight or physical decay
outside of a blighted area. Activities are limited to demolition/clearance, historic preservation,
and rehabilitation of buildings (to the extent necessary to eliminate public health and safety
issues).
II. Project Type (for clarification on the categories, please see Appendix B)
❑ Housing Rehabilitation
❑ Social/Public Service
❑ Infrastructure/Public Facility Improvements
3
Page 4
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
❑ Economic Development
❑ Slum/Blight Eradication
❑ Other
III. GENERAL PROJECT INFORMATION
1.  Project Name: SMOC's ESL Program
2.  Project Dates: *:  7/1/22-6/30/23
*CDBG-funded elements of proposed projects supported in Fiscal 2023 should end no later than June
30, 2023. Programs that cannot be implemented within 12 months may lose awarded CDBG funds.
3.  CDBG Funds Requested: 
$ 10,000.00
4. 
Name of Sponsoring
Organization or Individual
SMOC 
Address
7 Bishop Street 
DUNS Number
030806830
5.  Person responsible for coordinating and administering this project (if known)
Name: Nora Cuddy
Address: 7 Bishop Street, Framingham MA 01702
Phone: 413-313-1288
Email: ncuddy@smoc.org
6.  Location of project or area served (Include Census Tract(s) and Block Group(s) served by proposed
project, if known) (please see map in Appendix D for eligible census tracts:
Tract  Percent Low/ Mod  Check all Tracts
that Apply 
383102.01
383300.01
383200.03
383102.02 
86.5% 
85.0% 
81.2% 
80.4% 
X
X
X
X
4
Page 5
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
383101.01
383501.02
383200.01
383600.02
383101.02
383400.03
383400.02
383700.03
383400.01 
79.5% 
79.5% 
75.2% 
74.1% 
72.4% 
71.4% 
58.1% 
55.1% 
52.6% 
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
7. Compliance Statement
For public facility and infrastructure projects requiring more than $2,000 in CDBG funds, describe how
compliance with Davis/Bacon federal wage, affirmative action and Section 3 requirements will be
maintained and documented: 
5
Page 6
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
B. Project Narrative
Please provide a narrative description of your proposed project or program
by answering the following questions. We recommend that you include the
question as part of your response. Responses must not exceed 10 pages.
a. Need and Outcomes:
a. Why are you seeking to undertake this work (need)?
Joan Brack Adult Learning Center (JBALC), a program of South Middlesex Opportunity Council, Inc. 
(SMOC), launched its ESL program in 2010 in response to a need for ESL programming in the
MetroWest area. According to the 2019 American Community Survey 1-year estimates, foreign
born workers make up 21.4% of the population in Middlesex County. Additionally, the
Framingham area, where JBALC’s offices are located, has one of the highest concentrations of
immigrants in Massachusetts. These immigrants are from non-English-speaking countries such as
Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, Brazil and Haiti. Furthermore, many of our ESL students have
a history of homelessness, are unemployed, living with a disability, are in recovery from substance
abuse addiction, and/or are immigrants or dislocated workers. 
The ESL program offered at JBALC is vital to the community because it is the only free daytime and
yearlong ESL program in the MetroWest area. Thus, it is critical to operate our program in order to
provide students with access to the English language instruction, listening comprehension, and the
cultural immersion they need to develop skill sets that will improve their job opportunities and
support them on their journey to self-sufficiency. 
b. Why do you believe your organization is best positioned to address this need?
South Middlesex Opportunity Council, Inc. (SMOC) was founded in 1965 through the efforts of
community activists in the Town of Framingham under Title II of the Economic Opportunity Act of
1964. SMOC is a nonprofit corporation with a 501(C)(3) federal tax designation; a federally
designated Community Action Agency (CAA) for the MetroWest and Blackstone Valley regions; a
statewide provider of low-income housing; and a certified Ch.40H statewide Community
Development Corporation (CDC). SMOC is the primary provider of housing and services in the
MetroWest region for homeless families and individuals. 
SMOC’s mission is to improve the quality of life of low-income and disadvantaged individuals and
families by advocating for their needs and rights; providing services; educating the community; 
building a community of support; participating in coalitions with other advocates; and searching for
new resources and partnerships. Central to our mission is working with individuals and families to
maximize self-sufficiency and economic independence, especially for the most vulnerable in our
community. 
In 1999, with the support of the Joan H. Brack Family Foundation, SMOC founded the Joan Brack
6 
Page 7
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
Adult Learning Center (JBALC) to provide Adult Basic Education in two main areas: no-cost
high school equivalency (HiSET/GED) preparation and English as a Second Language (ESL) 
classes. JBALC’s philosophy is to supply long-term, committed, and compassionate dedication to
students from all backgrounds and life circumstances in order to support them on their journey
to further their education and obtain financial self-sufficiency. 
JBALC is uniquely positioned to address the need for ESL classes because the program has proven
to be innovative and effective, and fills an important gap in services as the area’s only free
daytime ESL program. The program serves very low to low-income immigrants and refugees, who
are often participants in other SMOC housing and support programs. To date, the program has
served more than 275 students, and receives an average of 125 new applications each year. The
program is able to accommodate four levels in one class and offers computer-based learning for
beginners of English as well as a conversation class once a week for advanced speakers. 
Prior to the COVID pandemic, the ESL program was offered at SMOC’s offices in downtown
Framingham, which gave students access to a variety of additional SMOC services such as
housing, WIC, counseling, workshops in job search, computer skills, financial literacy, and many
other services, thus providing students with a unique, holistic environment to build stability
through access to SMOC’s additional programs and services, in addition to improving their English
skills. These linkages continue virtually while our offices remain closed to clients. 
c. How will you measure success?
After a 12-week course cycle, students complete an evaluation using Microsoft Form to provide
feedback on their experience with the program. The evaluation measures student satisfaction in
the areas of program effectiveness, instructor performance, and the Workforce Development
division as a whole. Students are also provided the opportunity to meet with the Division
Director to voice concerns. This provides JBALC with critical information to assess the program’s
performance and to make adjustments to increase the effectiveness of the program. These
online evaluations were critical in shaping the ESL program over the last year when making
adjustments due to the impact of COVID, and will continue to do so as program staff and
volunteers assess different virtual class structures. 
Despite program changes due to COVID, JBALC staff also continue to meet weekly to review
student progress and assess the overall operation of the program. The ESL Program Manager
meets weekly with ESL volunteers to assist with lesson plans, discuss student progress, and
conduct class observations. Program evaluation is ongoing and adjustments to increase the
effectiveness of the ESL courses are based on data collected, outcome monitoring and
recommendations from Teachers’ Meetings. 
Finally, SMOC maintains internal evaluation procedures and agency wide program reporting
mechanisms. Program data is regularly collected through SMOC’s centralized client database
and data collection program, CSG Engage. The software can be tailored to meet the specific
reporting 
7 
Page 8
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
requirements of funders while also tracking demographics and outcomes that are common
across all SMOC programs. 
d. What do you expect the status of this project to be at the end of FY2023?
(Ex: iterative revision, continuation, end)
We expect the ESL program to continue offering year-round instruction to students. Due to the
success of our virtual courses, we expect to continue to offer virtual courses for the foreseeable
future. Depending on the situation with the pandemic, we expect to transform into a hybrid
model once we are able to offer classes in-person again. 
e. Please provide backup data documenting need
SMOC's 2020 Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) Annual Report
reports SMOC served 66,874 low-income individuals including 38,117 families. Client racial/ethnic
demographics were reported as 53% white; 20% multi-race; 10.5% Black/African American; 1% 
Asian; and 3% other. 36% identified as Latino/Hispanic. 28.4% of Framingham’s population is
foreign born according to the US 2019 Census American Community Survey. 
ESL classes are consistently filled to capacity (~60 students) and there is also a constant waitlist
of individuals who have expressed interest in the program and have taken a placement test, but
cannot enroll due to high demand. There are currently 26 individuals on the ESL course
enrollment waitlist. 
b. Impact:
a. Who benefits from this work and how?
JBALC provides services to low-income individuals residing in the MetroWest area with the
majority from Framingham, Ashland and Marlborough. Most are participating in other programs
at SMOC. Approximately 33% are residents of SMOC’s low-income housing or temporary housing
for homeless individuals or families. Demographically, our clients vary but tend to be between the
ages of 24-42, 31% Hispanic, and 18% African American. JBALC sees a high percentage of
immigrants from Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, Brazil and Haiti. Many more are American
born citizens whose first language is Spanish. 
Attending ESL classes increases our graduates’ employment opportunities, improves their English
language skills, and enables them to confidently and directly engage with the Framingham
community. Although many students are employed, 10-15% of ESL report finding new jobs or
receiving a promotion. About 5% of these students go on to post-secondary education and job
training programs in health care, sales, and the food industry among other sectors. SMOC is
currently working with Framingham State University and Massachusetts Bay Community College to
enhance post-secondary pathways for these students. 
8 
Page 9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
b. How many will be served
ESL services will be provided to at least 60 enrolled students (current full capacity) in remote
learning (possibly switching to hybrid in-person and remote once safe to do so).
c. If this is a request for continued funding, please document the progress of your current
project or program, including the number served and the outcomes achieved thus far. 
N/A
c. Solution Design:
a. What is the evidence base to support this project’s design and outcomes?
SMOC’s ESL program uses the Ventures Series (Basic level - Transition level) of Cambridge
University Press. This is a standards-based, integrated skills series for Adult Education, aligned to
WIOA, NRS, English Language Proficiency, and College and Career Readiness standards. Our
teachers follow the English Language Professional standards and well as the Massachusetts ESOL
professional standards. 
b. With whom have you consulted/collaborated and how did their input impact the
solution design?
While our program follows the Venture Series curriculum, our teachers adapt the curriculum to
meet our students’ needs, based on learning style, the students’ goals, and current events. 
The instruction design had to change dramatically when the program moved to a remote learning
system. Our instructors participate in SABES trainings, the Massachusetts adult education (AE) 
professional development (PD) system, which have assisted in adaptations to remote learning
methods and technology. Student feedback was key as the program tried a variety of methods of
learning remotely, including using platforms like Zoom, WhatsApp, and others. Feedback has been
quite positive, as Zoom and other interactive platforms still allow students to learn from each
other in a group setting. 
c. If you are applying for continued funding, how has your design/methodology
evolved in response to evaluation and feedback?
N/A
d. How have you designed your solution to maximize impact to reach critical needs?
SMOC’s ESL program reaches critical needs both by its accessibility and by its feedback-based
design. SMOC’s ESL program is free, which removes a major barrier for low-income adults in need
of quality ESL instruction. Prior to COVID, it was the only local ESL program that met during the
day, filling a need for those with alternative work schedules or family commitments that did not
align with evening classes. Following COVID restrictions, the classes continue to meet remotely, 
which has further increased the program’s accessibility by removing the need for transportation
9
Page 10
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
and travel times. Teachers utilize apps for communication and education, thanks to positive
feedback about the apps’ ease of use. Furthermore, the program evolves to meet the needs of
SMOC’s target population by combining general ESL instruction with discussions around
current events and workforce topics. 
e. How will you validate your design/methodologies/approach and track and report
impact?
JBALC’s ESL program follows a standards-based curriculum used by ESL programs across the country. The
program tracks participation and successful completion of classes and assessments of
comprehension, as well as collecting student feedback on the impact of the program. Participants
are tracked using SMOC’s primary internal case management database, CSG Engage, which is a
multi-program web-based software product that enables staff to collect, track, report and share
data amongst most of its programs. CSG Engage captures client intake, referral, service
participation, outcome, and case management information. CSG Engage provides aggregate and
individual client reports which assist in assessing program and client performance. 
d. Community Engagement:
a. Describe how your organization has engaged and continues to engage those
intended to benefit from this work in the design, delivery and evaluation of
services to be provided?
SMOC operates 60 programs across the Commonwealth including Child Care, Head Start, 
WIC, Fuel Assistance, Weatherization Assistance, Mental Health Services, Addiction
Treatment, Domestic & Sexual Violence Services and Workforce Development. SMOC is
also a provider of low-income housing with 1,964 units statewide that include shelters, 
Housing First options, sober housing, transitional housing and permanent housing for
both individuals and families. SMOC's service delivery system has evolved as part of an
innovative integrated supportive housing strategy to assist our clients in becoming self-
sufficient and economically independent. This is a holistic approach to eradicating the
root causes of poverty modeled after the “Model Cities Program.” Targeted outreach to
housing case managers, shelter case managers, program support staff, and the greater
MetroWest community increases the potential number of individuals served. These
efforts are facilitated through consistent contact with case managers and other potential
referral sources such as the Framingham Transitional Assistance office. 
The ESL Program at SMOC collaborates and receives referrals from all of the SMOC support
programs including supported housing, Voices Against Violence, WIC, SMOC Behavioral Health
Services and Child Care/Head Start programs. The program also maintains a collaborative
relationship with other ESL programs in the area including: Framingham Adult ESL Plus, The
Literacy Connection at the Framingham Public Library, the Natick Service Council, Mass Bay
Community College and many others. SMOC's ESL program is also represented at the
Framingham Community Partners monthly meetings. 
10
Page 11
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
b. Describe how your marketing and promotion plans are designed to reach the
targeted constituency
Marketing materials are distributed to community partners where potential participants access
services and are prominently displayed in the SMOC Career Center, local libraries, healthcare
centers and the unemployment office. Multiple modes of communication are utilized, including: e-
newsletters, social media events and announcements, open house style hiring and recruitment
events, flyers, community networking, and press releases. JBALC is a member of the MetroWest
Adult Learning Collaborative, a group of agencies that provide adult education in the MetroWest
area. They meet quarterly to strategize and cross-refer to fill vacancies in staff and students. JBALC
also produces a quarterly newsletter and program specific flyers that are distributed with the
monthly community email. 
c. How do you intend to keep the community informed of your progress?
Program data is regularly collected through SMOC’s centralized client database and data
collection program, CSG Engage. The software can be tailored to meet the specific reporting
requirements of funders while also tracking demographics and outcomes that are used to create
informational community outreach materials. 
e. Organizational Capacity:
a. What experience, skills and leadership does your agency bring to this work?
Founded in 1999 with the support of the Joan H. Brack Family Foundation, JBALC provides free
Adult Basic Education in two main areas: high school equivalency (HiSET/GED) preparation and
English as a Second Language (ESL) classes. JBALC’s philosophy is long-term, committed, 
compassionate dedication to students from all backgrounds and life circumstances to acquire
greater education and financial self-sufficiency. 
Since 2010, SMOC has operated a successful and innovative ESL program employing a dynamic
teaching model to serve three levels in one classroom. SMOC offers the area’s only free daytime
ESL classes and serves very low to low-income immigrants and refugees, who are often
participants in other SMOC housing and support programs. To date, the program has
served more than 275 students, and receives an average of 125 new applications each year. 
JBALC’s ESL Program Manager, Mary Meany, holds an MFA in Teaching English as a Second
Language and has 11 years of teaching experience. Nora Cuddy, Director of the Framingham
Community and Cultural Center, holds an MEd in School Counseling K-12. She has four years of
experience as an assistant teacher for Head Start in bilingual classrooms, and ten years of direct
care and educational services in public schools and nonprofit settings. 
b. What other organizations will you be collaborating with to achieve maximum
results (please include letters of collaboration)?
11
Page 12
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
The JBALC ESL program collaborates informally with other local ESL programs and service
providers. Additionally, as one of SMOC’s many programs, there are a number of ESL students
who also receive services from other SMOC programs, such as WIC, childcare/Head Start, our
affordable housing continuum, and other programs. Program referrals within SMOC go both
ways; a client may come to SMOC for housing or rental assistance and be referred to the ESL
program, or the client may come to SMOC for ESL and then be referred to other SMOC programs. 
f.  Equity:
a. How will you ensure equitable access and success for underserved populations?
SMOC’s ESL program strives to be accessible to all who need its services. It is a free program, 
which removes a significant barrier to access, and its staff and volunteers work hard to
individualize instruction as needed to help each learner succeed. We are proud to have learners
from many different cultural backgrounds, including immigrants from Russia, Egypt, China, as well
as Central and South American countries including Guatemala, Venezuela, and Colombia. 
Currently, 100% of the ESL students were born in another country and speak another primary
language. 
b. What barriers to access exist in your community and how will you address them?
Barriers to learning that our ESL program addresses includes cost, transportation, time, and
cultural sensitivity. SMOC’s ESL classes are offered free of charge, which removes potential cost
burdens. Classes began being offered remotely starting in March 2020 due to COVID, but the
feedback on the flexibility remote learning affords has led our team to consider using this model, 
at least in part, for the foreseeable future. Remote learning removes the potential barrier of
transportation, and also lessens the amount of time required as there is no travel time. Finally, 
our ESL program is led by teachers, both paid and volunteer, who speak multiple languages
themselves and come from a variety of backgrounds, making it easier for them to connect with
students who have a similar background. 
c. How will you ensure marginalized voices in your community are amplified and
consulted in the design, delivery, and evaluation of your project/program?
As a program of SMOC, many of the ESL students come from marginalized backgrounds, including
those with low incomes; those who are experiencing homelessness or have a history of
experiencing homelessness; and those suffering from substance use and/or mental health issues. 
Every learner completes a student evaluation after their 12-week ESL cycle, and there are ample
opportunities to provide ongoing feedback or voice concerns. As an agency, SMOC completes a
comprehensive community needs survey every three years that includes hundreds of client
surveys, as well as focus groups and stakeholder interviews. This data impacts all areas of our
service design and delivery. 
12
Page 13
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
d. Describe efforts underway within your organization to promote diversity, equity and
inclusion
As an agency, SMOC has a strong commitment to promoting diversity, equity and inclusion. In the
summer of 2020, SMOC created a Diversity, Access and Inclusion Committee (DAI) led by upper- 
and mid-level managers and SMOC board members. The DAI Committee meets monthly and has
received several grants to fund both agency-wide diversity trainings and conversations as well as
a grant that will fund strategic planning to review our systems and policies and identify
opportunities to strengthen our policies to support our DAI work, beginning in 2022. 
g. Sustainability:
a. Does this work depend entirely on CDBG funds? Please describe your plans for this
work if full funding is not granted.
JBALC is funded principally by the Joan H. Brack Family Foundation, the MutualOne Bank
Foundation, and individual donors. The program does not collect any fees from learners. If full
funding is not granted through the CDBG, JBALC will seek support from other grant funders to
ensure the program can continue to serve its current students and those on its waitlist. 
b. How do you plan to sustain this work once CDBG support ends, keeping in mind that
sustainability means more than replacing funding?
CDBG support will help the program continue during what we hope will be a time of transition
from fully remote to a hybrid approach of remote and in-person learning. SMOC consistently
seeks foundation and individual gifts to support JBALC. Prior and existing grant funders include: 
Brack Foundation, First Literacy, National Literacy Directory, MutualOne Bank, and Middlesex
Savings Bank. In addition, funds are provided by the Department of Transitional Assistance (DTA) 
and SNAP-ET (UMASS), for individuals in the ESL program who are receiving SNAP. 
13
Page 14
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
c. Additional Proposal Narrative:
What else would you like us to know about your proposed project?
14
Page 15
C. Logic Model 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
Use this template to develop and submit a logic model for your proposed project. If you need help in developing a logic model
for your grant proposal, please reach out to us at [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov or 508-532-5457 or the next page
has a sample one. 
INPUTS
Resources to be used to
undertake this project or
program. 
ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS SHORT-TERM
OUTCOMES 
LONG-TERM- 
OUTCOMES
Specific events, actions, 
partnerships, and processes. 
Artifacts and evidence of the Measurable changes that will
activities.  occur in the next year. 
Long-term intended effects. 
Qualified, diverse, and caring Initial ESL level assessment 50 students participate in
staff and volunteers and placement ESL classes
Adaptable, accredited Daytime ESL classes offered 50 assessments of progress
curriculum that incorporates at progressive levels, plus
current events and  individualized support as
supplemental material utilized needed
remotely via Zoom 
Annual Celebration of  50 student evaluations
Learning to highlight and collected and incorporated
celebrate student into the program
achievements 
Students improve their written Students improve their earning
and verbal communication skills potential and their family’s self-
sufficiency
Students report increased
confidence using English 
Students are able to more fully
participate in community and
school events, providing more
diverse voices
New ESL credentials assist in 
upward mobility in employment
and opportunities to further
their education
15 
Page 16
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
D. PROJECT COSTS
1. Detailed Project Budget:
Budget Item (A)  CDBG Funds (B) 
i.e. Personnel, Office
Supplies, etc.
Salaries and Wages
Employee Benefits and
Taxes
Equipment Rental &
Maintenance 
Professional Development
Rent & Occupancy
Supplies and Materials
Misc Expenses
Total Project Cost 
Other Sources (C)  Total (B + C) 
$22,660 
$ 6,798
$515
$775
$7,723
$1,355
$4,467
$44,293
2. Anticipated Project Funding Sources (Include all funding sources for which you’ve applied
CDBG  Projected Committed Amount
a) Other sources (Please Specify which
are projected and which are
committed): 
35,000
b) Donations for project use
c) In kind Donations (please specify)
d) Total CDBG Amount  9,293
*Total Project Funding:  44,293
*Project costs in Table 2 must match Table 1 Total Project Costs.
16 
Page 17
Susan Gentili  President & CEO
12/9/2021
Page 18
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
Evaluation Criteria 
Appendix A
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds are awarded through a competitive proposal
evaluation process. The evaluation considers all aspects of the proposal as described in the RFP and
proposal application. 
Proposals are checked first by the City’s Planning and Community Division staff for completeness of
application, content and eligibility under CDBG guidelines. Eligible applicants will have proposals
reviewed and ranked by members of the Community Development Committee using the City of
Framingham’s Application Evaluation Worksheet. If a question arises during its review, the committee
reserves the right to contact the applicant for clarification. Based on the committee’s review and
ranking of proposals, recommendations will be presented to the Mayor’s Office, which will render the
final decision on grant awards. Ultimately, the City Council votes to accept or reject the annual
aggregate federal funds before the Annual Action Plan is submitted and the funds dispersed. 
The Division of Planning and Community Development and the Community Development Committee
will have sole discretion on the approval of funds. Committee has discretion to partially or fully fund a
proposal. Please note that a well-written application is no guarantee of funding since this is a highly
competitive process. Applicants should give adequate attention to the completeness, conciseness, and
responsiveness of the information provided in response to the questions asked within the application. 
The RFP will be the only time for organizations to present proposals since no future meetings or
hearings are scheduled between the submission date and allocation date. Please contact the
Community Development Department at [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov if you have any
questions concerning the Evaluation Worksheet or the application. 
11
Page 19
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
APPENDIX B
SUMMARY OF ELIGIBLE AND INELIGIBLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT ACTIVITIES
This is a summary of the activities that are eligible and ineligible for assistance under the Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program pursuant to governing regulations of the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 24, Part 570, Sections 570.200 – 570.207. This summary is based upon the Final Rules
published in March 1996 and is meant to be a guide. Please check with CD staff or the HUD website for
any changes that may have occurred since 1996. 
General Policies – 570.200
The primary objective of the CDBG Program is the development of viable communities, by providing
decent housing and sustainable living environment, and expanding economic opportunities, principally
for persons of low and moderate-income. Funds must be used so as to give maximum feasible priority to
activities that will carry out one of the three broad national objectives of: benefit to low and moderate- 
income families, aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or blight, or activities that meet an urgent
community need due to existing conditions that pose a serious and immediate threat to the health or
welfare of the community where other financial resources are not available to meet such needs. At least
70% of the total CDBG funds must be used for activities that benefit low and moderate-income persons; 
and at least 51% of the beneficiaries of the individual activities must be low to moderate-income persons. 
Basic Eligible Activities – 570.201
CDBG funds may be used for the following activities: 
(a)  Acquisition. Acquisition in whole or in part by purchase, long-term lease, donation, or otherwise,
of real property (including air rights, water rights, rights-of-way, easements, and other interests
therein) for any public purpose.
(b)  Disposition. Disposition, through sale, lease, donation, or otherwise, of any real property acquired
with CDBG funds or its retention for public purposes, including reasonable costs of temporarily
managing such properties.
(c)  Public facilities and improvements. Acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
installation of public facilities and improvements, except buildings for the general conduct of
government. Activities may include:
•  Removal of material and architectural barriers that restrict the mobility and accessibility of
elderly or severely disabled persons to public facilities and improvements;
•  Design features and improvements that promote energy:
•  Architectural design features, and similar treatments intended to enhance the aesthetic
quality of facilities and improvements receiving CDBG assistance:
•  Eligible facilities include shelters for the homeless; convalescent homes; hospitals, nursing
homes; battered spouse shelters; halfway houses for run-away children, drug offenders or
12
Page 20
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
parolees; group homes for intellectually challenged persons and temporary housing for
disaster victims: 
(d)  Clearance activities. Clearance, demolition, and removal of buildings and improvements, 
including movement of structures to other sites. Demolition of HUD-assisted or HUD-owned
housing units may be undertaken only with the prior approval of HUD. 
(e)  Public services. Provision of public services (including labor, supplies, and materials) including but
not limited to those concerned with employment, crime prevention, child care, health, drug
abuse, education, fair housing counseling, energy conservation, homebuyer down payment
assistance, or recreational needs. To be eligible for CDBG assistance, a public service must meet
each of the following criteria: 
•  A new service or a quantifiable increase in the level of an existing service above that which
has been provided with State and Local funds in the previous 12 calendar months; and
•  The amount of CDBG funds obligated for public services shall not exceed 15 percent of the
annual grant, and 15 percent of program income received during the immediately preceding
program year. 
(f)  Interim assistance. Activities may be undertaken on an interim basis in areas exhibiting objectively
determinable signs of physical deterioration where immediate action is needed and where
permanent improvements will be carried out as soon as practicable in order to alleviate
emergency conditions threatening the public health and safety in areas where an emergency
condition exists and requires immediate resolution. 
(g)  Payment of non-Federal share. Payment of the non-Federal share required in connection with a
Federal grant-in-aid program undertaken as part of CDBG activities. 
(h)  Urban renewal completion. Payment of the cost of completing an urban renewal project funded
under title I of the Housing Act of 1949 as amended. 
(i)  Relocation. Relocation payments and other assistance for permanently and temporarily relocated
individuals, families, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farm operations. 
(j)  Loss of rental income. Payments to housing owners for losses of rental income incurred in holding, 
for temporary periods, housing units to be used for the relocation of individuals and families
displaced by program activities assisted under this part.
(k)  Housing services. Housing services such as tenant counseling in connection with tenant-based
rental assistance and affordable housing projects, energy auditing, preparation of work
specifications, loan processing, inspections, tenant selection, management of tenant-based rental
assistance, and other services related to assisting owners, tenants, contractors, and other entities
participating or seeking to participate in housing activities assisted under title II of the Cranston- 
Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act. 
(l)  Privately owned utilities. CDBG funds may be used to acquire, construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, 
or install the distribution lines and facilities of privately-owned utilities, including the placing
underground of new or existing distribution facilities and lines. 
13
Page 21
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
(m) Construction of housing. CDBG funds may be used for the construction of housing assisted under
section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. 
(n)  Homeownership assistance. CDBG funds may be used to provide direct homeownership
assistance to low- or moderate-income households in accordance with section 105(a) of the Act. 
(o)  Facilitate economic development. CDBG funds may facilitate economic development by: 
•  Providing credit, including, but not limited to, grants, loans, loan guarantees, and other forms of
financial support, for the establishment, stabilization, and expansion of micro enterprises; 
•  Providing technical assistance, advice, and business support services to owners of micro
enterprises and persons developing micro enterprises; and
•  Providing general support, including, but not limited to, peer support programs, counseling, 
childcare, transportation, and other similar services, to owners of micro enterprises and persons
developing micro enterprises. 
(p)  Technical assistance. Provision of technical assistance to public or nonprofit entities to increase
the capacity of such entities to carry out eligible neighborhood revitalization or economic
development activities. 
(q)  Assistance to institutions of higher education. Provision of assistance to institutions of higher
education if such institution has demonstrated a capacity to carry out eligible activities. 
Eligible rehabilitation and preservation activities - 570.202
(a)  Types of buildings and improvements eligible for rehabilitation assistance. CDBG funds may be
used to finance the rehabilitation of: 
•  Privately owned buildings and improvements for residential purposes; improvements to a
single-family residential property which is also used as a place of business, which are
required in order to operate the business, need not be considered to be rehabilitation of
a commercial or industrial building, if the improvements also provide general benefit to
the residential occupants of the building; 
•  Low-income public housing and other publicly owned residential buildings and
improvements; 
•  Publicly or privately owned commercial or industrial buildings, except that the
rehabilitation of such buildings owned by a private for-profit business is limited to
improvements to the exterior of the building and the correction of code violations; 
•  Nonprofit-owned nonresidential buildings and improvements
•  Manufactured housing when such housing that is part of the community's permanent
housing stock. 
14
Page 22
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
(b)  Types of assistance. CDBG funds may be used to finance the following types of activities, and
related costs: 
▪  Assistance to private individuals and entities, including profit making and nonprofit
organizations, to acquire for the purpose of rehabilitation, and to rehabilitate properties, 
for use or resale for residential purposes; 
•  Labor, materials, and other costs of rehabilitation of properties, including repair directed
toward an accumulation of deferred maintenance, replacement of principal fixtures and
components of existing structures, installation of security devices, including smoke
detectors and deadbolt locks, and renovation through alterations, additions to, or
enhancement of existing structures, which may be undertaken singly, or in combination; 
•  Loans for refinancing existing indebtedness secured by a property being rehabilitated; 
•  Improvements to increase the efficient use of energy in structures through such means as
installation of storm windows and doors, siding, wall and attic insulation, and conversion, 
modification, or replacement of heating and cooling equipment, including the use of solar
energy equipment; 
•  Improvements to increase the efficient use of water through such means as water savings
faucets and shower heads and repair of water leaks; 
•  Connection of residential structures to water distribution lines or local sewer collection
lines; 
•  For rehabilitation carried out with CDBG funds, costs of: Initial homeowner warranty
premiums; Hazard insurance premiums, except where assistance is provided in the form
of a grant; and Flood insurance premiums for properties covered by the Flood Disaster
Protection Act of 1973; and Procedures concerning inspection and testing for and
abatement of lead-based paint. 
•  Costs of acquiring tools to be lent to owners, tenants, and others who will use such tools
to carry out rehabilitation; 
•  Rehabilitation services, such as rehabilitation counseling, energy auditing, preparation of
work specifications, loan processing, inspections, and other services related to assisting
owners, tenants, contractors, and other entities, participating or seeking to participate in
rehabilitation activities
•  Assistance for the rehabilitation of housing under section 17 of the United States Housing
Act of 1937; 
•  Improvements designed to remove material and architectural barriers that restrict the
mobility and accessibility of elderly or severely disabled persons to buildings and
improvements eligible for assistance under paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Costs incurred for inspection for code violations and enforcement of codes
(e.g., salaries and related expenses of code enforcement inspectors and legal proceedings, but
not including the cost of correcting the violations) in deteriorating or deteriorated areas when 
15
Page 23
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
such enforcement together with public or private improvements, rehabilitation, or services to be
provided may be expected to arrest the decline of the area. 
(d)  Historic preservation. CDBG funds may be used for the rehabilitation, preservation or restoration
of historic properties, whether publicly or privately owned. Historic properties are those sites or
structures that are either listed in or eligible to be listed in the National Register of Historic Places, 
listed in a State or local inventory of historic places, or designated as a State or local landmark or
historic district by appropriate law or ordinance. Historic preservation, however, is not
authorized for buildings for the general conduct of government. 
(e)  Renovation of closed buildings. CDBG funds may be used to renovate closed buildings, such as
closed school buildings, for use as an eligible public facility or to rehabilitate such buildings for
housing. 
(f)  Lead-based paint activities. Lead-based paint activities as set forth in part 35 of this title. 
Special economic development activities - 570.203
A recipient may use CDBG funds for special economic development activities as part of an economic
development project. The recipient must ensure that the appropriate level of public benefit will be
derived before obligating funds. Special activities authorized under this section do not include assistance
for the construction of new housing. Special economic development activities include: 
(a)  The acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or installation of commercial or
industrial buildings, structures, and other real property equipment and improvements, including
railroad spurs or similar extensions. 
(b)  The provision of assistance to a private for-profit business, including, but not limited to, grants, 
loans, loan guarantees, interest supplements, technical assistance, and other forms of support, 
for any activity where the assistance is appropriate to carry out an economic development
project. 
(c)  Economic development services include, but are not limited to, outreach efforts to market
available forms of assistance; screening of applicants; reviewing and underwriting applications
for assistance; preparation of all necessary agreements; management of assisted activities; and
the screening, referral, and placement of applicants for employment opportunities generated by
CDBG-eligible economic development activities, including the costs of providing necessary
training for persons filling those positions. 
Special activities by Community-Based Development Organizations (CBDOs). – 570.204
(a) Eligible activities. CDBG funds may be used by CBDO to carry out a neighborhood revitalization, 
community economic development, or energy conservation project, including: 
▪  Activities listed as eligible; and 
16
Page 24
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
▪  Activities not otherwise listed as eligible – excluding buildings for the general conduct of
government business, general government expenses, and political activities. 
(b) Activities must: 
•  Meet the public service requirements, although services specifically designed to increase
economic opportunities through job training and placement and other employment support
services; 
•  Meet the requirements of the guidelines for evaluating and selecting economic development
project under Section 570.209; and
•  Must not result in the recipient exceeding the 20% limit on planning and administrative costs. 
(c) Eligible Entities are: 
•  Non-profit or for-profit organizations engaged in community development activities primarily
within an identified geographic area and whose primary purpose is the improvement physical, 
economic and social environment; 
•  Section 301 (d) Small Business Investment Companies; including those which are profit making; 
State or local Development Companies; or Community Housing Development Organizations
(CHDOs);
•  Organization similar in purpose, function and scope. 
Eligible planning, urban environmental design and policy-planning management-capacity building
activities – 570.205
a) Planning activities which consist of all costs of gathering data, studies, analysis, and preparation of
plans and the identification of actions that will implement such plans, including, but not limited to: 
▪  Comprehensive plans; 
▪  Community development plans; 
▪  Functional plans, in areas such as: 
▪  Housing, including the development of a consolidated plan; 
▪  Land use and urban environmental design; 
▪  Economic development; 
▪  Open space and recreation; 
▪  Energy use and conservation; 
▪  Floodplain and wetlands management in accordance with the requirements of Executive Orders
11988 and 11990; 
▪  Transportation; 
▪  Utilities; and Historic preservation. 
▪  Other plans and studies such as: 
▪  Small area and neighborhood plans; 
▪  Capital improvements programs; 
17
Page 25
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
▪  Reasonable costs of general environmental, urban environmental design and historic
preservation studies. 
▪  Strategies and action programs to implement plans, including the development of codes, 
ordinances and regulations; 
▪  Support of clearinghouse functions, such as those specified in Executive Order 12372; and
▪  Analysis of impediments to fair housing choice. 
•  Policy planning/management/capacity building activities which will enable the recipient to
determine its needs; 
▪  Set long-term goals and short-term objectives, including those related to urban environmental
design; 
▪  Devise programs and activities to meet these goals and objectives; 
▪  Evaluate the progress of such programs and activities in accomplishing these goals and
objectives; and
▪  Carry out management, coordination and monitoring of activities necessary for effective
planning implementation, but excluding the costs necessary to implement such plans. 
Program administrative costs – 570.206
a) General management, oversight and coordination. Reasonable costs of overall program management, 
coordination, monitoring, and evaluation, including: 
•  Salaries, wages, and related costs of staff engaged in program administration. Program
administration includes the following types of assignments; 
•  Providing local officials and citizens with information about the program; 
•  Preparing program budgets and schedules, and amendments thereto; 
•  Developing systems for assuring compliance with program requirements; 
•  Developing interagency agreements and agreements with sub-recipients and contractors to
carry out program activities; 
•  Monitoring program activities for progress and compliance with program requirements; 
•  Preparing reports and other documents related to the program for submission to HUD; 
•  Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring findings; 
•  Evaluating program results against stated objectives; and
•  Managing or supervising persons whose primary responsibilities with regard to the program
include such assignments as those described in paragraph (a)(1)(i) through (viii) of this section. 
•  Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the program; 
•  Administrative services performed under third party contracts or agreements, including such
services as general legal services, accounting services, and audit services; and
•  Other costs for goods and services required for administration of the program, including such
goods and services as rental or purchase of equipment, insurance, utilities, office supplies, and
rental and maintenance (but not purchase) of office space. 
18
Page 26
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
(b) Public information. The providing of information and other resources to residents and citizen
organizations participating in the planning, implementation, or assessment of activities being
assisted with CDBG funds. 
(c) Fair housing activities. Provision of fair housing services designed to further the fair housing
objectives of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601–20) by making all persons, without regard to race, 
color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status or handicap, aware of the range of housing
opportunities available to them; 
(d) Indirect costs. Indirect costs may be charged to the CDBG program under a cost allocation plan
prepared in accordance with OMB Circular A–21, A–87, or A–122 as applicable. 
(e) Submission of applications for federal programs. Preparation of documents required for submission
to HUD to receive funds under the CDBG and UDAG programs. In addition, CDBG funds may be used
to prepare applications for other Federal programs where the recipient determines that such
activities are necessary or appropriate to achieve its community development objectives. 
(f) Administrative expenses to facilitate housing. CDBG funds may be used for necessary administrative
expenses in planning or obtaining financing for housing; 
(g) Section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. Reasonable costs for overall program
management of the Rental Rehabilitation and Housing Development programs authorized under
section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, whether or not such activities are otherwise
assisted with funds provided under this part. 
(h) Reasonable costs equivalent to those described in paragraphs (a), (b), (e), and (f) of this section for
overall program management of: 
(i) A Federally designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community;and
(j) The HOME program under title II of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42
U.S.C. 12701 note).
Ineligible activities – 570.207
The general rule is that any activity that is not authorized under the provisions of §§570.201–570.206 is
ineligible to be assisted with CDBG funds. This section identifies specific activities that are ineligible and
provides guidance in determining the eligibility of other activities frequently associated with housing
and community development. 
(a) The following activities may not be assisted with CDBG funds: 
•  Buildings or portions thereof, used for the general conduct of government General
government expenses;  Political activities. 
(b) The following activities may not be assisted with CDBG funds unless carried out as a special
economic development activity, or as a public service, or by an eligible community-based
development organization, or by the recipient as specifically authorized. 
•  Purchase of equipment; 
19
Page 27
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
•  Construction equipment; 
•  Fire protection equipment. Fire protection equipment is considered for this purpose to be
an integral part of a public facility and thus, purchase of such equipment would be eligible
under §570.201(c);
•  Furnishings and personal property; 
•  Operating and maintenance expenses; 
•  Payment of salaries for staff, utility costs and similar expenses necessary for the operation
of public works and facilities; New housing construction; Income payments. 
20
Page 28
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
APPENDIX C: 
21
Page 29
Logic Model Example: Completion of Treatment for Tuberculosis Disease by Using Incentives and Enabler1
Inputs  Activities Outputs
(No. and%) 
Short-Term
Outcomes(% 
Intermediate-Term
Outcomes(%) 
Long-Term
Outcomes(%)
Funding to support
bus passes or
extended clinic
hours
Adequate staffing
to conduct
activities
Support from
management for
conducting
activities, including
extended clinic
hours 
Provide incentives
to patients
Extend hours for in­ 
patient DOT
Train staff on
strategies for
following up after
missed
appointments
Follow up same day
after missed
appointments 
Patients who are
given bus passes
Patients who come
to clinic during
extended hours
Staff trained on
strategies for
following up after
missed
appointments
Patients who miss
visits and are
rescheduled within
24 hours 
Decrease in
patients who
experi•ence
transportation and
scheduling barriers
Increase in patients
who arrive at the
clinic for in-person
DOT 
Decrease in
patients with
missed doses of in­ 
person DOT 
Increase in patients
completing TB
treatment
Abbreviations: DOT, directly observed therapy; TB, tuberculosis. 
* See Completion of Treatment for Tuberculosis Disease by Using Incentives and Enablers for the accompanying program evaluation plan
Page 30
Consolidated Financial Statements
South Middlesex Opportunity Council, Inc. 
and Affiliates
June 30, 2020 and 2019
Page 31
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Consolidated Financial Statements
Table of Contents
Consolidated Financial Statements: 
Independent Auditors’ Report
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
Consolidated Statements of Activities
Consolidated Statements of Functional Expenses
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
1-2
3
4
5-8
9
10-26
Page 32
Independent Auditors’ Report 
The Board of Directors
South Middlesex Opportunity Council, Inc. and Affiliates
Framingham, Massachusetts
We have audited the accompanying consolidated financial statements of South Middlesex Opportunity
Council, Inc. and Affiliates (the “Organization”), which comprise the consolidated statements of financial
position as of June 30, 2020 and 2019, and the related consolidated statements of activities, functional
expenses, and cash flows for the years then ended, and the related notes to the consolidated financial
statements. 
Management’s Responsibility for the Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these consolidated financial
statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America; this includes the design, implementation, and maintenance of internal control relevant to the
preparation and fair presentation of consolidated financial statements that are free from material
misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 
Auditors’ Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our
audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the
United States of America. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free from material
misstatement. 
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in
the consolidated financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditors’ judgment, 
including the assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, 
whether due to fraud or error. In making those risk assessments, the auditor considers internal control
relevant to the entity’s preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial statements in
order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of
expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control. Accordingly, we express no
such opinion. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of significant accounting estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the
overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. 
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for
our audit opinion. 
Page 33
Opinion
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material
respects, the consolidated financial position of South Middlesex Opportunity Council, Inc. and Affiliates
as of June 30, 2020 and 2019, and the changes in its net assets and its cash flows for the years then
ended in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. 
Emphasis of Matters
As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, effective July 1, 2019, the Organization
adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, 
ASU No. 2018-08, Clarifying the Scope and the Accounting Guidance for Contributions Received and
Contributions Made and ASU No. 2016-18, Statement of Cash Flows, Restricted Cash. Our opinion is
not modified with respect to these matters. 
January 15, 2021
Boston, Massachusetts 
Page 34
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC.
AND AFFILIATES
Statements prepared by Mike Hutnak 
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
June 30,
Assets  2020  2019
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
Certificates of deposit
Restricted cash
Restricted cash, Home modification loan program
Accounts receivable:
Contracts and grants
Third parties - net of allowance for doubtful accounts
Other - net of allowance for doubtful accounts
Investments
Prepaid expenses and deposits 
$  6,936,937 $  4,009,982
2,413,767  1,138,713
922,325  843,499
1,989,350  4,109,484
5,995,778
2,045,379
1,665,664
453,637
14,334 
7,323,409
989,611
794,672
451,715
68,945
Total current assets  22,437,171  19,730,030
Other assets:
Other assets
Notes receivable, long-term portion
Home modification program receivable
Property, plant and equipment, net
Construction in progress
Investment in affiliate
Due from related party 
2,075,865
273,358
16,469,436
80,224,057
3,347,136
25,000
- 
2,665,025
277,664
15,915,559
78,885,730
2,558,071
25,000
151,191
Total other assets  102,414,852 100,478,240
Total assets  $  124,852,023 $  120,208,270
Liabilities and Net Assets
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
Accrued expenses
Obligations under capital lease, current portion
Mortgage notes payable, current portion
Deferred revenue 
$  4,743,766 $  4,089,268
2,464,321  1,567,433
113,100  73,807
1,435,690  1,856,447
5,085,981  3,131,790
Total current liabilities  13,842,858  10,718,745
Other liabilities:
Lines of credit
Obligations under capital lease, long-term portion
Mortgage notes payable, long-term portion
Home modification loan program advances payable
Home modification loan program pool payable
Other liabilities 
2,727,555
259,480
65,771,463
16,469,436
1,989,350
105,113 
4,987,783
108,510
62,416,516
15,915,559
4,109,484
121,535
Total other liabilities  87,322,397  87,659,387
Total liabilities  101,165,255  98,378,132
Net assets:
Without donor restrictions
With donor restrictions 
22,034,230
1,652,538 
20,045,245
1,784,893
Total net assets  23,686,768  21,830,138
Total liabilities and net assets  $  124,852,023 $  120,208,270
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.  3
Page 35
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC.
AND AFFILIATES
Statements prepared by Mike Hutnak
Consolidated Statements of Activities
Years Ended June 30,
Revenues, gains and other support:
Contracts and grants
Third party billings, net of free services and contractual allowances
Tuition income
Other program revenue
Donated goods and services
Contributions
Rental income
Other income
Gain (loss) on sale of property
Total revenue and gains
Net assets released from restriction
Total revenue, gains and other support
Expenses and losses:
Program services:
Housing
Open Pantry Community Services, Inc.
Education and Child Care
Domestic Violence
Substance Abuse
Energy and Financial Assistance
Transitional Housing
Employment and Training
Mental Health Services
Nutrition
Total program services before depreciation and amortization
Supporting services:
General and administrative
Fundraising
Total supporting services before depreciation and amortization
Total expenses and losses before depreciation and amortization
Change in net assets before depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense
Change in net assets
Net assets, beginning of year
Net assets, end of year 
Without
Donor
Restrictions 
2020
With
Donor
Restrictions Total
$  84,145,395 $
9,256,883
573,474
1,499,581
862,302
1,731,510
7,677,194
1,028,948
(22,096) 
1,435,138 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 
$  85,580,533 
9,256,883
573,474
1,499,581
862,302
1,731,510
7,677,194
1,028,948
(22,096)
106,753,191  1,435,138 108,188,329
1,567,493  (1,567,493)  -
108,320,684  (132,355) 108,188,329 
Without
Donor
Restrictions 
2019
With
Donor
Restrictions Total
$  82,742,645 $
5,993,306
818,176
1,254,636
1,196,011
3,120,772
7,660,059
106,921
1,047,802 
959,832 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 
$  83,702,477 
5,993,306
818,176
1,254,636
1,196,011
3,120,772
7,660,059
106,921
1,047,802
103,940,328  959,832 104,900,160
531,630  (531,630)  -
104,471,958  428,202 104,900,160
10,204,739 
1,828,052
11,239,454 
1,145,681
5,822,216
45,437,991 
15,013,617 
1,105,330
4,259,430
2,231,419
98,287,929 
-  10,204,739 
-  1,828,052 
-  11,239,454 
-  1,145,681 
-  5,822,216 
-  45,437,991 
-  15,013,617 
-  1,105,330 
-  4,259,430 
-  2,231,419 
-  98,287,929 
11,694,335 
2,011,549
10,313,677 
1,162,926
4,519,724
44,831,285 
13,877,502 
1,152,354
3,884,667
1,900,523
95,348,542 
-  11,694,335 
-  2,011,549 
-  10,313,677 
-  1,162,926 
-  4,519,724 
-  44,831,285 
-  13,877,502 
-  1,152,354 
-  3,884,667 
-  1,900,523 
-  95,348,542 
4,911,717
140,625
5,052,342
103,340,271
4,980,413
2,991,428
1,988,985
20,045,245
$  22,034,230 $ 
-  4,911,717 
-  140,625 
-  5,052,342 
-  103,340,271
(132,355) 4,848,058 
-  2,991,428 
(132,355) 1,856,630 
1,784,893  21,830,138 
1,652,538 $  23,686,768 
3,687,677
143,731
3,831,408
99,179,950
5,292,008
2,718,773
2,573,235
17,472,010
$  20,045,245 $ 
-
-
-
-
428,202
-
428,202
1,356,691 
1,784,893 $ 
3,687,677
143,731
3,831,408
99,179,950 
5,720,210
2,718,773
3,001,437
18,828,701 
21,830,138 
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.  4
Page 36
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC.
AND AFFILIATES
Statements prepared by Mike Hutnak
Consolidated Statement of Functional Expenses
Year Ended June 30, 2020
Expenses and losses:
Salaries and wages
Employee benefits and payroll taxes 
Housing 
Open Pantry
Community
Services, Inc. 
Education
and
Child Care 
Program Services
Domestic
Violence 
Substance
Abuse 
Energy and
Financial
Assistance 
Balance
Forward
$  2,723,939 $
82 3,74 6 
$ 854,603
267,960 
5,827,075 $
1,813,881 
$ 720,791
226,200 
3,055,719 $
930,779 
$  15,143,123 1,960,996
613,543  4,676,109 
Total salaries and related expenses  3,547,685  1,122,563  7,640,956  946,991  3,986,498  2,574,539 19,819,232 
Client assistance
Professional fees and contracted services
Occupancy
Equipment expenses
Dietary
Donated goods and services
Transportation
Supplies
Telephone
Insurance
Advertising
Training
Interest expense
Bad debt expense
Other
Fundraising
Management fees
Eliminating entries 
1,309,766
211,311
3,859,197
33,215
2,830
-
197 ,675
666 ,736
113 ,135
640 ,030
840
2,02 0
1,900 ,479
891,476
3,088
-
-
(3,174,744) 
35,064
104,144
141 ,158
10,586
26,272
458,322
37,51 7
54,50 4
17,14 3
18,38 3
19 1
1,725
3, 529
-
122
-
-
(203,171) 
1,431
1,481,960 
804,659
84, 036
347,083
277,869
110,863
342,245
40, 587
71, 771
3,596
31,333
610
-
45 5
-
-
- 
13,113 
18,097 
83,760
5,675
5,47 6
-
14,260
22,435
10,210
10,362
273
15,029
-
-
-
-
-
- 
171,292 
54,174
956,647 
129,807
129,570
45,018
55,868
115,188 
113,519 
38,160
36 6
12,093
3,615
10,401
-
-
-
- 
36,624,882
54,465
181,360
42,38 5
228,099
-
25,416
4,956,759
22,41 9
41,263
31,866
649,406
4,135
-
997
-
-
- 
38,155,548
1,924 ,151
6,026,781
305 ,704
739 ,330
781 ,209
441 ,599
6,157,867
317 ,013
819 ,969
37,132
711 ,606
1,91 2,36 8
901 ,877
4,662
-
-
(3,377,915)
Expenses and losses before depreciation and amortization 10,204,739  1,828,052  11,239,454  1,145,681  5,822,216  45,437,991 75,678,133
Depreciation and amortization  2,686,366  3,869  -  2,298 -  2,692,533 -
Total expenses  $  12,891,105 $  1,831,921 $  11,239,454 $  1,145,681 $  5,824,514 $  45, 437, 991 $  78, 370, 666
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.  5
Page 37
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC.
AND AFFILIATES
Consolidated Statement of Functional Expenses…continued
Year Ended June 30, 2020 
Statements prepared by Mike Hutnak
Expenses and losses:
Salaries and wages
Employee benefits and payroll taxes 
Balance
Forward 
Transitional
Housing 
Program Services
Employment
and
Training 
Mental
Health
Services Nutrition 
Supporting Services
General and
Administrative Fundraising Total
$  15,143,123 $
4,676,109 
$ 5,117,935
1,587,794 
628,722 $
196,321 
$ 2,823,012
651 ,99 6 
$ 1,245,246
351 ,00 5 
$ 3,083,676
370 ,81 8 
$  28,097,717 56,003 
17,321  7,851,364
Total salaries and related expenses  19,819,232  6,705,729  825,043  3,475,008  1,596,251  3,454,494  73,324 35,949,081 
Client assistance
Professional fees and contracted services
Occupancy
Equipment expenses
Dietary
Donated goods and services
Transportation
Supplies
Telephone
Insurance
Advertising
Training
Interest expense
Bad debt expense
Other
Fundraising
Management fees
Eliminating entries 
38,155,548
1,924,151
6,026, 781
305 ,70 4
73 9, 33 0
78 1, 209
441 ,59 9
6, 157 ,86 7
317 ,01 3
819 ,96 9
37, 132
711 ,60 6
1, 912 ,36 8
90 1,87 7
4,662
-
-
(3,377,915) 
2,434,029
368,211
4,290,456
89, 380
103 ,97 4
288 ,36 9
143 ,31 3
327,815
148 ,20 2
97, 608
6,518
8,941
1,922
-
3,255
-
-
(4,105) 
51 ,99 0
143 ,88 7
178,000
16 ,70 9
6,037
-
29, 071
131 ,19 5
9,609
9,189
892
33, 249
4,409
-
-
-
-
(333,950) 
280
129,726
535,167
29 ,41 4
5,396
-
11 ,00 0
52, 634
44, 153
38, 523
13 ,11 3
6,120
-
-
650
-
-
(81,754) 
130,347
57, 706
213,116
1,739
4,128
-
3,922
77 ,38 9
130,793 
15 ,58 6
25
205
-
-
212
-
-
- 
16, 091
534,881
140 ,17 1
48, 309
21, 947
-
13, 570
410,433
35, 258
33 ,61 2
10, 507
5,209
159,208
356
39 ,68 6
-
5, 34 1,22 6
(5,353,241) 
-
7,500
11,356
785
416
-
-
6,454
84
632
976
950
-
-
385
37,763
-
- 
40,788,285
3, 166 ,06 2
11,395,047 
492 ,04 0
881 ,22 8
1, 069 ,57 8
64 2, 475
7, 163 ,78 7
685,112
1,015, 119
69, 16 3
766 ,28 0
2, 077 ,90 7
90 2, 233
48, 85 0
37 ,76 3
5, 341 ,22 6
(9,150, 965 )
Expenses and losses before depreciation and amortization 75,678,133  15,013,617  1,105,330  4,259,430  2,231,419  4,911,717  140,625 103,340,271
Depreciation and amortization  2,692,533  120,794  -  -  -  178,101  -  2,991,428 
Total expenses  $  78,370,666 $  15,134,411 $  1, 105 ,330 $  4, 259 ,430 $  2, 231 ,419 $  5, 089 ,818 $  14 0,62 5 $  10 6,33 1,699
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.  6
Page 38
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC.
AND AFFILIATES
Statements prepared by Mike Hutnak
Consolidated Statement of Functional Expenses
Year Ended June 30, 2019
Expenses and losses:
Salaries and wages
Employee benefits and payroll taxes
Total salaries and related expenses
Client assistance
Professional fees and contracted services
Occupancy
Equipment expenses
Dietary
Donated goods and services
Transportation
Supplies
Telephone
Insurance
Advertising
Training
Interest expense
Bad debt expense
Other
Fundraising
Management fees
Eliminating entries
Expenses and losses before depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization
Total expenses 
Housing 
Open Pantry
Community
Services, Inc. 
Program Services
Education
and  Domestic
Child Care Violence 
Substance
Abuse 
Energy and
Financial
Assistance 
Balance
Forward
$  3,294,048 $
292,086 
$ 843,931
269,293 
$ 4,782,765
1,524,069 
$  2,448,612 709,212  $
226,608  744,718 
$  14,042,980 1,964,412
627,430  3,684,204 
3,586,134  1,113,224  6,306,834  935,820  3,193,330  2,591,842  17,727,184 
2, 381, 521
389, 628
4, 000, 077
27, 847
4,300
1, 418
237, 931
703, 845
123, 226
533, 322
89
8, 517
1, 835, 370
145, 168
22, 827
-
-
(2,306,885) 
30,562
133,967
152, 616
24, 899
42,632
581,729
48, 342
52, 351
13, 432
18, 102
188
1, 428
4,719
-
-
-
-
(206,642) 
200
1,621,594
788, 105
44, 062
454, 158
554, 445
120, 359
276, 313
32, 817
61, 321
8,043
45, 386
40
-
-
-
-
- 
9, 986
44,802 
87,042 
7,008
9,448
-
16,051 
23,552 
7,232
9,638
614
10,594
32
-
1, 107
-
-
- 
127,181
8, 689
772,899
25, 246
94, 919
45, 264
55,614
96,380
28, 428
46, 119
-
6, 655
2, 130
-
16, 870
-
-
- 
34,169,635 
54, 366
194, 430
104, 549
84, 542
-
31, 806
7, 173, 532
15, 173
40, 666
30, 063
330, 013
4, 270
-
6, 398
-
-
- 
36,719,085 
2,253,046
5,995,169
233,611
689,999
1, 182, 856
510,103
8,325,973
220,308
709,168
38, 997
402,593
1, 84 6,56 1
145, 168
47,202
-
-
(2,513,527)
11,694,335  2,011,549  10,313,677 1,162,926  4,519,724  44,831,285 74,533,496 
2,452,954  8,830  1,023  818  -  5,727  2,469,352
$  14, 147, 289 $  2, 020, 379 $  10, 314, 700 $  1, 163, 744 $  4, 519, 724 $  44, 837, 012 $  77, 002, 848 
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.  7
Page 39
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC.
AND AFFILIATES
Consolidated Statement of Functional Expenses…continued
Year Ended June 30, 2019 
Statements prepared by Mike Hutnak
Expenses and losses:
Salaries and wages
Employee benefits and payroll taxes 
Balance
Forward 
Transitional
Housing 
Program Services
Employment
and
Training 
Mental
Health
Services Nutrition 
Supporting Services
General and
Administrative Fundraising Total
$  14,042,980 $
3,684,204 
$ 4,782,017
1,499,624 
628,937 $
200,605 
$ 2,688,817
359 ,39 2 
$ 1,066,769
292 ,04 3 
$ 1,896,842
237 ,68 5 
$  25,148,339 41,977 
13,412  6,286,965
Total salaries and related expenses  17,727,184  6,281,641  829,542  3,048,209  1,358,812  2,134,527  55,389 31,435,304 
Client assistance
Professional fees and contracted services
Occupancy
Equipment expenses
Dietary
Donated goods and services
Transportation
Supplies
Telephone
Insurance
Advertising
Training
Interest expense
Bad debt expense
Other
Fundraising
Management fees
Eliminating entries 
36,719,085
2,253,046
5,995, 169
233 ,61 1
68 9, 99 9
1, 182 ,85 6
510 ,10 3
8, 325 ,97 3
220 ,30 8
709 ,16 8
38, 997
402 ,59 3
1, 846 ,56 1
14 5,16 8
47 ,20 2
-
-
(2,513, 527 ) 
2,125,445
238,432
4,189,737
109 ,63 1
106 ,20 4
293,336
144 ,33 7
282,051
84, 891
82, 486
565
10, 088
2,918
-
3,383
-
-
(77 ,643 ) 
26 ,82 1
134 ,51 5
110,619
19, 295
1,219
-
20, 981
107 ,99 0
6,712
9,235
1,240
1,630
1,255
-
-
-
-
(118,700) 
25
135,267
321,721
70 ,06 8
12, 858
-
10 ,15 1
71, 102
29, 534
40, 813
888
2,636
-
157,421
1,07 7
-
-
(17,103) 
175,774
55, 385
187,278
9,191
4,148
-
4,285
75 ,32 1
12 ,29 4
16 ,83 4
407
754
40
-
-
-
-
- 
1,012
755,355
125 ,71 1
40, 155
22, 581
-
23, 111
257,558
24 ,32 0
72 ,87 0
6,138
3,319
205 ,02 6
-
63, 197
-
4, 37 7,50 0
(4,424,703) 
-
-
11,356
299
202
-
42
10,132
41
340
-
159
-
-
10,468
55,303
-
- 
39,048,162
3, 572 ,00 0
10,941,591 
482 ,25 0
837 ,21 1
1, 476 ,19 2
713,010
9, 130 ,12 7
378,100
931 ,74 6
48 ,23 5
421 ,17 9
2, 055 ,80 0
30 2, 589
125,327
55 ,30 3
4, 377 ,50 0
(7,151,676)
Expenses and losses before depreciation and amortization 74,533,496  13,877,502  1,152,354  3,884,667  1,900,523  3,687,677  143,731 99,179,950 
Depreciation and amortization  2,469,352  110,910  1,432  -  1,023  136,056  -  2,718,773 
Total expenses  $  77,002,848 $  13,988,412 $  1, 153 ,786 $  3, 884 ,667 $  1, 901 ,546 $  3, 823 ,733 $  14 3,73 1 $  10 1,89 8,723
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.  8
Page 40
Statements prepared by Mike Hutnak 
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC.
AND AFFILIATES
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Years Ended June 30,
Cash flows from operating activities:
Change in net assets
Adjustments to reconcile change in net assets to
net cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation and amortization
(Gain) loss on sale of property
Gain on donation of property
Gain on investments
Changes in:
Change in accounts receivable
Change in prepaid expenses, deposits and other assets
Change in notes receivable
Due from related party
Change in accounts payable
Change in accrued expenses
Change in deferred revenue
Change in other liabilities
Home modification loan program pool payable
Net cash provided by operating activities
Cash flows from investing activities:
Purchases of property and equipment
Proceeds from sale of property and equipment
Construction in progress costs incurred
Purchase of certificates of deposit
Interest earned on certificates of deposit
Sales/(purchases) of investments
Net cash used in investing activities
Cash flows from financing activities:
Repayment of obligations under capital leases
Proceeds from mortgage notes payable
Repayment of mortgage notes payable
Net proceeds (repayments) on revolving line of credit
Mortgage acquisition costs incurred
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash, beginning of year
Cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash, end of year
Cash and cash equivalents
Restricted cash
Restricted cash, Home modification program
Total cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
Cash paid during the year for interest
Mortgage obligations incurred for purchase of property
Capital lease obligations incurred for use of equipment 
Construction in progress costs incurred remaining in accounts payable
See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. 
2020  2019
$  1,856,630 $  3,001,437
2,991,428
22,096
-
(6,460)
(599,129)
643,771
4,306
151,191
654,500
896,888
1,954,191
(16,422)
(2,120,134)
6,432,856 
2,718,773
(1,047,802)
(1,814,183)
(29,290)
(3,638,968)
52,890
(110,475)
20,732
2,317,668
245,641
(291,020)
(10,312)
726,959
2,142,050
(834,006)
282,915
(4,110,858)
(1,272,786)
(2,268)
4,538
(5,932,465) 
(57,715)
1,985,728
(3,065,676)
-
(3,301)
(9,611)
(1,150,575)
(132,766)
4,076,217
(1,279,352)
(2,260,228)
(18,615) 
(125,423)
227,201 
(1,369,959)
861,459
(214,476)
385,256  (621,198)
885,647  370,277
8,962,965  8,592,688
$  9,848,612 $  8,962,965
6,936,937
922,325
1,989,350 
4,009,982
843,499
4,109,484
$  9,848,612 $  8,962,965
$  2,095,909 $  2,046,558
$  -  $  6,012,715
$  323,029 $  20,496
$  1,241,302 $  -
9
Page 41
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 - Nature of Activities and Significant Accounting Policies 
Nature of Activities
South Middlesex Opportunity Council, Inc. (“SMOC”) and Affiliates (the “Organization”) are not-for-
profit corporations (excluding Freedom Village LLC) originally established in 1965 dedicated to
support the improvement of the quality of life for low-income residents of the South Middlesex, 
Massachusetts area and the greater community at large. 
Freedom Village LLC, a Massachusetts corporation, is a wholly-owned subsidiary of South
Middlesex Non-Profit Housing Corporation, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of SMOC. Based in
West Boylston, Freedom Village LLC provides low income and affordable housing. 
A summary of the Organization’s significant accounting policies follows: 
Basis of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of South Middlesex Opportunity
Council, Inc., South Middlesex Non-Profit Housing Corporation, Inc., South Middlesex Opportunity
Properties, Inc., Worcester Public Inebriate Program, Inc., P.I.P. Foundation, Inc., Open Pantry
Community Services, Inc.,  Freedom Village LLC, the Martin Luther King, Jr. Business
Empowerment Center, Chandler 237 Realty, Inc. and Lowell Transitional Living Center, Inc. These
corporations are under common management and control and are consolidated for financial
statement purposes. All significant intercompany account balances and transactions have been
eliminated in consolidation. 
Financial Statement Presentation
The consolidated financial statements have been presented on the accrual basis of accounting and
in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which
required the Organization report information regarding its financial policies and activities based on
the existence or absence of donor-imposed restrictions. Accordingly, net assets and changes
therein are classified as follows: 
Net assets without donor restrictions represent the portion of net assets of the Organization that
is available for general use and not subject to donor restrictions. Net assets without donor
restrictions also include investment in property, plant and equipment, net of accumulated
depreciation and related debt obligations. 
Net assets with donor restrictions represent contributions and other inflows of assets whose use
by the Organization is limited by donor-imposed stipulations that either expire by passage of
time or can be fulfilled and removed by actions of the Organization pursuant to those
stipulations. 
10
Page 42
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 - Nature of Activities and Significant Accounting Policies (Continued) 
Classification and Reporting of Net Assets
Revenues are reported as increases in net assets without donor restrictions unless the use of the
related asset is limited by donor restrictions. Expenses are reported as decreases in net assets
without donor restrictions. Expirations of net assets with donor restrictions, that is, the donor-
imposed stipulated purpose has been accomplished and/or the stipulated time period has elapsed, 
are reported as releases to net assets without donor restrictions. 
Fair Value Measurements
The Organization reports certain assets and liabilities as fair value on a recurring and non-recurring
basis depending on the accounting policy for the particular item. Fair value is defined as the price
that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants at the measurement date. Recurring fair value measures include
investment accounts. These standards require an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs
(such as quoted prices in active markets) and minimize the use of unobservable inputs (such as
appraisals or valuation techniques) to determine fair value. Fair value standards also require the
Organization to classify financial instruments into a three-level hierarchy, based on the priority of
inputs to the valuation technique as follows: 
Level 1 – inputs are quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the
Organization has the ability to access at measurement date. 
Level 2 – inputs are other than quoted prices included in Level 1 that are either directly or
indirectly observable. 
Level 3 – inputs are unobservable for the instrument and include situations where there is little, 
if any, market activity for the instrument. The inputs into the determination of fair value
require significant management judgment or estimation. 
The level in the fair value hierarchy within which a fair value measurement in its entirety falls is
based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety. 
Market price is affected by several factors, including the type of instrument and the characteristics
specific to the instrument, as well as the effects of market, interest and credit risk. Instruments with
readily available active quoted prices or for which fair value can be measured from actively quoted
prices generally will have a higher degree of market price observability and less judgment used in
measuring fair value. It is reasonably possible that change in values of these instruments will occur
in the near term and that such changes could materially affect amounts reported in these financial
statements. 
11
Page 43
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 - Nature of Activities and Significant Accounting Policies (Continued) 
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and
assumptions. These estimates affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures
of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts
of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those
estimates. 
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Organization defines cash equivalents as short-term highly liquid investments with original
maturities of three months or less. Cash and cash equivalents are reported at cost plus earned
interest. Cash and cash equivalents held by investment managers are considered part of
investments given the expectation of near term reinvestment. The Organization maintains its cash
in bank deposit accounts, which, at times, may exceed federally insured limits. The Organization
monitors its exposure associated with cash and cash equivalents and has not experienced any
losses in such accounts. 
Certificates of Deposit
The Organization invests in fixed rate certificates of deposit. The certificates of deposit are valued
at cost plus accrued interest. 
Restricted Cash and Restricted Cash - Home Modification Loan Program
Restricted cash represents escrow accounts associated with financing arrangements, tenant
security deposits and funds held for clients. Restricted cash - Home Modification Loan Program
(HMP) represents cash associated with the program. These amounts are carried at cost. 
Accounts Receivable
The Organization records accounts receivable when there is an unconditional right to consideration
under contract and grant arrangements. Accounts receivable consist primarily of amounts related to
contracts and grants from state and local governments and amounts due from third-party payor
sources. 
Accounts receivable are evaluated for collectability and recorded at their estimated net realizable
value. The allowance is based on experience and other circumstances. It is the Organization’s
policy to charge off uncollectible receivables when management determines the receivable will not
be collected. Recoveries of accounts receivable previously written off are recorded as revenue
when received. Interest is not charged on accounts receivable. 
12
Page 44
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 - Nature of Activities and Significant Accounting Policies (Continued) 
Investments and Investment Return
Investments are reported in the consolidated financial statements at fair value. Fair value is
determined as per the fair value policy elsewhere in this section. Investment income including
interest, dividends, and net realized and unrealized gains and losses less external and direct
investment expenses are included in revenues and other support. The investment objective of the
Organization is to invest its assets in a prudent manner to achieve a long-term rate of return
sufficient to increase investment values after inflation. 
Other Assets
Other assets primarily consists of advances to Bixby Road 19, LLC (“Bixby”), an unconsolidated
related party for construction costs, developer fees, overhead and operating advances for a
property. The property houses one of the Organization’s programs. The advances are due annually
based on net cash flows. Amounts due to the Organization from Bixby totaled $2,075,865 and
$1,816,308 at June 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. All outstanding amounts are due on the earlier
to occur of August 2030, the liquidation of Bixby or the removal of the Managing Member of Bixby. 
Notes Receivable 
Notes receivable consist of zero interest loans due from participants through the Micro-Loan
Program. The Micro-Loan Program lends start-up funds to small local businesses. When the loans
are repaid, the funds are put back into the pool for potential new loans. 
Home Modification Loan Program Receivable, Program Advances and Loan Pool Payable
Home modification loan program receivable consists of loans funded to qualified low income
individuals to complete property repairs and renovations. The Organization administers this
program for the Community Economic Development Assistance Corporation (CEDAC). When the
loans are repaid, the funds are put back into the loan pool payable for potential new loans. The
Organization carries no risk of loss on this program. If a borrower cannot repay the loan, CEDAC
absorbs the loss. There is a corresponding liability due to CEDAC included in Home Modification
Loan Program advances payable on the consolidated statements of financial position. 
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost when such amounts are above management’s
threshold for capitalization and have a useful life of one year or more or, if received by donation, at
estimated fair market value at the time such properties were received. Fair value of donated
property, plant and equipment uses a Level 3 market approach as described elsewhere in this
section. Depreciation and amortization are provided over the estimated useful lives of the
respective assets on a straight-line basis as follows: 
Years
Buildings and building improvements
Leasehold improvements
Motor vehicles
Furnishings and equipment 
20-40
3-35
5
3-10 
13
Page 45
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 - Nature of Activities and Significant Accounting Policies (Continued) 
Property, Plant and Equipment (Continued) 
Expenditures for major renewals and improvements are capitalized, while expenditures for
maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Furniture, equipment and improvements
purchased under contracts and grants are capitalized as acquired. Costs associated with the
construction of major projects are accumulated in construction in process until completion. The
completed asset is then depreciated over its estimated useful life after being placed in service. 
Management is unaware of any liabilities related to asset retirement or environmental obligations
related to its property and plant. The Organization will recognize a liability in the period in which
sufficient information is available to reasonably estimate the obligation. 
Investment in Affiliate
The Organization entered into a joint venture LLC with other behavioral health entities for the
purpose of facilitating patient care coordination to facilitate the efficient and appropriate delivery of
behavioral health services to the Metro West area. The Organization has invested $25,000 to date
and the entity commenced operations in 2018. The Organization accounts for this activity under the
cost method. 
Mortgage Notes Payable
Mortgage notes payable are reported at the fair value of the remaining obligations under the related
debt issue, net of the issuance costs. The Organization incurs debt issuance costs, including bank
and professional fees, in connection with certain financing arrangements. These costs are
capitalized and are amortized on a straight-line method over twenty years, which has been deemed
by the Organization to be a reasonable average life for their debt. 
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue represents advanced rent payments from funding sources as well as the amount
of unearned related services that are in progress as of year end related to the Organization’s
programs. Such amounts are reflected as revenue as costs are incurred. 
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is earned under exchange type transactions and contribution type transactions as follows: 
Earned Support
The Organization derives revenue primarily through third party billings and rental income, all of
which are under arrangements which are generally one year or less in length. 
14
Page 46
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 - Nature of Activities and Significant Accounting Policies (Continued) 
Revenue Recognition (Continued) 
Earned Support (Continued) 
Under accounting standards, earned revenue is driven via a principles-based process that requires
that entities: 1) identify the contract with the customer; 2) identify the performance obligations in the
contract; 3) determine the transaction price to the performance obligations; 4) allocate the
transaction price to the performance obligations; and 5) recognize revenue when (or as) 
performance obligations are satisfied. A summary of exchange type transactions and their elements
of revenue recognition are as follows: 
Third-party billings revenue (Medicare, Medicaid, MBHP, and Private Insurance) is reported at the
estimated net realizable amounts due from patients, third-party payors and others for services
rendered and is recorded when performance obligations are satisfied which is generally as services
are rendered. Management does not consider there to be significant judgement involved in the
timing of satisfaction of performance obligations as those are linked to the service performed. 
Rental income consists of payments collected from tenants. Revenue is recorded associated with
the period of occupancy to which the payment relates. Payments received in advance are deferred
until earned. 
Contributed Support
Contributed type transactions and their elements of revenue recognition are as follows: 
Contract and grant revenue consist of cost-reimbursement and unit rate grants from federal, state
and local agencies that are considered conditional contributions in that a barrier to entitlement must
be met prior to the Organization having a right to the related resources. The Organization
recognizes revenue when it has met the barrier to entitlement such as meeting a service delivery
requirement, matching provision or incurring specified qualifying expenses in accordance with a
framework of allowable costs or other barriers as stipulated in the grants and contracts such as
performance requirements and/or the incurrence of allowable qualifying expenses. The
Organization bills funding sources primarily on a monthly basis following the month in which
expenses have incurred or services rendered to a client subject to the limits provided for in those
grants and contracts. If amounts are received in advance of meeting a barrier to entitlement, such
amounts are considered deferred revenue. 
Contributions, including unconditional promises to give, are recorded as revenues as either without
or with donor restrictions in the period verifiably committed by the donor. Contributions of assets
other than cash are recorded at their estimated fair value. Unconditional promises to give that are
expected to be collected in future years are recorded at the present value of the estimated future
cash flows using a risk adjusted discount rate depending on the time period involved. The discount
on these amounts is computed using the appropriate rate commensurate with the timeframe
involved. Amortization of the discount is included in contribution revenue in accordance with the 
15
Page 47
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 - Nature of Activities and Significant Accounting Policies (Continued) 
Revenue Recognition (Continued) 
Contributed Support (Continued) 
donor-imposed restrictions, if any, on the contributions. Contributions with donor-imposed
restrictions that can be met through the passage of time or upon the incurring of expenses
consistent with the purposes are recorded as net assets with donor restrictions and reclassified to
net assets without donor restrictions and reported as “net assets released from restrictions” when
such time or purpose restrictions have been satisfied. Conditional contributions are recorded when
conditions are met which primarily relates to grants and contracts as noted above. 
Contributions of land, buildings and equipment without donor stipulations concerning the use of
such long-lived assets are reported as revenues of the net assets without donor restrictions class. 
Contributions of cash or other assets to be used to acquire land, buildings and equipment with
donor stipulations are reported as revenues of the net assets with donor restrictions class; the
restrictions are considered to be released at the time of acquisition of such long-lived assets. 
The Organization receives support in the form of donated services recorded using a Level 3 fair
value methodology. Contributions of services are reported as without donor restrictions revenues
and expenses at the fair value of the services received only if the services create or enhance a non-
financial asset or would typically need to be purchased by the Organization if they had not been
provided by individuals with those skills. Contributions of goods and space to be used in program
operations are reported as without donor restrictions revenues and expenses at the time the goods
or space is received. Donated goods and services are included in contributions on the consolidated
statements of activities. 
Functional Allocation of Expenses
The costs of providing the various programs and activities and supporting services have been
summarized on a functional basis in the consolidated statements of activities. The consolidated
statements of functional expenses present the natural classification detail by function. Expenses
related directly to a program are distributed to that program while other expenses are allocated to
functional classifications based on percentage of effort, usage, square footage and other criteria as
determined by management. Interest expense is allocated to functional classifications that benefited
from the use of proceeds of debt. Expenses are reported as decreases in net assets without donor
restrictions. 
Income Tax Status
The Organization and related corporations are organized under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code and are generally exempt from Federal and state income taxes. As described in
Note 1, the Organization is the sole member of Freedom Village LLC, a Massachusetts limited
liability corporation. As such, the entity is disregarded for Federal tax purposes and a separate
return is not required. 
16
Page 48
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 - Nature of Activities and Significant Accounting Policies (Continued) 
Uncertain Tax Positions
The Organization accounts for the effect of any uncertain tax positions based on a “more likely than
not” threshold to the recognition of the tax positions being sustained based on the technical merits
of the position under scrutiny by the applicable taxing authority. If a tax position or positions are
deemed to result in uncertainties of those positions, the unrecognized tax benefit is estimated
based on a “cumulative probability assessment” that aggregates the estimated tax liability for all
uncertain tax positions. Interest and penalties assessed, if any, are accrued as income tax
expense. The Organization has identified its tax status as a tax-exempt entity and its determination
as to its income being related or unrelated as its only significant tax positions. However, the
Organization has determined that such tax positions do not result in an uncertainty requiring
recognition. The Organization is not currently under examination by any taxing jurisdiction. The
Organization’s Federal and state tax returns are generally open for examination for three years
following the date filed. 
Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications have been made to the 2019 consolidated financial statements to conform
to the presentation used in 2020. These reclassifications had no effect on the reported change in
net assets. 
Newly Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
Effective July 1, 2019, the Organization adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-
09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, associated with revenue recognition. This standard
outlines a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from
contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance, including
industry-specific guidance. The guidance is based on the principle that an entity should recognize
revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the
consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. 
The standard addresses inconsistency in revenue recognition by outlining a principles-based
system which requires that there be a contract with a customer, that performance obligations be
identified, that transaction price be determined, that transaction price is allocated to performance
obligations and that revenue be recorded when or as the performance obligations are satisfied over
the contract term. The guidance also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing
and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts, including significant
judgments and changes in judgments and assets recognized from costs incurred to fulfill a contract. 
Associated with the adoption of this standard, consideration was given to the accounting treatment
of certain costs to obtain and fulfill a contract. Certain incremental costs of obtaining a contract with
a customer and costs incurred in fulfilling a contract with a customer, that are not in the scope of
other existing guidance, should be analyzed for capitalization. There were no costs incurred to
obtain and fulfill contracts and, accordingly, no change was made to this accounting. 
17
Page 49
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 - Nature of Activities and Significant Accounting Policies (Continued) 
Newly Adopted Accounting Pronouncements (Continued) 
Effective July 1, 2019, the Organization also adopted ASU No. 2018-08, Clarifying the Scope and
the Accounting Guidance for Contributions Received and Contributions Made, using the modified
retrospective method. 
The contribution standard addresses inconsistency in revenue recognition when an item should be
considered a contribution or an exchange type transaction. Exchanges would be accounted for
using the revenue recognition standards above. It also provides guidance as to when a contribution
should be considered conditional which, for example, the case is often when funds are received
under federal and state grants and contracts. Conditional contributions have different revenue
recognition when compared to non-reciprocal transfers of resources in that amounts are reflected
as earned when barriers to entitlement are overcome with any difference being deferred or a
receivable as applicable. 
The adoption of these standards did not impact reported revenue in the period. Revenue
recognition measurement practices were determined to be the same as under prior standards. In
evaluating the effects of the change, transactions in process as of July 1, 2019 were considered. 
In addition, certain changes from adopting these new standards resulted in changes to terminology
which impacted certain disclosures and presentation of amounts. 
During 2020, the Organization also adopted ASU No. 2016-18, Statement of Cash Flows, 
Restricted Cash.  The update requires entities to include restricted cash or restricted cash
equivalents with cash and cash equivalents when reconciling the beginning-of-period and end-of-
period total amounts shown on the consolidated statements of cash flows. 
Future Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases, 
which requires a lessee to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability for all leases, initially
measured at the present value of the lease payments, in its statement of financial position. The
standard also requires a lessee to recognize a single lease cost, calculated so that the cost of the
lease is allocated over the lease term, on a generally straight-line basis. The guidance also
expands the required quantitative and qualitative disclosures surrounding leases. The ASU is
effective for fiscal year ending June 30, 2023 for the Organization. The Organization is evaluating
the impact this will have on the consolidated financial statements. 
Management believes that other pending accounting standards will be of limited impact. 
Subsequent Events
The Organization evaluated subsequent events through January 15, 2021, the date the
consolidated financial statements were available to be issued. 
18
Page 50
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 - Nature of Activities and Significant Accounting Policies (Continued) 
Subsequent Events (Continued) 
Subsequent to the fiscal year end, the Organization entered into bond financing in the amount of
$21,454,500 from the Massachusetts Development Finance Agency privately placed with Middlesex
Savings Bank. The issuance consists of $15,561,000 Series A Bond and $5,853,500 Series B
Bond, collectively the “Bonds”. The Bonds mature on September 17, 2035 and are collateralized by
certain land and buildings of the Organization. The proceeds from the bonds were used to refinance
real estate acquisition debt, will be used to construct various capital improvement projects used by
the Organization for program services and to pay certain bond issuance costs. The Series A Bond
and Series B Bond bears interest at a fixed rate of 3.51% and requires monthly principal and
interest payments of $70,403 and $26,483, respectively. Approximately $5.1M of new debt was
entered into during this transaction. 
Note 2 - Liquidity and Availability 
The Organization regularly monitors liquidity to meet its operating needs and other contractual
commitments while also striving to maximize the investment of its available funds. The Organization
has various sources of liquidity at its disposal, including cash and cash equivalents, certificates of
deposit and lines of credit. 
In addition to financial assets available to meet general expenditures over the next twelve months, the
Organization operates with a balanced budget and anticipates collecting sufficient revenue to cover
general expenditures not covered by donor restricted funds. Refer to the consolidated statements of
cash flows which identify the sources and uses of the Organization’s cash and show positive cash
generated by operations for the years ended June 30, 2020 and 2019. 
The following table shows the amounts held by the Organization that could readily be made available
within one year of the statement of financial position date to meet general expenditures: 
Cash and equivalents
Certificates of deposit
Accounts receivable
Investments 
2020  2019 
$  6,936,937 $  4,009,982 
1,225,183  1,138,713
9,706,821  9,107,692 
453,637  451,715
$  18,322,578 $  14,708,102 
19
Page 51
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 3 - Related Party Transactions 
The corporate clerk of the Organization (non-voting) is a partner in a law firm that represents the
Organization. The Organization incurred fees of approximately $337,000 and $461,500 during 2020
and 2019, respectively. In addition, the law firm provided donated services in its capacity as general
counsel to the Organization totaling $30,600 during 2020 and 2019. Amounts included in accrued
expenses and accounts payable relating to these transactions totaled $208,898 and $82,873 as of
June 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. 
A member of the Organization’s board of directors is an employee of a family owned insurance agency
that is a member of a consortium, which provides services to the Organization. The Organization
incurred approximately $664,000 and $558,000 in insurance expense for policies serviced by the
consortium during 2020 and 2019, respectively. 
A member of the Organization’s board of directors is an employee of a real estate company, which
provides services to the Organization. The Organization incurred approximately $68,600 during 2019 in
commission associated with various real estate transactions. No broker’s fees were incurred during
2020. This individual stepped down from the board of directors for the Organization during 2020. 
Note 4 - Investments
Investments consist of the following as of June 30: 
2020  2019
Cash and cash equivalents
Exchange traded products
Equity securities
Debt securities 
$  28,139 $  30,070
-  13,321
277,170  259,583
148,328  148,741
$  453,637 $  451,715
All investments are considered Level 1 investments in the fair value hierarchy as discussed in Note 1. 
Investment gains were $6,460 and $29,290 for the years ended June 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. 
20
Page 52
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 5 - Property, Plant and Equipment
Following is a summary as of June 30: 
Land
Buildings and building improvements
Leasehold improvements
Furnishings and equipment
Motor vehicles
Less: accumulated depreciation
and amortization 
2020  2019
$  12,823,138 $  12,864,788
93,369,563 89,608,141
2,413,210  2,367,767
3,921,435  3,904,457
1,002,350  654,624
113,529,696 109,399,777
33,305,639 30,514,047
$  80,224,057 $  78,885,730
Note 6 - Construction in Progress
As of June 30, 2020, the Organization is in the process of renovating 7 properties for various programs. 
The sites are in various stages of completion. As of June 30, 2020, costs of approximately $3,352,000
have been incurred. The estimated cost to complete the projects is $2,733,000. 
21
Page 53
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 7 - Mortgage Notes Payable
Mortgage notes payable are as follows at June 30: 
2020  2019
Various mortgage notes payable to financial institutions
in monthly installments totaling $292,239, including
interest at rates ranging from 3.0% to 6.50%,  with
balloon payments totaling $40,632,195, due on various
dates ranging from 2020 to 2045. The notes are
secured first, second, third and fourth mortgages on real
property. The Organization intends to refinance the
balloon payments and continue the 20-30 year
amortization schedules.  $  46,287,500 $  43,490,380
Non-interest bearing mortgage notes payable on dates
ranging from 2020 to 2063. No principal is due on these
notes prior to those dates. The notes are secured by
mortgages on real property.  22,085,296 22,085,296
Total mortgage notes payable
Less: current portion of mortgage notes payable
Less: mortgage acquisition costs
Plus: accumulated amortization 
68,372,796
(1,435,690)
(2,781,291)
1,615,648 
65,575,676
(1,856,447)
(2,762,678)
1,459,965
Total  $  65,771,463 $  62,416,516
Maturities of mortgage notes payable mature as follows as of June 30, 2020: 
Total 
Balloon
Payments 
Annual
Payments
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Thereafter 
$  1,435,690 $  $ 925,267
2,593,787 2,059,439
1,573,896 1,014,491
1,731,327 1,250,732
1,469,298 1,301,275
59,558,798 56,166,288 
510,423
534,348
559,405
480,595
168,023
3,392,510
$  68,362,796 $  62,717,492 $  5,645,304 
22
Page 54
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 8 - Obligations Under Capital Leases
The Organization leased motor vehicles and office equipment under capital leases that expire at
various times throughout 2022 and 2025. The assets and liabilities under capital leases have been
recorded at the present value of the minimum lease payments which is equivalent to the fair value of
the asset. The assets are amortized over their estimated lives. 
Leased property under the capital lease was as follows as of June 30: 
2020  2019
Motor vehicles
Office equipment
Less: accumulated depreciation 
$  685,098 $  496,408 
-  146,679 
(361,227) (545,178)
$  323,871 $  97,909 
Capital lease obligations are due as follows for the years ending June 30: 
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025 
$  113,100 
95,084
75,977
47,898
40,521
$  372,580 
Note 9 - Lines of Credit
The Organization has a commercial revolving line of credit agreement with a bank in the amount of
$6,500,000 that expires on January 31, 2021 and is renewed annually at the bank’s discretion. Interest
is calculated at the bank’s prime lending rate plus 0.25% with a floor of 4.00% (4% as of June 30, 
2020). The line is secured by all business assets. 
The Organization has a development/construction revolving line of credit agreement with a bank in the
amount of $2,750,000 expiring on June 30, 2021. The Organization intends to refinance this line with
long-term financing during fiscal year 2021. Interest is calculated at the bank’s prime lending rate plus
0.25% with a floor of 6.50% (6.50% as of June 30, 2020 and 2019).
The Organization has a commercial revolving line of credit with six banks participating within the
Organization’s Financial Services program with the combined amount of $500,000. Interest is
calculated at 2.00%. 
23
Page 55
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 9 - Lines of Credit (Continued) 
Outstanding balances on the lines of Credit as of June 30: 
2020
Commercial line of credit
Development/construction line of credit
SMOC Financial Services Program 
$  -  $
2,228,058
499,497
$  2,727,555 $ 
2019
2,459,725
2,228,058
300,000
4,987,783
Note 10 - Operating Leases
Buildings
The Organization leases facilities under operating leases expiring at various dates through 2027, as
well as under tenant-at-will agreements. Included in occupancy expenses is rental expense of
$3,276,484 and $3,199,400 for the years ended June 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. 
Equipment
The Organization leases equipment under operating leases expiring at various dates through 2022. 
Included in equipment expenses is equipment rental expense totaling $85,638 and $79,946 for the
years ended June 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively. 
Future minimum rental payments under building and equipment leases are as follows at June 30: 
Buildings Equipment Total
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Thereafter 
$  604,271 $
588,019
531,443
376,308
313,068
721,577 
49,607 
28,358 
21,017 
8,563
3,335
- 
$  653,878 
616,377 
552,460 
384,871 
316,403 
721,577 
$  3,134,686 $  110,880 $  3,245,566 
24
Page 56
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 11 - Net Assets
Following is a summary of net assets without donor restrictions as of June 30: 
2020  2019
Operating - undesignated
Net investment in property and equipment 
$  6,428,370 $  3,898,252
15,605,860 16,146,993
Total net assets without donor restrictions $  22,034,230 $  20,045,245
Following is a summary of net assets with donor restrictions as of June 30: 
Advances on a $385,600 non-interest bearing construction
loan payable to HUD. Upon completion of the project, the
construction loan converted to a non-interest bearing mortgage
note payable due in September 2033. Repayment of this loan
will be waived if very low income individuals occupy the
building through this date. The note is secured by a mortgage
on real property.  $ 
2020
385,600 $
Grant in support of specific program needs.  1,266,938
Grant in support of equipment and capital projects.  -
Total  $  1,652,538 $ 
2019
385,600
945,365
453,928
1,784,893
Net assets released from restriction totaling $1,567,493 and $531,630 for the years ended June 30, 
2020 and 2019, respectively, relates to satisfying the requirements under the award requirements and
the time release under a program grant. 
Note 12 - Retirement Plan
The Organization has a qualified tax deferred annuity plan as described in IRS Code Section 403(b) 
covering all eligible employees beginning upon their first full month of service. The plan allows the
Organization to make discretionary contributions, as determined by the board of directors, subject to
IRS limitations. The amount contributed to the plan by the Organization for the years ended June 30, 
2020 and 2019 was $219,314 and $218,399, respectively. 
25
Page 57
SOUTH MIDDLESEX OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL, INC. 
AND AFFILIATES
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 13 - Commitments and Contingencies
The Organization is involved in legal proceedings, claims and disputes which arise in the ordinary
course of business. In management’s opinion, these matters will not have a material adverse effect on
the financial position of the Organization. 
The Organization has elected to pay for the costs of unemployment compensation by reimbursing the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts for unemployment compensation paid. As of June 30, 2020 and
2019, the Organization has estimated and accrued approximately $203,000 and $153,000, 
respectively, for claims incurred prior to year end but not paid by those dates. 
The Organization is subject to the regulations and rate formulas of the Massachusetts Executive Office
for Administration and Finance Operational Services Division. Revenue is recorded by the individual
programs either at the rate approved under negotiated contracts or at the rate of reimbursement as
certified by the Massachusetts Operational Services Division. Excess of revenue over expenses from
Commonwealth of Massachusetts supported programs, up to certain defined limits, can be utilized by
the Organization for expenditures in accordance with its exempt purposes provided such expenditures
are reimbursable under the Operational Services Division regulations. Amounts in excess of these
limits are subject to negotiated use or potential recoupment and are reported as a liability. 
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a Coronavirus (COVID-19) 
a pandemic. Management is currently unable to accurately forecast the future financial impact on the
Organization resulting from the pandemic, which, among other things, could impact the quantity of
clients on a forward looking basis. Since the pandemic, the Organization has experienced increased
costs in maintaining social distance, cleaning costs and unemployment expenses. The effects of the
pandemic could impact the future results of operations. Based on information available as of the date of
this report, management expects to experience a decrease in revenues. At this time, management
does not expect COVID-19 to have a materially adverse effect on the Organization’s operations. 
26
