REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Overview ............................................................................................................................................................... 1
Application ............................................................................................................................................................ 3
Appendix A: Evaluation Criteria ........................................................................................................................... 11
Appendix B: Eligible and Ineligible Activities ....................................................................................................... 12
Appendix C: Eligible Census Tracts Map ............................................................................................................. 21
Appendix D: Sample Logic Model............................................................................................................................... 22
OVERVIEW
The City of Framingham’s Community Development Program invites local nonprofit organizations or City
departments to submit Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program proposals for fiscal year 2023
starting on July 1, 2022, and ending on June 30, 2023. CDBG funds are allocated to the city by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to impact a wide range of services and programs, 
principally for low- and moderate-income residents. 
The City of Framingham receives an average of $525,000 CDBG funding annually. Final figures will not be known
until after the federal budget is passed and HUD announces allocation amount. The chart below lists the
approximate amount awarded to various projects. 
Project  Approximate Amount Notes
Administration  $105,000 City can spend 20% on administration
Public Services (Non-Profits)  $77,000 City can spend up to 15% on public services
Housing Rehab, code enforcement, 
economic development projects, 
public facilities 
$343,000 CD Committee and mayor final decision on how
these funds are distributed
All organizations requesting funding from the Framingham Community Development Block Grant Program must
email complete applications by December 10, 2021, at 5:00 pm to
 communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov. CD staff will email applicants for more information for
clarification if needed after the deadline. CD staff will review applications for compliance with minimum
requirements. 
Eligibility criteria include, but are not limited to: 
● Compliance with federal eligibility standards
● Overall benefit to low- and moderate-income persons
● How such benefits will be measured/reported
● Project goals
● Need for the proposed activity
● How the proposed project is unique, complementing and not duplicating existing services.
1
Page 2
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
● The experience and capability of applicants to provide proposed activities
● Documentation of support for the project
● Availability of matching funds for the activity will also be considered.
Eligible projects will be forwarded to the committee to make funding recommendations for final approval by the
Mayor. Applicants can contact the CD office by email or call (508) 532-5457 by December 3rd to ask questions
about the application. 
The Community Development Program and the City reserve the right to reject any proposals that are incomplete
and unresponsive to the information requested in the proposal package. The Community Development Program
can recommend or reject any proposal, in whole or in part, determined not to be in its interest. Note that CDBG
funds must be used conforming to applicable city, state and federal laws that include procurement policies, equal
employment opportunity/Section 3 requirements, anti-kickback rules, Davis-Bacon Act (prevailing wages for
construction projects in excess of $2,000 or housing of eight units or more), bonding and insurance regulations, 
and environmental requirements. 
Timeline: 
October 22th: Application Posted 
December 10: Applications Due by 5pm to [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov
December 17: Applications sent to community development committee for review
Week of January 25, 2022: Committee will schedule two public hearings on Public Services and non-public
services 
February 1, 2022 Committee makes recommendations 
2
Page 3
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
A. APPLICATION 
I. Project Eligibility
Project meets at least ONE of the HUD National Objectives listed below (please check all applicable; 
definitions are included as attachments):
X❑ Benefits low/moderate income individuals/households 
❑ Addresses the prevention or elimination of slums or blight 
❑ Meets an urgent community need threatening health and welfare
Check all statements that describe HOW this project or activity meets at least one of the National
Objectives listed above: 
X❑ Area Benefit Activities: The proposed project or activity meets the needs of low/moderate
income persons residing in an area where at least 51% of those residents have incomes within
80% of the Area Median Income. The benefits of this activity are available to all persons
regardless of income. Examples may include street improvements, water/sewer lines, 
neighborhood facilities, and façade improvements in neighborhood commercial districts. 
X❑ Limited Clientele Activities: The proposed project benefits a specific group of people (rather 
than all residents in a particular area), where 51% of the people are documented or presumed
to be low/moderate income persons. Examples may include construction of a senior center, 
public services for the homeless, meals on wheels for the elderly, construction of a job training
facility for the handicapped. 
❑ Housing Activities: The proposed project creates or improves permanent residential units that 
will be occupied by low/moderate income persons upon completion. Housing can be either
owner occupied or rental one family or multi-family units. Examples may include property
acquisition for permanent housing, permanent housing rehabilitation, and conversion of non-
residential units into permanent housing. 
❑ Job Creation or Retention: The proposed project creates or retains permanent jobs. At least 51% 
of those jobs must be available to low- and moderate-income persons. Examples may include
loans to pay for the expansion of a factory, assistance to a business which has publicly announced
its intention to close resulting in loss of employment for low/moderate income persons. 
❑ Slum or Blighted Area: The proposed project is located in a slum/blighted area and the
anticipated results of the project addresses one or more of the conditions that qualify in the
area. 
❑ Spot Blight: The proposed project will eliminate specific conditions of blight or physical decay
outside of a blighted area. Activities are limited to demolition/clearance, historic preservation, 
and rehabilitation of buildings (to the extent necessary to eliminate public health and safety
issues).
II. Project Type (for clarification on the categories, please see Appendix B)
❑ Housing Rehabilitation
X❑ Social/Public Service
❑ Infrastructure/Public Facility Improvements
3
ANNOTATION: X
ANNOTATION: X
ANNOTATION: X
ANNOTATION: X
Page 4
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
❑ Economic Development
❑ Slum/Blight Eradication
❑ Other
III. GENERAL PROJECT INFORMATION
1.  Project Name: Hoops and Homework Scholarship Fund
2.  Project Dates: *:  July 31, 2022 to June 30 2023
*CDBG-funded elements of proposed projects supported in Fiscal 2023 should end no later than June
30, 2023. Programs that cannot be implemented within 12 months may lose awarded CDBG funds. 
3.  CDBG Funds Requested: $12,142
4. 
Name of Sponsoring
Organization or Individual
Hoops and Homework 
Address  DUNS Number
56 Agnes Dr., Framingham 085663316
01701
5.  Person responsible for coordinating and administering this project (if known)
Name: Herb Chasan
Address: 56 Agnes Dr., Framingham, MA 01701
Phone: 508-380-1196
Email: herbchasan@gmail.com
6.  Location of project or area served (Include Census Tract(s) and Block Group(s) served by proposed
project, if known) (please see map in Appendix D for eligible census tracts:
Tract  Percent Low/ Mod  Check all Tracts
that Apply 
383102.01  86.5%  X
383300.01  85.0% 
383200.03  81.2% 
383102.02  80.4% 
4
ANNOTATION: Hoops and Homework Scholarship Fund
ANNOTATION: July 31, 2022 to June 30 2023
ANNOTATION: $12,142
ANNOTATION: Hoops and Homework  56 Agnes Dr., Framingham
ANNOTATION: 01701
ANNOTATION: 085663316
ANNOTATION: Herb Chasan
ANNOTATION: 56 Agnes Dr., Framingham, MA 01701
ANNOTATION: 508-380-1196
ANNOTATION: herbchasan@gmail.com
ANNOTATION: X
Page 5
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
383101.01
383501.02
383200.01
383600.02
383101.02
383400.03
383400.02
383700.03
383400.01 
79.5% 
79.5% 
75.2% 
74.1% 
72.4% 
71.4% 
58.1% 
55.1% 
52.6% 
7. Compliance Statement
For public facility and infrastructure projects requiring more than $2,000 in CDBG funds, describe how
compliance with Davis/Bacon federal wage, affirmative action and Section 3 requirements will be
maintained and documented: 
_____________________________ Does not apply to this request.
5
ANNOTATION: Does not apply to this request.
ANNOTATION: _____________________________
Page 6
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
B. Project Narrative 
Please provide a narrative description of your proposed project or program by answering the
following questions. We recommend that you include the question as part of your response. 
Responses must not exceed 10 pages. 
1. Need and Outcomes: 
a. Why are you seeking to undertake this work (need)?
The need is to supervise and provide homework assistance, enrichment and meals to children
after school and during school vacations in coordination with the Framingham Public Schools. 
Since our programs serve 48 children living in the lowest income section of Framingham, 
the need is to address the issue that poverty has a profound and predictable negative
influence on child development, including language skills, physical and mental health, and
academic achievement which the COVID-19 pandemic has greatly magnified. 
There is a huge need to promote Social & Emotional Learning which is particularly
important during this pandemic , as children struggle to understand and regulate their
emotions in the face of added stress, maintain social and academic relationships after the
hardship of dealing with the pandemic. 
There is a great need for academic focused summer programs for disadvantaged children
who have been negatively impacted by the pandemic. 
b. Why do you believe your organization is best positioned to address this need? 
Hoops and Homework is located right in the lowest income neighborhood of Framingham. 
We are the only licensed program which provides full scholarships to deserving kids. 
c. How will you measure success? 
One of the main goals of the Hoops and Homework program is to increase the academic
skill levels of our students. Last summer we gave the kids pre and post tests to determine
exactly the impact of our program. Hoops and Homework was concentrating on
improving the reading skills of our students. We were able to point to the success of our
program specifically since the kids were not getting help in the schools over the summer. 
Results were that the kids ended the summer with vocabulary skills much closer to their
grade level, increasing their Instructional grade level by over one-third of a grade, and
68% improved their attitude towards reading and 71% improved their reading ability. 
The kids’ improved attitude and improved ability toward reading is attributable to the
program’s environment with less pressure, and more fun, than in the school. Parents add
that their children are even more engaged in reading since our books are popular with the
kids. So during the year, Hoops and Homework is continuing the same successful
academic programs. 
1
Page 7
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
d. What do you expect the status of this project to be at the end of FY2023? (Ex: iterative revision, 
continuation, end) 
Continuation and expansion to reach more deserving children
e. Please provide backup data documenting need
Washington Post article: 6-7-21 :A lost generation’: Surge of research reveals students
sliding backward, most vulnerable worst affected
After the U.S. education system fractured into Zoom screens last year, experts feared
millions of children would fall behind. Hard evidence now shows they were right. 
A flood of new data — on the national, state and district levels — finds students began this
academic year behind. Most of the research concludes students of color and those in high-
poverty communities fell further behind their peers, exacerbating long-standing gaps in
American education. 
A study released this week by McKinsey & Co. estimates that the shift to remote school set
White students back by one to three months in math, while students of color lost three to
five months. As the coronavirus pandemic persists through this academic year, McKinsey
said, losses will escalate. 
“I think we should be very concerned about the risk of a lost generation of students,” said
former education secretary John B. King Jr., who is now president of Education Trust, an
advocacy and research group focused on equity issues. 
The McKinsey study echoes a half dozen other national reports released in recent days. 
They all find that students regressed because of lost classroom time in the spring, 
particularly in math, though the reports vary in degree of the losses and in disparities
among student groups. 
Separately, data released by multiple school districts show a sharp increase in failing grades
this fall, particularly for the most vulnerable students. 
Together, the new research raises important questions about how American children can
recover once the pandemic is over, and how educators can try to mitigate the gaps until
then. Experts say high-intensity tutoring and summer school programs both have track
records of success, but those would cost tens of billions of dollars to reach all students who
will need remediation at a time when school districts are already struggling to pay for basic
needs. 
2. Impact: 
a. Who benefits from this work and how? 
Children living in the lowest income area of Framingham. They benefit by attending our
programs. 
b. How many will be served? 
48 Children. 
c. If this is a request for continued funding, please document the progress of your current project
or program, including the number served and the outcomes achieved thus far. 
2
Page 8
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
We have been evaluated by the State inspector from the MA Dept of Early Education and
Care (EEC) These are some comments from our latest evaluations: 
Visit Activity Summary
*The program has established a seamless routine as children enter the program and
immediately start their homework. Educators were observed to be working with children
on their assignments and encouraging “bringing grades up” 
*During the visit, a child entered the program to show off some improved grades that all
educators recognized and celebrated with him. 
*During the visit, educators were observed to be dividing a food delivery up to send home
with the children for their families. The Site Coordinator stated that the program had just
adjusted their food delivery to increase, to allow the program the chance to send food home
to all for their families. 
The program has set up strong systems to keep paperwork current, to ensure that the
program meets regulation and that it meets the individual and different needs of each child
in the program. 
Interactions between kids and staff have never been a concern for me, they have always
been great here. But the changes you’ve made have really turned the program into a
quality after school program. 
The work you’ve put into the program shows, congrats. 
Thank you for all your efforts. Well done Hoops and homework, 
The program has updated the environment, including painting the program, adding a
raised garden
outside that the children can participate in tending. 
The program has added “special programs” such as violin 
lessons, yoga and Mass Audubon classes. The program has been “cleaned” out and
reorganized, giving the
educators more space for children and “less” clutter. The program was observed to be
extremely clean and
running well. 
All educators were relaxed when the Licensor came into the program and shared that this
first
year as a licensed program “evolved” in the best possible way. 
*Children were observed to come directly into the program and were part of a well
established routine. 
Children that still had homework (a week before school ends for the summer) went right
over to the desks to 
3
Page 9
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
complete it. Educators did not need to tell them where to go, they walked right into the
routine. 
Noelle McCullough
Licensing Specialist
Department of Early Education and Care 
10 Austin St, Worcester, MA
3. Solution Design: 
a. What is the evidence base to support this project’s design and outcomes? 
Framingham has three elementary schools with students performing in the lowest 7th, 12th, 
and 15th percentile of the whole state. That means that some of the kids in these schools
need a lot of extra help. The kids who live in the target area attend school at these lowest
performing schools. 
Data from the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education indicate that the
students from our area falling into the high service need category is 77%. These are
students at risk of educational failure or otherwise in need of special assistance and support, 
such as students who are living in poverty, who are far below grade level, who have
disabilities, or who are English learners. These are the neediest kids in Framingham. 
Of our students, 48% have single female head of household, 62% are from extremely low
income families (below $20,650), and 33% are from low income families (below $34,349).
These kids need a lot of care and mentoring. 
The 2018 Comm. of MA State testing (MCAS) showed that the there were only 38% of
students in Framingham who met or exceeded expectations in math and language. These
results were lower than comparable school districts with less poverty. Our low income
students were among the lowest achieving and the most in need of help. 
There’s long been a clear connection between families’ socioeconomic status and students’ 
academic achievement. As can be seen in Figure 1a, states with higher percentages of
students from low-income families report lower average scale scores in 8th-grade math on
the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). The same connection between
poverty and academic performance can be observed at the school level
b. With whom have you consulted/collaborated and how did their input impact the solution design? 
We have consulted and collaborated with the Framingham Public Schools and the YMCA
which run similar programs to ours. Our program design is based on their successful
operations. 
c. If you are applying for continued funding, how has your design/methodology evolved in response
to evaluation and feedback? 
We are continually improving our programs because of collaboration with the Framingham
Public schools and the YMCA. Also we use evaluation feedback forms given to parents and
our children. 
d. How have you designed your solution to maximize impact to reach critical needs? 
We have opened earlier this year an expanded new space to serve 26 more needy children. 
e. How will you validate your design/methodologies/approach and track and report impact? 
4
Page 10
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
We will track and report the success of our programs by continually doing pre and post
testing and getting feedback from parents, our children, their teachers and educators from
the YMCA. 
4. Community Engagement: 
a. Describe how your organization has engaged and continues to engage those intended to benefit
from this work in the design, delivery and evaluation of services to be provided? 
We are constantly looking to attract new students and to retain the ones that we have. 
The key to engagement is in reaching the parents the right way. With our good marketing
strategy consisting of content marketing, digital marketing, and visual marketing, we
attract both parents and children alike. 
The parents and their choices are affected by how their children feel about enrolling in our
program, so we make it fun and engaging for both groups. 
We figure out what the children want, what appeals to them in terms of visuals and
activities. Then, we focus on parents and their goals for their children. 
We incorporate visual marketing into our efforts: Infographics, Blog posts, ,Videos, Social
media, Website, Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram, and Parent forums. 
We generate buzz about our programs by holding a Friends and Family Night with food
and babysitting , which gives our current families the chance to help us market our
organization's strengths in a noncommittal environment. 
We have been visiting successful after school programs in order to provide us with a better
idea of what does and doesn't work. 
We keep plans flexible and focus on the students. Our aim is to provide activities and
learning opportunities that interest students. Give them an opportunity to make choices, 
and make sure our program meets their needs. We pay attention to what children say about
their participation and our overall program when their families pick them up. 
We train our staff members to handle the demands of an after school program. They must
be able to work with children who have a variety of personalities and learning styles. It's
also important that our staff has the ability to connect with students of all ages and needs. 
The environment of our after school program is inclusive of all children. 
We focus on students' strengths, not weaknesses. Children who attend after school
programs want to feel comfortable and engaged. Focus on building children up instead of
focusing on their weaknesses, because children come back to our program since we
routinely encourage them and help them feel good about something they have done that
day. 
5
Page 11
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
b. Describe how your marketing and promotion plans are designed to reach the targeted
constituency. 
We use flyers and personal contact with kids who are not engaged after school. We spend a
lot of time speaking directly to parents who live close to our program sites. 
Evening family meetings with meals are a favorite of ours in order to reach our
constituents. 
c. How do you intend to keep the community informed of your progress? 
We have had great success with social media and newspapers and TV stations such as
Channel 5 who did a special program on Hoops and Homework. 
5. Organizational Capacity: 
a. What experience, skills and leadership does your agency bring to this work? 
Hoops and Homework has almost years experience in running after school and summer
programs. 
We have a fully qualified program director and experienced staff who have been with us for
over five years. 
We also have a committed Board of Directors who supervise the operation. 
We are fully certified and licensed by the EEC dept. Of the Commonwealth of MA. 
b. What other organizations will you be collaborating with to achieve maximum results (please
include letters of collaboration)?
Framingham Public Schools and the YMCA. See attachment for letters of collaboration. 
6. Equity: 
a. How will you ensure equitable access and success for underserved populations? 
We provide easy access to deserving children to our programs because of our Scholarship
program which provides enrollment to all who qualify. The extant literature indicates that
participation in after-school programs leads to gains in academic outcomes. Research also
provides clear evidence that youth who spend more time in afterschool programs –
particularly during adolescence – will derive greater academic benefit than youth who
spend less time. Perhaps most importantly, evidence shows that academically at risk youth
will benefit more from participation in after-school programs than their higher achieving
peers. 
We are taking steps to ensure that all youth can access the potentially beneficial activities
offered through our high quality after-school programs. 
b. What barriers to access exist in your community and how will you address them? 
The barriers are lack of space for low income kids who need extra help. We have just
added a new expanded center to address this problem and we will be expanding to other
low income areas as we grow our programs. 
6
Page 12
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
c. How will you ensure marginalized voices in your community are amplified and consulted in the
design, delivery, and evaluation of your project/program? 
We hold parent orientations, one-on-one parent conferences and open forum parent
meetings to establish and grow the rapport between the program and parents. Each site
has a specific space where parents can gather to facilitate a sense of community. 
We work to establish that parents’ voices matter in their program—a position on our
Board of Directors is reserved for a parent; the program distributes annual parent surveys
asking for feedback on the program’s direction, policies and quality; and the program
encourages the formation of parent committees that help plan and carryout community
events. The program works to be inclusive in their outreach, sending a quarterly
newsletter to parents in both English and Spanish, as well as translating surveys for non-
English-speaking parents. 
Program Evaluation and Improvement: 
We measure student participation, engagement and outcomes. A continuous program
improvement cycle was implemented as a part of our dedication to raise student
achievement. To start the process, we established well-defined goals that were explicit in
nature and dedicated a senior staff member to supervise and manage the quality
improvement process. The cycle consisted of three steps: 1) staff training and professional
development; 2) data collection, program monitoring and staff coaching; and 3) data
analysis. In the first part of the cycle, staff trainings were developed to further the
program’s goals. Frequent staff trainings, scaffolding staff trainings and paring new staff
with experienced staff were various strategies employed. Next, senior staff observed the
quality of the programming, monitored staff use of practices taught during staff trainings, 
and documented their observations. Step three of the cycle included the senior staff and/or
an outside evaluator reviewing and analyzing the data collected, such as the documented
observations and student participant attendance rates and skills. Senior staff then
determined what changes needed to be made to the curriculum, what skills the staff needed
more help with, and the types of trainings that would be most useful to staff and support
the overall goals of the program. The cycle began again with staff development, and
findings from the data analysis were incorporated into the new staff trainings. 
d. Describe efforts underway within your organization to promote diversity, equity and inclusion
This is our plan to promote diversity, equity, and inclusion: 
1. Be aware of unconscious bias
Understanding bias and building awareness is a first step towards real change. 
Leaders address this by helping employees understand how individuals are impacted by
unconscious bias, and what actions continue to reinforce biases. We build awareness and
address unconscious bias is by encouraging every employee to review, question, and
analyze their own personal biases and assumptions. 
2. Communicate the importance of managing bias
Cultural humility is another way leaders and employees manage bias and foster more
inclusive environments. This concept involves remaining curious and humble about
cultural differences. 
3. Promote pay equity 
7
Page 13
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
Our Program Director levels out the playing field and provides fair opportunity for each
employee. 
4. Develop a strategic training program
We provide diversity training which helps employees understand how cultural differences
can impact how people work and interact at work. It can cover anything from concepts of
time and communication styles to self-identity and dealing with conflict. Diversity training 
is offered as optional tends to be more effective than that which is made mandatory. 
5. Acknowledge holidays of all cultures
We build awareness of diversity and foster greater inclusivity by being aware of and
acknowledge a variety of upcoming religious and cultural holidays..
6. Facilitate ongoing feedback
We encourage our people to share their feedback to get a better understanding of what’s
going on under the surface. Deploying pulse surveys across the workforce will arm leaders
with the information needed to make smarter decisions and reduce or eliminate any
patterns of discrimination or biases within a particular branch or area of the organization, 
for example. Anonymous feedback via an employee pulse survey can help build a case to
take immediate action on smaller, more pressing issues as well as inform long-term
strategies. 
7. Assess our policies
We assess areas of the organization in which discrimination can exist. Company policies
and interpersonal interactions – such as the way an internal issue is handled – plays a key
role in perpetuating existing problems. 
We address and replace negative processes or interactions with more positive ones. Leaders
first need to determine whether policies enable or perpetuate discrimination in the
workplace such as racism or sexism and reshape them to move towards a more equitable
workplace. 
True workplace flexibility should provide every employee with the opportunity to work
fairly and equitably. Facilitating flexibility for all employees helps to establish a more
equitable and inclusive culture across the organization. 
8. Track progress over extended periods of time
Diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts aren’t successful overnight. In fact, making
structural changes to workforce strategies and systems can take many months, especially as
we face new challenges around hiring and managing our people. A cultural shift takes time, 
which means we set benchmarks and track their progress to assess how their efforts are
moving the needle. This will not only show leaders what strategies are working, and which
ones are falling short, but it will also help to hold them accountable in reaching their long-
term goals. 
9. Hoops and Homework has employed a consultant to work with us on the above issues
to develop a baseline fluency in DEI and growth in the understanding of how diversity, 
equity, and inclusion strengthen the learning community and deepen the program
8
Page 14
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
experience of our students. 
7. Sustainability: 
a. Does this work depend entirely on CDBG funds? Please describe your plans for this work if full
funding is not granted. 
Our scholarship program does not depend entirely on CDBG funds. We are asking for
funding for only 2 out of our 48 kids. 
Our scholarship program is funded for the other 46 kids by monies from donations, grants
and vouchers. We have a nine year successful track record in funding this program in
order for kids to enroll in our activities. 
b. How do you plan to sustain this work once CDBG support ends, keeping in mind that
sustainability means more than replacing funding? 
Again, because of our successful track record of raising funds plus our huge community
support we feel that our programs will be sustainable for the foreseeable future. 
c. Additional Proposal Narrative:
What else would you like us to know about your proposed project? 
Dear CDBG, 
Thank you for your support for the past 7 years! We are so grateful to have you as firm supporters of
Hoops and Homework as we continue to grow and serve our community. We appreciate the opportunity to
apply again this year for funding for our scholarship program. 
As you know, we are the only licensed, neighborhood based remote learning and after-school program in
Framingham. Other programs are out of reach for low-income residents because they require fees to
attend and can necessitate difficult and expensive transportation coordination due to their locations. 
Our goal is to focus on boosting academics and expanding the opportunities of our kids. This will make
them contributors not detractors from our community. 
The Grant money will be used to fund our scholarship program which allows the children of families who
qualify to attend our programs. The Hoops and Homework scholarship program is entirely grant supported. 
This is a need based program. All funding supports direct service to children. 
We have had a fantastic year which includes the hire of a full time program director, Kevin Lopez. 
Kevin set up our full day summer programming which included reading groups assisted by Framingham
Public School staff, games, math and language activities and science enrichment. Field trips for the
students were held. Gardening and Yoga were very popular. 
The Framingham Public Schools provided us with a social worker who helps us deal with kids who were
having problems at home or in school. Issues come up because some of our low income families are
having a difficult time with jobs, food and just dealing with life’s challenges. 
Near the end of summer school we ran "back to school" sessions to prepare the kids properly to have a
successful year at public school. 
During the regular school year program we run our homework help center and give the kids a snack after
school and a meal before they go home because some families do not have proper food for their kids. 
9
Page 15
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
He developed a volunteer registration system which will encourage community folks to give our deserving
kids individualized attention. 
Our enrichment activities include music, science, yoga and individualized instruction on reading and math
achievement because many of our kids are behind in grade level. We have been fortunate to have many
high school, college and community people who volunteer their time for this individualized instruction. 
Tutoring is online and in person. Since we can access student’s assignments online, staff can make sure
that homework is done properly and understood by our kids. 
We are pleased to announce the launch of BOKS, a physical activity program. BOKS is an important step
in helping children gain an appreciation of the benefits of exercise and healthy choices that will last a
lifetime. BOKS philosophy is that exercise is the single most powerful tool that we have to optimize the
function of our brains. Classes are filled with team-oriented games and provide plenty of opportunity for
play, since the program focuses on fun! 
Kevin met with various community leaders about partnering to provide city wide after school programming. 
We hired a High School Student to carry out outdoor play and Junior leadership Training. This training is
designed to give teenage youth, 7th through 12th grade, experience under the guidance of the appropriate
leader to enable them to become effective leaders. The leadership project is based on the premise that
every person has some potential leadership ability. 
In summary, we are asking for your support to continue our mission of helping the most underprivileged
and disadvantaged kids in Framingham. 
Thank you. 
Sincerely, 
Herb Chasan 
Herb Chasan, Founder, Hoops and Homework 
1
0
Page 16
C. Logic Model 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
Use this template to develop and submit a logic model for your proposed project. If you need help in developing a logic model
for your grant proposal, please reach out to us at [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov or 508-532-5457 or the next page
has a sample one. 
INPUTS  ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS SHORT-TERM
OUTCOMES 
LONG-TERM-
OUTCOMES
Resources to be used to
undertake this project or
program. 
staff and trained adult and peer
mentors 
Specific events, actions, 
partnerships, and processes. 
Mentoring, prevention
programs, peer mediation
Reading and Math programs that Staff and volunteers work
we have developed and purchased with the students
Regularly scheduled tutortorial
session. 
Homework assistance and
specific subject support 
Artifacts and evidence of the Measurable changes that will
activities.  occur in the next year. 
Long-term intended effects. 
Improved positive interactions
with staff, Display more positive
social skills 
Improved school attendance,
Reduced referrals for discipline
Increase in reading and
math achievement 
Students will be able to read
and do and understand math
better 
Reduced substance abuse rates,
Reduced violent incidents,
Reduced suspensions and
expulsions
Increase chances of our kids
doing well in school , getting
good jobs after school
Increase in achievement in
school subjects 
Improved time management skills, Better attitudes towards school,
Increased engagement in learning Higher aspirations for the future
Access to basketball courts and
playing fields
Trained staff and volunteers 
exercise and physical fittness
activities 
Lower incidents of high risk
behavior, Improved peer to
peer relationships 
Increased interest in participating Improved health and fittness,
in physical activities Improved sportmanship,
Improved leadership
8
ANNOTATION: 
ANNOTATION: Reading and Math programs that we have developed and purchased
ANNOTATION:  Staff and volunteers work with the students
ANNOTATION: Increase in reading and  math achievement
ANNOTATION: Students will be able to read and do and understand math better
ANNOTATION: Increase chances of our kids doing well in school , getting  good jobs after school
ANNOTATION: Regularly scheduled tutortorial session.
ANNOTATION: Homework assistance and specific subject support
ANNOTATION: Increase in achievement in  school subjects
ANNOTATION: Improved time management skills, Increased engagement in learning
ANNOTATION: Better attitudes towards school, Higher aspirations for the future
ANNOTATION: Access to basketball courts and  playing fields
ANNOTATION: exercise and physical fittness activities  
ANNOTATION: Lower incidents of high risk  behavior,  Improved peer to peer relationships
ANNOTATION: Increased interest in participating in physical activities
ANNOTATION: Trained staff and volunteers
ANNOTATION: Improved health and fittness, Improved sportmanship, Improved leadership
ANNOTATION: staff and trained adult and peer  mentors
ANNOTATION: Mentoring, prevention programs,  peer mediation
ANNOTATION: Improved positive interactions with staff,  Display more positive  social skills
ANNOTATION:   Improved school attendance,   Reduced referrals for discipline
ANNOTATION: Reduced substance abuse rates, Reduced violent incidents, Reduced suspensions and expulsions
Page 17
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
D. PROJECT COSTS 
1. Detailed Project Budget: 
Budget Item (A)  CDBG Funds (B) 
i.e. Personnel, Office 
Supplies, etc. 
wages  $12,142
Insurance 
Office and Admin. expenses 
Site expansion 
Program supplies
Technology upgrades
Total Project Cost 
$12,142 
Other Sources (C) 
$175,728
$10,500
$26,000
$27,730
$21,000
$18,300
$279,258 
Total (B + C) 
$187,870
$10,500
$26,000
$27,730
$21,000
$18,300
$291,400
2. Anticipated Project Funding Sources (Include all funding sources for which you’ve applied
CDBG  Projected Committed Amount 
a) Other sources (Please Specify which
are projected and which are
committed): 
$40,258  $81,000  $121,258 
b) Donations for project use 
c) In kind Donations (please specify) 
$78,000  $80,000  $158,000 
d) Total CDBG Amount  $12,142 
$12,142 
*Total Project Funding: 
*Project costs in Table 2 must match Table 1 Total Project Costs. 
$291,400 
9 
ANNOTATION: 
ANNOTATION: wages    $12,142
ANNOTATION: $175,728
ANNOTATION: $187,870
ANNOTATION: Insurance
ANNOTATION: $10,500
ANNOTATION: Office and Admin. expenses
ANNOTATION: $26,000
ANNOTATION: Site expansion
ANNOTATION: $27,730
ANNOTATION: Program supplies
ANNOTATION: $21,000
ANNOTATION: Technology upgrades
ANNOTATION: $18,300
ANNOTATION: $291,400
ANNOTATION: $10,500
ANNOTATION: $26,000
ANNOTATION: $27,730
ANNOTATION: $21,000
ANNOTATION: $18,300
ANNOTATION: $279,258
ANNOTATION: $12,142
ANNOTATION: $12,142
ANNOTATION: $40,258   $81,000
ANNOTATION: $121,258
ANNOTATION: $78,000
ANNOTATION: $80,000
ANNOTATION: $158,000
ANNOTATION: $12,142
ANNOTATION: $291,400
Page 18
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
E. DOCUMENTED CAPABILITY 
Organizations must submit copies of their most recently completed audits or audited and certified
financial statements. 
If you are applying as a new entity or organization and do not have existing evaluations or reports, 
please provide letters of support. 
Please note, if there are any irregularities identified in this documentation, you may be contacted by
a member of the staff for further clarification. 
FAILURE TO INCLUDE THIS INFORMATION MAY RENDER THIS APPLICATION INCOMPLETE AND
INELIGIBLE FOR FUNDING. 
F. SIGNATURE AND CERTIFICATION STATEMENT 
On behalf of this organization, I affirm that all activities to be supported with these funds shall comply
with the provisions of applicable federal and state statutes, regulations, directives, guidelines, 
ordinances, and orders which encourage the inclusion and participation of all segments of the community
and prohibit discrimination against individuals based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, 
disability, familial status, or age. Under penalties of perjury, I affirm that the information contained in this
proposal is complete and accurate. I represent that the organization has the capacity and resources to
carry out the activities and achieve the outcomes cited in this proposal. 
Herb Chasan
Name
Herb Chasan 
Digitally signed by Herb Chasan
DN: cn=Herb Chasan gn=Herb Chasan c=US United States l=US
United States o=Hoops and Homework e=herbchasan@gmail.com
Reason: I am the author of this document
Location: 
Date: 2021-12-07 12:05-05:00
Signature 
Founder, Hoops and Homework
Title (type or print) 
12-7-2021
Date 
10 
ANNOTATION: Herb Chasan
ANNOTATION: Founder, Hoops and Homework
ANNOTATION: 12-7-2021
Page 19
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
Appendix A
Evaluation Criteria
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds are awarded through a competitive proposal
evaluation process. The evaluation considers all aspects of the proposal as described in the RFP and
proposal application. 
Proposals are checked first by the City’s Planning and Community Division staff for completeness of
application, content and eligibility under CDBG guidelines. Eligible applicants will have proposals
reviewed and ranked by members of the Community Development Committee using the City of
Framingham’s Application Evaluation Worksheet. If a question arises during its review, the committee
reserves the right to contact the applicant for clarification. Based on the committee’s review and
ranking of proposals, recommendations will be presented to the Mayor’s Office, which will render the
final decision on grant awards. Ultimately, the City Council votes to accept or reject the annual
aggregate federal funds before the Annual Action Plan is submitted and the funds dispersed. 
The Division of Planning and Community Development and the Community Development Committee
will have sole discretion on the approval of funds. Committee has discretion to partially or fully fund a
proposal. Please note that a well-written application is no guarantee of funding since this is a highly
competitive process. Applicants should give adequate attention to the completeness, conciseness, and
responsiveness of the information provided in response to the questions asked within the application. 
The RFP will be the only time for organizations to present proposals since no future meetings or
hearings are scheduled between the submission date and allocation date. Please contact the
Community Development Department at communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov if you have any
questions concerning the Evaluation Worksheet or the application. 
11 
Page 20
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
APPENDIX B
SUMMARY OF ELIGIBLE AND INELIGIBLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT ACTIVITIES 
This is a summary of the activities that are eligible and ineligible for assistance under the Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG) Program pursuant to governing regulations of the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 24, Part 570, Sections 570.200 – 570.207. This summary is based upon the Final Rules
published in March 1996 and is meant to be a guide. Please check with CD staff or the HUD website for
any changes that may have occurred since 1996. 
General Policies – 570.200 
The primary objective of the CDBG Program is the development of viable communities, by providing
decent housing and sustainable living environment, and expanding economic opportunities, principally
for persons of low and moderate-income. Funds must be used so as to give maximum feasible priority to
activities that will carry out one of the three broad national objectives of: benefit to low and moderate-
income families, aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or blight, or activities that meet an urgent
community need due to existing conditions that pose a serious and immediate threat to the health or
welfare of the community where other financial resources are not available to meet such needs. At least
70% of the total CDBG funds must be used for activities that benefit low and moderate-income persons; 
and at least 51% of the beneficiaries of the individual activities must be low to moderate-income persons. 
Basic Eligible Activities – 570.201 
CDBG funds may be used for the following activities: 
(a)  Acquisition. Acquisition in whole or in part by purchase, long-term lease, donation, or otherwise, 
of real property (including air rights, water rights, rights-of-way, easements, and other interests
therein) for any public purpose. 
(b)  Disposition. Disposition, through sale, lease, donation, or otherwise, of any real property acquired
with CDBG funds or its retention for public purposes, including reasonable costs of temporarily
managing such properties. 
(c)  Public facilities and improvements. Acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
installation of public facilities and improvements, except buildings for the general conduct of
government. Activities may include: 
•  Removal of material and architectural barriers that restrict the mobility and accessibility of
elderly or severely disabled persons to public facilities and improvements; 
•  Design features and improvements that promote energy: 
•  Architectural design features, and similar treatments intended to enhance the aesthetic 
quality of facilities and improvements receiving CDBG assistance: 
•  Eligible facilities include shelters for the homeless; convalescent homes; hospitals, nursing
homes; battered spouse shelters; halfway houses for run-away children, drug offenders or
12 
Page 21
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
parolees; group homes for intellectually challenged persons and temporary housing for
disaster victims: 
(d)  Clearance activities. Clearance, demolition, and removal of buildings and improvements, 
including movement of structures to other sites. Demolition of HUD-assisted or HUD-owned
housing units may be undertaken only with the prior approval of HUD. 
(e)  Public services. Provision of public services (including labor, supplies, and materials) including but
not limited to those concerned with employment, crime prevention, child care, health, drug
abuse, education, fair housing counseling, energy conservation, homebuyer down payment
assistance, or recreational needs. To be eligible for CDBG assistance, a public service must meet
each of the following criteria: 
•  A new service or a quantifiable increase in the level of an existing service above that which
has been provided with State and Local funds in the previous 12 calendar months; and
•  The amount of CDBG funds obligated for public services shall not exceed 15 percent of the
annual grant, and 15 percent of program income received during the immediately preceding
program year. 
(f)  Interim assistance. Activities may be undertaken on an interim basis in areas exhibiting
objectively determinable signs of physical deterioration where immediate action is needed and
where permanent improvements will be carried out as soon as practicable in order to alleviate
emergency conditions threatening the public health and safety in areas where an emergency
condition exists and requires immediate resolution. 
(g)  Payment of non-Federal share. Payment of the non-Federal share required in connection with a
Federal grant-in-aid program undertaken as part of CDBG activities. 
(h)  Urban renewal completion. Payment of the cost of completing an urban renewal project funded
under title I of the Housing Act of 1949 as amended. 
(i)  Relocation. Relocation payments and other assistance for permanently and temporarily relocated
individuals, families, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farm operations. 
(j)  Loss of rental income.  Payments to housing owners for losses of rental income incurred in
holding, for temporary periods, housing units to be used for the relocation of individuals and
families displaced by program activities assisted under this part.
(k)  Housing services. Housing services such as tenant counseling in connection with tenant-based
rental assistance and affordable housing projects, energy auditing, preparation of work
specifications, loan processing, inspections, tenant selection, management of tenant-based rental
assistance, and other services related to assisting owners, tenants, contractors, and other entities
participating or seeking to participate in housing activities assisted under title II of the Cranston-
Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act. 
(l)  Privately owned utilities. CDBG funds may be used to acquire, construct, reconstruct, 
rehabilitate, or install the distribution lines and facilities of privately-owned utilities, including the
placing underground of new or existing distribution facilities and lines. 
13 
Page 22
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
(m) Construction of housing. CDBG funds may be used for the construction of housing assisted under
section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. 
(n)  Homeownership assistance. CDBG funds may be used to provide direct homeownership
assistance to low- or moderate-income households in accordance with section 105(a) of the Act. 
(o)  Facilitate economic development. CDBG funds may facilitate economic development by: 
•  Providing credit, including, but not limited to, grants, loans, loan guarantees, and other forms of
financial support, for the establishment, stabilization, and expansion of micro enterprises; 
•  Providing technical assistance, advice, and business support services to owners of micro
enterprises and persons developing micro enterprises; and
•  Providing general support, including, but not limited to, peer support programs, counseling, 
childcare, transportation, and other similar services, to owners of micro enterprises and persons
developing micro enterprises. 
(p)  Technical assistance. Provision of technical assistance to public or nonprofit entities to increase
the capacity of such entities to carry out eligible neighborhood revitalization or economic
development activities. 
(q)  Assistance to institutions of higher education. Provision of assistance to institutions of higher
education if such institution has demonstrated a capacity to carry out eligible activities. 
Eligible rehabilitation and preservation activities - 570.202 
(a)  Types of buildings and improvements eligible for rehabilitation assistance. CDBG funds may be
used to finance the rehabilitation of: 
•  Privately owned buildings and improvements for residential purposes; improvements to a
single-family residential property which is also used as a place of business, which are
required in order to operate the business, need not be considered to be rehabilitation of
a commercial or industrial building, if the improvements also provide general benefit to
the residential occupants of the building; 
•  Low-income public housing and other publicly owned residential buildings and
improvements; 
•  Publicly or privately owned commercial or industrial buildings, except that the
rehabilitation of such buildings owned by a private for-profit business is limited to
improvements to the exterior of the building and the correction of code violations; 
•  Nonprofit-owned nonresidential buildings and improvements
•  Manufactured housing when such housing that is part of the community's permanent
housing stock. 
14 
Page 23
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
(b)  Types of assistance. CDBG funds may be used to finance the following types of activities, and
related costs: 
▪  Assistance to private individuals and entities, including profit making and nonprofit
organizations, to acquire for the purpose of rehabilitation, and to rehabilitate properties, 
for use or resale for residential purposes; 
•  Labor, materials, and other costs of rehabilitation of properties, including repair directed
toward an accumulation of deferred maintenance, replacement of principal fixtures and
components of existing structures, installation of security devices, including smoke
detectors and deadbolt locks, and renovation through alterations, additions to, or
enhancement of existing structures, which may be undertaken singly, or in combination; 
•  Loans for refinancing existing indebtedness secured by a property being rehabilitated; 
•  Improvements to increase the efficient use of energy in structures through such means as
installation of storm windows and doors, siding, wall and attic insulation, and conversion, 
modification, or replacement of heating and cooling equipment, including the use of solar
energy equipment; 
•  Improvements to increase the efficient use of water through such means as water savings
faucets and shower heads and repair of water leaks; 
•  Connection of residential structures to water distribution lines or local sewer collection
lines; 
•  For rehabilitation carried out with CDBG funds, costs of: Initial homeowner warranty
premiums; Hazard insurance premiums, except where assistance is provided in the form
of a grant; and Flood insurance premiums for properties covered by the Flood Disaster
Protection Act of 1973; and Procedures concerning inspection and testing for and
abatement of lead-based paint. 
•  Costs of acquiring tools to be lent to owners, tenants, and others who will use such tools
to carry out rehabilitation; 
•  Rehabilitation services, such as rehabilitation counseling, energy auditing, preparation of
work specifications, loan processing, inspections, and other services related to assisting
owners, tenants, contractors, and other entities, participating or seeking to participate in
rehabilitation activities
•  Assistance for the rehabilitation of housing under section 17 of the United States Housing
Act of 1937; 
•  Improvements designed to remove material and architectural barriers that restrict the
mobility and accessibility of elderly or severely disabled persons to buildings and
improvements eligible for assistance under paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Costs incurred for inspection for code violations and enforcement of codes
(e.g., salaries and related expenses of code enforcement inspectors and legal proceedings, but
not including the cost of correcting the violations) in deteriorating or deteriorated areas when
15 
Page 24
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
such enforcement together with public or private improvements, rehabilitation, or services to be
provided may be expected to arrest the decline of the area. 
(d)  Historic preservation.  CDBG funds may be used for the rehabilitation, preservation or
restoration of historic properties, whether publicly or privately owned. Historic properties are
those sites or structures that are either listed in or eligible to be listed in the National Register of
Historic Places, listed in a State or local inventory of historic places, or designated as a State or
local landmark or historic district by appropriate law or ordinance. Historic preservation, 
however, is not authorized for buildings for the general conduct of government. 
(e)  Renovation of closed buildings. CDBG funds may be used to renovate closed buildings, such as
closed school buildings, for use as an eligible public facility or to rehabilitate such buildings for
housing. 
(f)  Lead-based paint activities. Lead-based paint activities as set forth in part 35 of this title. 
Special economic development activities - 570.203 
A recipient may use CDBG funds for special economic development activities as part of an economic
development project. The recipient must ensure that the appropriate level of public benefit will be
derived before obligating funds. Special activities authorized under this section do not include assistance
for the construction of new housing. Special economic development activities include: 
(a) The acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or installation of commercial or
industrial buildings, structures, and other real property equipment and improvements, including
railroad spurs or similar extensions. 
(b)  The provision of assistance to a private for-profit business, including, but not limited to, grants, 
loans, loan guarantees, interest supplements, technical assistance, and other forms of support, 
for any activity where the assistance is appropriate to carry out an economic development
project. 
(c)  Economic development services include, but are not limited to, outreach efforts to market
available forms of assistance; screening of applicants; reviewing and underwriting applications
for assistance; preparation of all necessary agreements; management of assisted activities; and
the screening, referral, and placement of applicants for employment opportunities generated by
CDBG-eligible economic development activities, including the costs of providing necessary
training for persons filling those positions. 
Special activities by Community-Based Development Organizations (CBDOs). – 570.204 
(a) Eligible activities. CDBG funds may be used by CBDO to carry out a neighborhood revitalization, 
community economic development, or energy conservation project, including: 
▪  Activities listed as eligible; and 
16 
Page 25
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
▪  Activities not otherwise listed as eligible – excluding buildings for the general conduct of
government business, general government expenses, and political activities. 
(b) Activities must: 
•  Meet the public service requirements, although services specifically designed to increase
economic opportunities through job training and placement and other employment support
services; 
•  Meet the requirements of the guidelines for evaluating and selecting economic development
project under Section 570.209; and 
•  Must not result in the recipient exceeding the 20% limit on planning and administrative costs. 
(c) Eligible Entities are: 
•  Non-profit or for-profit organizations engaged in community development activities primarily
within an identified geographic area and whose primary purpose is the improvement physical, 
economic and social environment; 
•  Section 301 (d) Small Business Investment Companies; including those which are profit making; 
State or local Development Companies; or Community Housing Development Organizations
(CHDOs);
•  Organization similar in purpose, function and scope. 
Eligible planning, urban environmental design and policy-planning management-capacity building
activities – 570.205 
a) Planning activities which consist of all costs of gathering data, studies, analysis, and preparation of
plans and the identification of actions that will implement such plans, including, but not limited to: 
▪  Comprehensive plans; 
▪  Community development plans; 
▪  Functional plans, in areas such as: 
▪  Housing, including the development of a consolidated plan; 
▪  Land use and urban environmental design; 
▪  Economic development; 
▪  Open space and recreation; 
▪  Energy use and conservation; 
▪  Floodplain and wetlands management in accordance with the requirements of Executive Orders
11988 and 11990; 
▪  Transportation; 
▪  Utilities; and Historic preservation. 
▪  Other plans and studies such as: 
▪  Small area and neighborhood plans; 
▪  Capital improvements programs; 
17 
Page 26
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
▪  Reasonable costs of general environmental, urban environmental design and historic
preservation studies. 
▪  Strategies and action programs to implement plans, including the development of codes, 
ordinances and regulations; 
▪  Support of clearinghouse functions, such as those specified in Executive Order 12372; and 
▪  Analysis of impediments to fair housing choice. 
•  Policy planning/management/capacity building activities which will enable the recipient to
determine its needs; 
▪  Set long-term goals and short-term objectives, including those related to urban environmental
design; 
▪  Devise programs and activities to meet these goals and objectives; 
▪  Evaluate the progress of such programs and activities in accomplishing these goals and
objectives; and 
▪  Carry out management, coordination and monitoring of activities necessary for effective
planning implementation, but excluding the costs necessary to implement such plans. 
Program administrative costs – 570.206 
a) General management, oversight and coordination. Reasonable costs of overall program management, 
coordination, monitoring, and evaluation, including: 
•  Salaries, wages, and related costs of staff engaged in program administration. Program
administration includes the following types of assignments; 
•  Providing local officials and citizens with information about the program; 
•  Preparing program budgets and schedules, and amendments thereto; 
•  Developing systems for assuring compliance with program requirements; 
•  Developing interagency agreements and agreements with sub-recipients and contractors to
carry out program activities; 
•  Monitoring program activities for progress and compliance with program requirements; 
•  Preparing reports and other documents related to the program for submission to HUD; 
•  Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring findings; 
•  Evaluating program results against stated objectives; and
•  Managing or supervising persons whose primary responsibilities with regard to the program
include such assignments as those described in paragraph (a)(1)(i) through (viii) of this section. 
•  Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the program; 
•  Administrative services performed under third party contracts or agreements, including such
services as general legal services, accounting services, and audit services; and
•  Other costs for goods and services required for administration of the program, including such
goods and services as rental or purchase of equipment, insurance, utilities, office supplies, and
rental and maintenance (but not purchase) of office space. 
18 
Page 27
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
(b) Public information. The providing of information and other resources to residents and citizen
organizations participating in the planning, implementation, or assessment of activities being
assisted with CDBG funds. 
(c) Fair housing activities. Provision of fair housing services designed to further the fair housing
objectives of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601–20) by making all persons, without regard to race, 
color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status or handicap, aware of the range of housing
opportunities available to them; 
(d) Indirect costs.  Indirect costs may be charged to the CDBG program under a cost allocation plan
prepared in accordance with OMB Circular A–21, A–87, or A–122 as applicable. 
(e) Submission of applications for federal programs. Preparation of documents required for submission
to HUD to receive funds under the CDBG and UDAG programs. In addition, CDBG funds may be used
to prepare applications for other Federal programs where the recipient determines that such
activities are necessary or appropriate to achieve its community development objectives. 
(f) Administrative expenses to facilitate housing. CDBG funds may be used for necessary administrative
expenses in planning or obtaining financing for housing; 
(g) Section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937. Reasonable costs for overall program
management of the Rental Rehabilitation and Housing Development programs authorized under
section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, whether or not such activities are otherwise
assisted with funds provided under this part. 
(h) Reasonable costs equivalent to those described in paragraphs (a), (b), (e), and (f) of this section for
overall program management of: 
(i) A Federally designated Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community; and
(j) The HOME program under title II of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42
U.S.C. 12701 note).
Ineligible activities – 570.207
The general rule is that any activity that is not authorized under the provisions of §§570.201–570.206 is
ineligible to be assisted with CDBG funds. This section identifies specific activities that are ineligible and
provides guidance in determining the eligibility of other activities frequently associated with housing
and community development. 
(a) The following activities may not be assisted with CDBG funds: 
•  Buildings or portions thereof, used for the general conduct of government  General
government expenses;  Political activities.
(b) The following activities may not be assisted with CDBG funds unless carried out as a special
economic development activity, or as a public service, or by an eligible community-based
development organization, or by the recipient as specifically authorized. 
•  Purchase of equipment; 
19
Page 28
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
•  Construction equipment; 
•  Fire protection equipment. Fire protection equipment is considered for this purpose to be
an integral part of a public facility and thus, purchase of such equipment would be eligible
under §570.201(c);
•  Furnishings and personal property; 
•  Operating and maintenance expenses; 
•  Payment of salaries for staff, utility costs and similar expenses necessary for the operation
of public works and facilities; New housing construction; Income payments. 
20 
Page 29
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
APPENDIX C: 
21
Page 30
