LVM Literacy Unlimited: Request for Proposals
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
A. APPLICATION
I. Project Eligibility
Project meets at least ONE of the HUD National Objectives listed below (please check all applicable;
definitions are included as attachments):
❑ Benefits low/moderate income individuals/households
❑ Addresses the prevention or elimination of slums or blight
❑ Meets an urgent community need threatening health and welfare
Check all statements that describe HOW this project or activity meets at least one of the National
Objectives listed above: 
❑ Area Benefit Activities: The proposed project or activity meets the needs of low/moderate
income persons residing in an area where at least 51% of those residents have incomes within
80% of the Area Median Income. The benefits of this activity are available to all persons
regardless of income. Examples may include street improvements, water/sewer lines,
neighborhood facilities, and façade improvements in neighborhood commercial districts.
❑ Limited Clientele Activities: The proposed project benefits a specific group of people (rather
than all residents in a particular area), where 51% of the people are documented or presumed
to be low/moderate income persons. Examples may include construction of a senior center,
public services for the homeless, meals on wheels for the elderly, construction of a job training
facility for the handicapped.
❑ Housing Activities: The proposed project creates or improves permanent residential units that
will be occupied by low/moderate income persons upon completion. Housing can be either
owner occupied or rental one family or multi-family units. Examples may include property
acquisition for permanent housing, permanent housing rehabilitation, and conversion of non-
residential units into permanent housing.
❑ Job Creation or Retention: The proposed project creates or retains permanent jobs. At least 51%
of those jobs must be available to low- and moderate-income persons. Examples may include
loans to pay for the expansion of a factory, assistance to a business which has publicly announced
its intention to close resulting in loss of employment for low/moderate income persons.
❑ Slum or Blighted Area: The proposed project is located in a slum/blighted area and the
anticipated results of the project addresses one or more of the conditions that qualify in the
area.
❑ Spot Blight: The proposed project will eliminate specific conditions of blight or physical decay
outside of a blighted area. Activities are limited to demolition/clearance, historic preservation,
and rehabilitation of buildings (to the extent necessary to eliminate public health and safety
issues).
II. Project Type (for clarification on the categories, please see Appendix B)
❑ Housing Rehabilitation
❑ Social/Public Service
❑ Infrastructure/Public Facility Improvements
3
Page 2
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
❑ Economic Development
❑ Slum/Blight Eradication
❑ Other
III. GENERAL PROJECT INFORMATION
1.  Project Name: LVM Literacy Unlimited
2.  Project Dates: *:  July 1, 2022 - June 30, 2023
*CDBG-funded elements of proposed projects supported in Fiscal 2023 should end no later than June
30, 2023. Programs that cannot be implemented within 12 months may lose awarded CDBG funds.
3.  CDBG Funds Requested: 
$ 10,000.00
4. 
Name of Sponsoring
Organization or Individual 
Address  DUNS Number
Literacy Unlimited of Framingham Foundation, Inc. 49 Lexington St., Framingham, MA 01702
Framingham Public Library 49 Lexington St., Framingham, MA 01702 
n/a
149821097
5.  Person responsible for coordinating and administering this project (if known)
Name: Elyse Brown, Literacy Coordinator
Address: 49 Lexington St., Framingham, MA 01702
Phone: 508-532-5574
Email: ebrown@minlib.net
6.  Location of project or area served (Include Census Tract(s) and Block Group(s) served by proposed
project, if known) (please see map in Appendix D for eligible census tracts:
Tract  Percent Low/ Mod  Check all Tracts
that Apply 
383102.01
383300.01
383200.03
383102.02 
86.5% 
85.0% 
81.2% 
80.4% 
x
x
x
x
4
Page 3
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
383101.01
383501.02
383200.01
383600.02
383101.02
383400.03
383400.02
383700.03
383400.01 
79.5% 
79.5% 
75.2% 
74.1% 
72.4% 
71.4% 
58.1% 
55.1% 
52.6% 
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
7. Compliance Statement
For public facility and infrastructure projects requiring more than $2,000 in CDBG funds, describe how
compliance with Davis/Bacon federal wage, affirmative action and Section 3 requirements will be
maintained and documented: 
5
Page 4
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
B. LVM Literacy Unlimited Project Narrative
1. Need and Outcomes:
a. Why are you seeking to undertake this work (need)?
The focus and mission of Literacy Unlimited is to offer flexible and adaptive one-to-one
tutoring to ESOL (English for Speakers of Other Languages) and BL (Basic Literacy) adult
learners. Throughout the year, seasoned tutor volunteers offer classes in special topics like
the U.S. Citizenship Test and a crash course in English to provide students with “survival
skills” in their everyday lives. Many visitors to Literacy Unlimited speak little or no English
and must learn the language to achieve milestones that native English speakers take for
granted. Our tutors tailor the curriculum to adult learners' unique goals like getting a
driver’s license, applying for citizenship, and obtaining better employment. 
Literacy Unlimited requests $10,000 of CDBG funds towards our general operating
budget which is predominantly staff salaries. We are a small, part-time staff that carries out
many processes–from training new volunteer tutors to meeting students and understanding
their learning needs. 
Funding staff salaries correlate directly with the expansive services that Literacy
Unlimited offers to a student body largely made up of immigrants who need to learn English
to get by in their everyday lives. Office Manager Karen Boudreau matches volunteer tutors
with students on the waitlist; Database Administrator LieHua Shi updates and manages the
databases with confidentiality as the utmost priority; and Office Assistant Marjie Soloman
connects with tutors, conversation leaders, and students. The CDBG funds will supplement
staff salaries and support incremental raises for longtime staff members. The salary raises
are long overdue and will directly impact our program by investing in our talented staff and
their advanced skillset. 
b. Why do you believe your organization is best positioned to address this need?
We are centrally located in the city with our residency at Framingham Public Library; we
collaborate with the library on promotional and programming projects. Although we don’t
receive direct funding from the library, we receive in-kind donations of space and running
costs (i.e. utilities and maintenance). This allows us to keep our running costs lower than
other nonprofit organizations and continue to provide free services to adult learners. Our
staff is made up of four part-time employees who also contribute to Literacy Unlimited’s
community as volunteers and student. The staff’s varied expertise and dedication helps us
continually improve as we extend our reach to new volunteers and learners. 
c. How will you measure success?
LVM Literacy Unlimited  1  CDBG Application FY 2023 
Page 5
We are one of 12 affiliates of Literacy Volunteers of Massachusetts (LVM) and have a
substantial data management system that we use to track and record how many tutors and
students we serve and how active they are. 
We will measure the impact of the funding through our students. Literacy Unlimited
completes annual testing every spring to gauge our students’ English levels. I anticipate that
80% of our students will increase one educational level in their testing scores in Spring
2023. 
d. What do you expect the status of this project to be at the end of FY2023? (Ex:
iterative revision, continuation, end)
Literacy Unlimited adapted with speed and innovation at the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic. Performing all their duties remotely, the staff acted as a lifeline for students and
volunteers. However, we, like many nonprofits, are recovering from the shock waves of a
tumultuous two years. Our organization will begin to increase its number of active
volunteers and adult learners once again in Fall 2022. We will improve on being a hybrid
adult tutoring program by holding virtual events to reach people in our community who
prefer to interact remotely instead of in-person. 
e. Please provide backup data documenting need
Local Data: In 2019, the foreign-born population in Framingham was 28.4%, which is
higher than the national average of 13.7% (“Framingham, MA Census Place”). According to
Housing.MA, 15% of households are extremely low income, 12% are very low income, and
another 12% are low income in Framingham; adding up to 39% “of all households which
qualify for federal and state affordable housing programs based on household income.”
State Data: In the state of Massachusetts, during the reporting period of July 1, 2018 to
June 30, 2019, 204,292 adults did not speak English well and 365,984 adults did not have a
high school credential (“Adult Education Program Fact Sheet”). In July 2020, the
Massachusetts Coalition for Adult Education surveyed various Adult Basic Education
program directors and found that many programs pivoted quickly to serve adult learners
remotely, yet more government funding is needed in this new era of education to supply
technology to learners, help train staff, and follow state and local health guidelines
(https://mcae.net/blog/the-covid-19-pandemic-and-adult-education-in-massachusetts).
2. Impact:
a. Who benefits from this work and how?
Literacy Unlimited serves low to moderate income individuals and households. Often,
they are people who have immigrated from another country to the U.S. to seek better
opportunities. We provide free English language learning services to as many people as we
can. Recently, we restarted in-person conversation classes with a concentration on low
beginners where they learn vocabulary to help them complete everyday tasks like going to
the grocery store or doctor’s office. However, our main focus is one-to-one tutoring
because it offers the most flexibility to adult learners. When an adult learner reaches out to
LVM Literacy Unlimited  2  CDBG Application FY 2023 
Page 6
us, it is often as a last resort because a class schedule did not work for them or other
learning services were too expensive. 
b. How many will be served?
Currently, we serve 139 students with one-to-one tutoring and weekly conversation
classes. 
c. If this is a request for continued funding, please document the progress of your
current project or program, including the number served and the outcomes achieved
thus far.
In March 2020, Literacy Unlimited closed for in-person activities to mitigate the spread
of the novel COVID-19. At that point the program had expanded to serve 250 students. The
staff, led by now-retired Coordinator Anne O’Connell, sprang into action after they learned
that the closure would be ongoing as the world reeled in the first stages of the pandemic. 
Office Manager Karen Boudreau, a recent hire at the time, began to write newsletters in
earnest to help the volunteer tutors stay connected with Literacy Unlimited and learn about
the whirlwind transition to remote learning on varied platforms like Zoom and WhatsApp. 
Database Administrator LieHua Shi migrated her detailed workflow of updates and
maintenance to a remote work setting. Office Assistant Marjie Solomon was at the forefront
of reaching out to students and tutors by phone and email to check in and see how they
were doing during the initial stages of isolation that we all experienced one way or another
that spring. 
Despite the personal and environmental burdens that the staff experienced at the
height of the pandemic, they dove headlong into the 15 months of remote programming
with gusto. I was hired as the new Coordinator several months before Literacy Unlimited
reopened in July 2021. I am amazed by the staff’s tireless work and loyalty to support the
students and volunteer tutors. 
Currently, our program has 110 confirmed tutor-student matches; we serve 139
students in total. About 30% of the students on the tutor waiting list are placed in online or
in-person conversation classes. The number of students and volunteers we serve decreased
in 2020 and 2021. This change can be attributed to many pandemic-related factors such as
losing touch with tutors and students if they moved away, or tutors who decided to stop
volunteering with us for personal reasons. 
Literacy Unlimited aims to regrow our volunteer and student numbers incrementally as
we become more confident in the new programming we offer. Recently, we started holding
virtual and in-person social hours to connect more regularly with students and provide
informal conversation practice. 
3. Solution Design:
a. What is the evidence base to support this project’s design and outcomes?
LVM Literacy Unlimited  3  CDBG Application FY 2023 
Page 7
Literacy Unlimited was founded in 1986 in Framingham Public Library with a grant
through the Massachusetts Board of Library Commissioners. Thanks to the data we know in
2019 Framingham had a higher foreign-born population (28.4%) than the national average
(13.7%) (“Framingham, MA Census Place”). Our program is known for being one of the only
free adult tutoring services in Framingham. One-to-one tutoring is our core service because
it offers the most flexibility and targeted curriculum to adult learners who are unable to
thrive in a classroom setting. 
We complete a thorough student intake process with each individual to understanding
their goals as well as learn about their hobbies and interests to match them with the perfect
volunteer. New students complete an English assessment test in order to gauge what their
proficiency level is. We test active students on a yearly basis to chart their progress; the
majority of student scores increase each year as they work with our tutors. 
Recruiting and training volunteer tutors is a key component of our program to better
serve adult learners. Even when Literacy Unlimited was completely remote, new volunteers
completed a 12-hour online tutor training developed by LVM and educator Ruth Johnson
Colvin. The tutor training is chock full of research-based teaching practices to suit beginner, 
intermediate, and advanced ESOL students. After a new volunteer successfully completes
the course, they are then matched with a student based on availability and similar interests. 
The basic systems we have in place to match an adult learner with a volunteer tutor are
supplemented by additional activities we offer. We offer monthly professional development
sessions and office hours for tutors remotely. We email students about local job openings
and happenings in Framingham and invite them to social hours we host. The events we
offer promote connectivity in our community and encourage retention; some volunteer
tutors have worked with us for over 10 years and helped dozens of adult learners. 
b. With whom have you consulted/collaborated and how did their input impact the
solution design?
There are several organizations surrounding Literacy Unlimited that offer collaboration
and advice. These organizations are the connective tissue that help us to be a sustainable
educational program, and hold us accountable to stay on top of our internal processes and
improve how we deliver our services to the community. 
LVM provides support in data collection and maintains a rigorous, free training program
for new volunteer tutors. Framingham Public Library provides an in-kind donation of space
and running costs to support our program, as well as an incredible staff to help us promote
and orchestrate our offerings. 
c. If you are applying for continued funding, how has your design/methodology evolved
in response to evaluation and feedback?
Literacy Unlimited has evolved in past years thanks to surveys students and volunteers
completed after a Conversation Class or tutor training session ended. The COVID-19
LVM Literacy Unlimited  4  CDBG Application FY 2023 
Page 8
pandemic brought even greater change as the staff transitioned to remote work and
listened to volunteers and students needs in spring 2020. Translating the tutor training to a
virtual space required massive collaboration and innovation from Literacy Unlimited and all
LVM trainers. The curriculum was restructured and we received feedback from newly-
trained volunteer tutors on what worked and didn’t work. The tutor training course is like
the nucleus of our program; it is a requirement for new volunteers to complete and makes
them more well-rounded to help a students’ unique needs. 
d. How have you designed your solution to maximize impact to reach critical needs?
Literacy Unlimited’s solution is to provide flexible one-to-one tutoring to adults who
want to learn to speak, read, and write English for free to reach more of Framingham’s low- 
and moderate-income population. We provide an essential service which often leads to a
long student waitlist. Our service is provided by volunteers whom we train rigorously and
then ask for a 9 to 12-month commitment. 
One design aspect we use to reach students on the waiting list is Conversation Classes, 
led by longtime volunteers. We can reach more students this way and give them an
opportunity to practice English at least once a week. The ability to be on Zoom has allowed
us to reach more students through social event planning. 
e. How will you validate (show something is real/correct) your
design/methodologies/approach and track and report impact?
As we improve and refine our hybrid program design, we will track an increased number
of active students. We will use our data management processes to chart students’ progress
during our annual testing period and when they achieve learning goals set with tutors. 
4. Community Engagement:
a. Describe how your organization has engaged and continues to engage those
intended to benefit from this work in the [solution] design, delivery and evaluation of
services to be provided?
Literacy Unlimited is evolving as a hybrid adult tutoring program and strives to maintain
consistent communication with learners as well as volunteer tutors. Although we reopened
and welcome in-person visits, the staff continues to reach out and follow-up with students
by phone call, text, and email. We recently updated our signage with Portuguese and
Spanish translations to deliver information to visitors about the varied services offered at
Literacy Unlimited. 
When learners are placed on the waiting list to be matched with a tutor, we offer other
opportunities for them to start learning English as soon as possible. They can be placed in a
Conversation Class or join a monthly social hour to connect with others in the community
and receive English conversation practice. 
When a new volunteer wants to join our community, we invest a great deal of time and
effort in onboarding. All new tutors must complete a rigorous training course in research-
LVM Literacy Unlimited  5  CDBG Application FY 2023 
Page 9
based ESOL teaching practices. When a tutor is newly matched with a learner, we continue
to offer resources in monthly professional development sessions and office support. It takes
work to support volunteers but the care we give them translates into the excellent
attention and detail they put into preparing tailored lesson plans for students. 
Literacy Unlimited completes annual testing of all active students in May and June. We
record and track students' progress; if we are successfully providing English learning
services, we see their scores improve from year to year. 
b. Describe how your marketing and promotion plans are designed to reach the
targeted constituency.
Our goal for marketing and promotion is to get the word out in as many different ways
as possible to reach the widest range of our target audience. Internally, we use email, 
monthly newsletters, and Zoom events to reach the Literacy Unlimited community. The
Framingham Public Library staff helps us by designing flyers and posting social media
updates. We also rely on external organizations like the Massachusetts Libraries Board of
Commissioners and Massachusetts Adult Literacy Hotline to help spread the word about our
adult tutoring program online. 
c. How do you intend to keep the community informed of your progress?
We will keep the community informed through continual updates on our webpage and
work with the library to put out relevant social media announcements about what Literacy
Unlimited is up to. As normal life resumes in the 2022, we will start to have larger in-person
events to attract more people. 
5. Organizational Capacity:
a. What experience, skills and leadership does your agency bring to this work?
Literacy Unlimited has been a positive fixture in the community for over 30 years. In the
past 13 years our organization adapted to accommodate the growing immigrant population
in Framingham. The staff has grown from one to four parttime employees: Program
Coordinator (25 hours), Office Manager (18 hours), Database Administrator (15 hours), and
Office Assistant (5 hours). Half of the staff started as volunteer tutors at Literacy Unlimited
and one is a student; we make thoughtful decisions based on our first-hand experience of
Literacy Unlimited’s programming. 
We also have an Advisory Board made up of veteran volunteers and students. I meet
regularly with the Board to provide updates and reexamine program goals in an open
discussion. Literacy Unlimited is constantly at work to improve how we deliver our services
with a system of internal checks and balances. LVM contributes on a larger scale with tutor
training support and professional development opportunities for the staff. 
b. What other organizations will you be collaborating with to achieve maximum results
(please include letters of collaboration)?
LVM Literacy Unlimited  6  CDBG Application FY 2023 
Page 10
LVM: we are one of 12 affiliates in the LVM network. LVM provides support in data
management and maintains a rigorous, free training program for incoming volunteer tutors. 
If a new tutor or student reaches out to us who isn’t in our geographic area, we recommend
them to one of our affiliates spread out across Massachusetts. 
Framingham Public Library: our office and learning space is located at the library. 
Although the library doesn’t provide direct funding to our general operations, we utilize its
technological resources and collaborate on advertising campaigns. 
Nonprofits in Framingham and beyond: we have long-standing relationships with Jewish
Family Service of MetroWest, Framingham Adult English as a Second Language Plus, and
South Middlesex Opportunity Council. For example, if Literacy Unlimited is unable to help a
student and/or their family with something like rent assistance, our staff directs them to the
various organizations in Framingham and MetroWest that can provide the necessary
resources. 
6. Equity:
a. How will you ensure equitable access and success for underserved populations?
Literacy Unlimited does not discriminate based on race, ethnicity, gender, or
socioeconomic background. We strive to treat everyone fairly and honestly to ensure they
have the necessary information and feel welcome in our space. 
Recently, we increased signage around the library to educate visitors on where our
office is located and what services we provide. Our signage and literature in the library have
been translated into Portuguese and Spanish. If our office is closed, we have a plethora of
current information on the library’s website to educate online visitors about our services as
well as current activities at Literacy Unlimited. 
b. What barriers to access exist in your community and how will you address them?
With a new age of technology and the ability to teach adult learners in-person or online,
we are able to cross the physical barrier of transportation if an individual cannot come into
our office at the library. 
If a learner does not have access to a device or the internet, we rely on our working
relationship with the library to provide these basic services when a visitor walks into our
space. In the coming year, we would like to start distributing hotspots to students in need of
internet access at home. 
c. How will you ensure marginalized voices in your community are amplified and
consulted in the design, delivery, and evaluation of your project/program?
In prior years we ask for testimonials from students about the services we provide. We
recognize in those instances we were only focused on positive feedback and will need to
develop more open and inclusive communication tools in Fiscal Year 2023. I will research
LVM Literacy Unlimited  7  CDBG Application FY 2023 
Page 11
different literacy programs to get a better sense of best practices. For example, I noted one
local literacy program provides an anonymous feedback form in their e-newsletters. 
d. Describe efforts underway within your organization to promote diversity, equity and
inclusion
Literacy Unlimited strives to provide everyone with clear information about our
program and to learn about a student’s individual needs or obstacles so we can better assist
them. We seek online events hosted by other MA nonprofits which promote diversity and
share them with our community. I meet on a regular basis with various literacy programs
around Massachusetts to discuss and brainstorm best practices for delivering services
equitably to local communities. As a staff we will continue to seek educational opportunities
to learn how we can grow more equitable and inclusive in our mission and daily operations. 
7. Sustainability:
a. Does this work depend entirely on CDBG funds? Please describe your plans for this
work if full funding is not granted.
Our goal to give staff members fair salaries and reward their work ethic with
incremental raises does not depend entirely on CDBG funds. However, the CDBG funds are
incredibly helpful to our mission to make ourselves a financially stable nonprofit each year. 
We receive a portion of a Department of Secondary Education (DESE) grant award from
LVM and a smaller grant award from Foundation for MetroWest (FFMW) each year. The
remainder of the funds we need to support staff are a combination of donations from
individuals, family foundations, and corporate sponsorships. Literacy Unlimited perseveres
despite a pandemic that has taken its toll locally and globally. Much of this is in large part to
the extensive fundraising efforts of retired coordinator Anne O’Connell. 
If CDBG does not grant full funding we would ramp up our fundraising efforts in Fiscal
Year 2023 and set goals to establish new donor relationships as well as cut down on event
costs for in-person and hybrid events. 
b. How do you plan to sustain this work once CDBG support ends, keeping in mind that
sustainability means more than replacing funding?
Literacy Unlimited perseveres despite a pandemic that has taken its toll locally and
globally. We were fortunate to receive donations from corporate sponsors and had great
turnouts for two spring appeals and an online event fundraiser in honor of Anne O’Connell’s
retirement. The silver lining of not being able to host in-person events is that we can save
the money that normally would be spent on preparation and food. As mentioned in the
above question, we will reflect on our budgetary needs and set goals in Fiscal Year 2023 to
cultivate new relationships. 
LVM Literacy Unlimited  8  CDBG Application FY 2023 
Page 12
8. Additional Proposal Narrative:
What else would you like us to know about your proposed project?
To get a feel for our program and the community we serve, please check out our online
presence at [URL: "https://framinghamlibrary.org/literacy/our-program"] https://framinghamlibrary.org/literacy/our-program. 
Bibliography
“Adult Education Program Fact Sheet.” Massachusetts Coalition for Adult Education. 
Educate & Elevate Adult Education, COABE, 2019, [URL: "https://3b8ygboqtj713fuxf2pdm8ow-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/142/2020/08/COABE_DataSheet_MA.pdf"] https://3b8ygboqtj713fuxf2pdm8ow-
 wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/142/2020/08/COABE_DataSheet_MA.pdf. 
Accessed 7 Dec. 2021. 
“Basic Housing Needs Assessment for Framingham, MA.” Metropolitan Area Planning
Council. [URL: "http://www.housing.ma/framingham/report"] http://www.housing.ma/framingham/report. Accessed 7 Dec. 2021. 
“Framingham, MA Census Place.” Data USA. The Census Bureau & ACS 5-year Estimate, 
2019, [URL: "https://datausa.io/profile/geo/framingham-ma#demographics"] https://datausa.io/profile/geo/framingham-ma#demographics. Accessed 7 Dec. 2021. 
LVM Literacy Unlimited  9  CDBG Application FY 2023 
Page 13
C. Logic Model 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
Use this template to develop and submit a logic model for your proposed project. If you need help in developing a logic model
for your grant proposal, please reach out to us at [URL: "mailto:communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov"] communitydevelopment@framinghamma.gov or 508-532-5457 or the next page
has a sample one. 
INPUTS
Resources to be used to
undertake this project or
program. 
ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS SHORT-TERM
OUTCOMES 
LONG-TERM-
OUTCOMES
Specific events, actions, 
partnerships, and processes. 
Artifacts and evidence of the Measurable changes that will
activities.  occur in the next year. 
Long-term intended effects. 
Staff time/expertise and
technology to recruit new
tutors 
-Schedule/host information sessions
-Marketing: in library and Framingham
-Engage new tutors with social events
and information prior to training 
-Interested newcomers decide to
train and volunteer with us
-People learn about us by word of
mouth 
-Tutor completes training and is matched -Tutor and student develop a
with a student
-Tutor asks staff for advice and resources 
positive working relationship
-Student meets learning goals
Staff time, volunteers, and
technology to expand
Conversation Classes 
-Meet w/current Class Leaders to discuss how
to expand class size on Zoom
-Recruit volunteers for new classes
-Train/refresh Zoom skills for effective teaching 
-Class size on Zoom increases
-New classes are set up and added
to weekly schedule
-Notify waiting list 
-Waiting list students are placed in
classes
-Students practice English on a weekly
basis 
-Class leaders and students develop
positive working relationships
-Connect with more students in
Framingham
Staff time/expertise and data -Give student information about program
-Assist student with registration form, discuss goals
entry to register a new student -Place student on waiting list and Conversation Class
-Student data and staff notes are entered in database 
-Student understands what services we provide
-Student receives class spot or tutor as soon as
possible
-Confidential record of student interaction and
progress at Literacy Unlimited 
-Students starts to learn English and
become confident
-Staff is familiar with student's goals 
-Student meets learning goals
-Literacy Unlimited develops stronger
community connection within Framingham
8
Page 14
Request for Proposals
Framingham Community Development Department
Fiscal Year 2023
 
D. Literacy Unlimited Project Costs 
1. Detailed Project Budget: 
 
 
 
2. Anticipated Funding Sources:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LVM Literacy Unlimited 
LVM Literacy Unlimited 
   CDBG Application FY 2023 
14  CDBG Application FY 2023
Page 15
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS 
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023 
E. DOCUMENTED CAPABILITY
Organizations must submit copies of their most recently completed audits or audited and certified
financial statements. 
If you are applying as a new entity or organization and do not have existing evaluations or reports, 
please provide letters of support. 
Please note, if there are any irregularities identified in this documentation, you may be contacted by
a member of the staff for further clarification. 
FAILURE TO INCLUDE THIS INFORMATION MAY RENDER THIS APPLICATION INCOMPLETE AND
INELIGIBLE FOR FUNDING. 
F. SIGNATURE AND CERTIFICATION STATEMENT
On behalf of this organization, I affirm that all activities to be supported with these funds shall comply
with the provisions of applicable federal and state statutes, regulations, directives, guidelines, 
ordinances, and orders which encourage the inclusion and participation of all segments of the community
and prohibit discrimination against individuals based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, 
disability, familial status, or age. Under penalties of perjury, I affirm that the information contained in this
proposal is complete and accurate. I represent that the organization has the capacity and resources to
carry out the activities and achieve the outcomes cited in this proposal. 
Elyse B. Brown
Name 
Program Coordinator
Title (type or print) 
Signature 
12/10/2021
Date
10
Page 16
December 2, 2021
Dear Committee Members,
As the chairwoman of the Literacy Unlimited Advisory Board, I write to you asking for your
continued support of LVM Literacy Unlimited by selecting us as a recipient of the Community
Development Block Grant (CDBG). As a tutor, I see firsthand how vital this program is to the
students who utilize our services. I also see how this program goes beyond language learning, 
helping the families and building community bonds. Our students’ ultimate goals vary from
learning to speak fluent English to getting a driver’s license and/or job; receiving their GED and
ultimately becoming a valued and productive citizen.
More and more low and moderate income residents come to us for both Basic Literacy and
English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) tutoring. This means that our volunteer tutor
base needs to grow, which requires additional funding for teacher training and supplies. That is
why we are asking for assistance for salaries and educational support for our students, so we can
better assist them in accomplishing their personal goals. 
This past year has been both extremely difficult but also promising for both the students and
tutors. Our tutors had to learn how to teach virtually. Tutors comfortable with technology helped
other learn how to continue teaching the students remotely. The obstacles have been daunting but
not unconquerable which is testament to the commitment of our volunteers. Many are still
meeting remotely but the Framingham library is once again open. Additionally, our program has
taken a financial blow as we had to cancel our main fundraiser. Nevertheless we have sustained
our high level of commitment to our students. The need to train more tutors is constantly a top
priority as we always have a continuous list of students, waiting for a tutor match. 
Thank you in advance for your continued support of our organization.
Nancy Agler, Chair
Literacy Unlimited Advisory Board
Page 17
10 Post Office Square – Suite 800 S, Boston, MA 02109  Telephone: 617.367.1313  www.lvm.org
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Chairman 
Robert L. Peabody, Esquire
Members 
Vashti Brotherhood
Katherine German, Ph.D. 
Roberta Soolman 
December 3, 2021
Lena Kilburn
Literacy Unlimited
Framingham Public Library
Framingham, MA 01702
BENEFACTORS BOARD
Edward DeNoble
Beth-Anne C. Flynn
Mario Marsano
Thomas McNamara
David Mittelman (deceased) 
Gregory Shoukimas, M.D. 
EMERITUS BOARD
Gene Barton, Esquire
Craig Cerretani
Jacqueline P. Fields, Ph.D.
Donald Froude
William Huff
Richard Kommit
Donald Mitchell
Elizabeth St. Sauveur
James Walter 
Dear Lena: 
I am delighted to write this letter of support for the Community Development
Block Grant (CDBG) application being submitted by the Literacy Volunteers of
Massachusetts program at the Framingham Public Library (LVM-Literacy
Unlimited). Literacy Unlimited serves Framingham adults who read or speak
English at the lowest levels, including individuals with low and moderate income. 
As an affiliate in the Literacy Volunteers of Massachusetts state-wide network of
programs and a member in good standing, LVM-Literacy Unlimited complies with
all policies, procedures and quality standards for basic literacy and ESOL
instructional services, tutor training, volunteer management and non-profit
management. Since its inception, LVM-Literacy Unlimited has been an excellent
example of a well-managed program and has participated enthusiastically and
fully in all network activities. In addition, the affiliate has forged a strong, 
collaborative and model partnership with the Natick Public Library, which enables
both institutions to better serve the community. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Literacy Unlimited has demonstrated exemplary
leadership in meeting the challenges of providing both remote instructional
services for students and remote training for volunteer tutors. 
For Fiscal Year 2022 (7/1/21-6/30/22), LVM is providing funding of $36,103
through LVM’s grant from the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education (DESE). This funding is contingent upon sufficient
appropriation by the state legislature and the release of the funds by DESE. 
LVM wholeheartedly supports your CDBG application. 
Sincerely, 
Roberta Soolman
Executive Director 
Page 18
December 3, 2021
Community Development Block Grant Review Committee
150 Concord St 
Framingham MA 01702 
Dear Committee Members: 
Please consider continued support of the Framingham Public Library’s Literacy
Unlimited program with Community Development Block Grant Funds. 
This life-changing program provides critical language learning opportunities for
immigrants new to this country and to Framingham. It provides pathways for
obtaining Citizenship—guidance, resources, and classes in American Civics—a
program that yields new American Citizens each year. 
In a community like Framingham the demand for English Language Learning is
enormous. Our program offers free opportunities to those who would otherwise not be
able to access them. And its location in the Library—and in downtown Framingham—
could not be better in terms of access to all that Library has to offer. 
Literacy Unlimited is a lifeline, for other adult learners as well seeking to improve
literacy skills or improve their lives. The program is a much-needed chance to connect
with a resource that offers hope for success and an opportunity for connection with
resources and information. Over the years working here at the Library, I have seen
truly inspiring transformations among the students in the program and heard their
testimonies that this program changed their lives. 
The Library is privileged to continue its full support and partnership with Literacy
Unlimited and all its activities. It truly enriches the tapestry of the Library’s offerings. I
hope the Committee will look favorably on this request and continue to fund this
important program. 
Sincerely, 
Lena Kilburn 
Director of Libraries
Framingham 
