City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
A. APPLICATION
I. Project Eligibility
Project meets at least ONE of the HUD National Objectives listed below (please check all applicable; 
definitions are included as attachments):
√  Benefits low/moderate income individuals/households
❑ Addresses the prevention or elimination of slums or blight
❑ Meets an urgent community need threatening health and welfare
Check all statements that describe HOW this project or activity meets at least one of the National
Objectives listed above: 
❑ Area Benefit Activities: The proposed project or activity meets the needs of low/moderate
income persons residing in an area where at least 51% of those residents have incomes within
80% of the Area Median Income. The benefits of this activity are available to all persons
regardless of income. Examples may include street improvements, water/sewer lines, 
neighborhood facilities, and façade improvements in neighborhood commercial districts. 
√  Limited Clientele Activities: The proposed project benefits a specific group of people (rather
than all residents in a particular area), where 51% of the people are documented or presumed
to be low/moderate income persons. Examples may include construction of a senior center, 
public services for the homeless, meals on wheels for the elderly, construction of a job training
facility for the handicapped. 
❑ Housing Activities: The proposed project creates or improves permanent residential units that
will be occupied by low/moderate income persons upon completion. Housing can be either
owner occupied or rental one family or multi-family units. Examples may include property
acquisition for permanent housing, permanent housing rehabilitation, and conversion of non- 
residential units into permanent housing. 
❑ Job Creation or Retention: The proposed project creates or retains permanent jobs. At least 51% 
of those jobs must be available to low- and moderate-income persons. Examples may include
loans to pay for the expansion of a factory, assistance to a business which has publicly announced
its intention to close resulting in loss of employment for low/moderate income persons. 
❑ Slum or Blighted Area: The proposed project is located in a slum/blighted area and the
anticipated results of the project addresses one or more of the conditions that qualify in the
area. 
❑ Spot Blight: The proposed project will eliminate specific conditions of blight or physical decay
outside of a blighted area. Activities are limited to demolition/clearance, historic preservation, 
and rehabilitation of buildings (to the extent necessary to eliminate public health and safety
issues).
II. Project Type (for clarification on the categories, please see Appendix B) 
❑ Housing Rehabilitation
√  Social/Public Service
❑ Infrastructure/Public Facility Improvements 
1
Page 2
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
❑ Economic Development
❑ Slum/Blight Eradication
❑ Other
III. GENERAL PROJECT INFORMATION
1.  Project Name: STEM Education for Framingham Middle School Students
2.  Project Dates: *: 7/1/22 – 6/30/23
*CDBG-funded elements of proposed projects supported in Fiscal 2023 should end no later than June
30, 2023. Programs that cannot be implemented within 12 months may lose awarded CDBG funds. 
3.  CDBG Funds Requested: $8,250
4. 
Name of Sponsoring
Organization or Individual 
Address  DUNS Number
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated 100 State Street, Framingham, 
Science Learning  MA 01701  9488451930000
5.  Person responsible for coordinating and administering this project (if known) 
Name: Dr. Irene Porro
Address: Framingham State University, 100 State Street, PO 9101, Framingham, MA 01701
Phone: 508-626-4056
Email: iporro@framingham.edu
6.  Location of project or area served (Include Census Tract(s) and Block Group(s) served by proposed
project, if known) (please see map in Appendix D for eligible census tracts:
Tract  Percent Low/ Mod  Check all Tracts
that Apply
383102.01  86.5%  X
383300.01  85.0% 
383200.03  81.2%  X
383102.02  80.4%  X
2
Page 3
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
383101.01
383501.02
383200.01
383600.02
383101.02
383400.03
383400.02
383700.03
383400.01 
79.5% 
79.5% 
75.2% 
74.1% 
72.4% 
71.4% 
58.1% 
55.1% 
52.6% 
X
X
X
7. Compliance Statement
For public facility and infrastructure projects requiring more than $2,000 in CDBG funds, describe how
compliance with Davis/Bacon federal wage, affirmative action and Section 3 requirements will be
maintained and documented: 
n/a 
3
Page 4
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
B. Project Narrative 
1. Need and Outcomes: 
a. Why are you seeking to undertake this work (need)?
There is a consistent need for quality learning during out-of-school time, especially during
school vacations, early release, and summer. Youth from low-income families often lack
opportunities to participate in engaging, creative, and educational experiences outside of school. 
This project offers quality informal learning, especially team building and simulations, for low-
income, underserved and at-risk youth, particularly targeting our communities in South
Framingham. Particularly, the Fuller, McCarthy, and Harmony Grove Schools, which have
MCAS scores lower than the state average for math and science and located in some of
Framingham’s highest poverty rate census tracts. These youth are also underrepresented in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and related careers. 
CDBG funding would enable the McAuliffe Center to renew its sponsorship program that has
been on hiatus due to the lack of funding and the COVID-19 pandemic for the past two years. 
A sponsorship program enables Framingham-based low-income school and community groups
to participate in STEM exploration. Activities at the McAuliffe Center include simulated
missions in the Challenger Learning Center (CLC) and planetarium shows, which comprise the
sponsored programming. CLC missions are STEM experiences designed for middle school
students. The space-themed simulation-based experiences introduce the youth to jobs in STEM
fields, which include some of the fastest growing jobs. Planetarium presentations are immersive; 
a fulldome learning environment that bring cross-curriculum educational programming. Career
exploration prior to high school provides youth with advanced opportunity to consider joining
the STEM career pipeline. 
b. Why do you believe your organization is best positioned to address this need? 
The McAuliffe Center is geographically located in the center of Framingham at Framingham
State University under the College of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics. 
Although located at FSU, the McAuliffe Center is a science center that serves as the hub for
informal STEM education (ISE), which means that it provides science education outside of a
formal classroom. While the McAuliffe Center is often referred to as a local “hidden gem,” this
sponsorship program for Framingham afterschool and out-of-school time (ASOST) programs
will contribute to establishing the McAuliffe Center as a modern hub for integrated learning that
also promotes environmental sustainability and fosters an inclusive and accessible learning
environment while strengthening partnerships with ASOST programs throughout our city. 
The McAuliffe Center is devoted to promoting and increasing diversity and equity in STEM
education by sharing its resources and building collaborations with organizations that serve
youth from low-income communities and populations historically underrepresented in STEM. 
The facility includes a Challenger Learning Center (CLC), planetarium, and exhibit areas for
exploration. The founding of the McAuliffe Center in 1986 honors the legacy of the first teacher
in space and FSU alumna, Christa McAuliffe. Each year, approximately 10,000 K-16 students
participate in the McAuliffe Center’s programs, which are fee-based, free, or sponsored. 
The McAuliffe Center hosts one of more than 40 Challenger Learning Centers (CLCs) around
the world. The CLC network was conceived by families of the Challenger crew in order to
continue the spirit of their loved ones. The result is a place where children, educators, and other
4
Page 5
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
adults can manipulate equipment, conduct experiments, solve problems, and work together, 
immersing themselves in space-like surroundings. The Challenger Center’s mission is to engage
students and teachers in dynamic, hands-on exploration and discovery opportunities that
strengthen knowledge in STEM, inspire students to pursue careers in STEM, and provide an
outlet to learn and apply life skills. Mission simulations deepen student engagement by putting
STEM concepts into a real-world context and organically introduce skills, knowledge, and
expertise needed by STEM employers. CLC experiences promote STEM careers by giving youth
a sense of who they can become and what they can do if they choose a STEM career. 
The CLC at the McAuliffe Center is one of three in New England and 44 around the world. The
next closest CLCs are 120 miles away in Bridgeport, CT and 131 miles in Schenectady, NY. 
Maine’s CLC is 217 miles from Framingham. 
The planetarium offers fulldome and live, interactive experiences that complement the CLC
experience. Participants may experience a tour of the seasonal night sky, fly through space to
visit other planets, or analyze the interconnected components of the Earth system. Programming
includes a wide range of earth and space science topics that promote STEM education and
inspire exploration of STEM and STEM-related careers. 
The McAuliffe Center manages the MetroWest STEM Education Network (MSEN), one of nine
Massachusetts regional STEM networks dedicated to promoting quality education and career
pathways in STEM. MSEN members include organizations from industry, higher education, K-
12 education, professional organizations, workforce development, economic development, out-
of-school time programs, and community-based nonprofit organizations. The group focuses on
developing collaborations to support member organizations in empowering local students with
the confidence and perseverance to pursue STEM-enabled career pathways. 
Targeted partner agencies are located in and serve South Framingham. This includes the
Framingham Public Schools (FPS) – Community Resource Development and Pelham Lifelong
Learning Center. We will also reach out to Hoops & Homework as a new partner for whom we
can offer sponsorships. We seek to strengthen our work together to reinforce skills and
knowledge so the youth can have productive lives. FPS has informed McAuliffe Center
programming as a Collaborating Partner of MSEN since 2018 when MSEN was awarded
membership in the STEM Learning Ecosystems Community of Practice, and for the past three
years as a partner for the team mentorship program for high school students. Additionally, we
worked with FPS on several summer programs for middle school students in 21st Century
Community Learning Centers. Therefore, we are familiar with the FPS curriculum. We have
provided learning opportunities for youth from the Pelham Rec Center to attend the annual
MetroWest STEM Festival at FSU and look forward to their partnership where they are now the
Pelham Lifelong Learning Center, providing assistance and learning opportunities for all ages. 
c. How will you measure success? 
The McAuliffe Center was one of 28 CLCs in 22 U.S. States to take part in 2018-19 national
survey developed as part of a NASA Cooperative Agreement to assess the impact of one of the
CLC missions. We will use this same, validated survey that was completed by 80,000 students
across the country, to measure the impact of the Framingham youth experience, that provided
valuable feedback about the program. The survey includes a Likert scale with questions to assess
overall experience, increased interest in STEM, learning more than a student normally does in
5
Page 6
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
normal class time, and recommendation of the CLC experience to others. 
The outcomes and level of impact may vary for each group based on the quality and amount of
preparation completed with the youth by their educators prior to their simulated mission in the
CLC. Nonetheless, we expect all youth participating in a CLC mission simulation to achieve the
“STEM awareness” stage and progress towards the “understanding” and “advocacy” stages
described below: 
•  Awareness: Develop awareness of the range of both STEM and non-STEM expertise
involved in supporting space exploration activities. 
•  Understanding: Develop an appreciation and understanding of the range of scientific and
engineering skills and expertise applied to current and planned space missions. 
•  Advocacy: Develop positive attitudes towards STEM careers. 
McAuliffe Center staff will evaluate the program. Irene Porro, Ph.D. is the McAuliffe Center’s
Director who will lead the evaluation process. She has developed considerable experience in the
evaluation of informal education programs during her tenure at both the MIT Office of
Engineering Outreach Programs and at the McAuliffe Center. 
Post-surveys for students will be the primary tools for data collection. Evaluation data will
include general demographics collected through the Sponsorship Application Request Form. A
final report will summarize all relevant data of the program and will be used to further improve
the program as needed. 
d. What do you expect the status of this project to be at the end of FY2023? 
The program supported with Framingham CDBG funding will end for Framingham by June 30, 
2023, coinciding with the end of the academic year 2022-2023. We hope to continue
sponsorship of schools and OST programs especially based in low-income census tracts and
cities by securing funding from other sources. 
e. Data documenting need
According to the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE),
Framingham Public Schools is a Title I district. The majority of the elementary and middle
schools are Title I schools. The schools located in South Framingham – Barbieri, Harmony
Grove, McCarthy and Fuller – all have more than double the state average of 23.9 percent for
First Language Not English and English Language Learner of 11 percent. All schools in the
district are above the state average (43.8 percent) for low-income but Harmony Grove
represents 82.9 percent, nearly double the state average, and the highest in the district. Fuller
follows with the second highest rate for low-income at 73.7 percent, Barbieri 68.6 percent, 
McCarthy 66.2 percent. See table below for details about Selected Populations per DESE. 
6
Page 7
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
SCHOOL PROFILE (2021-22): Title I Schools
Name of School
Framingham Public Schools
Barbieri Elementary
Brophy Elementary
Harmony Grove Elementary
Mary E. Stapleton Elementary
Miriam F. McCarthy School
Cameron Middle School
Fuller Middle School
State Average 
Poverty Rate
% by Census
Tract
7.41% 
1.11% 
22.51% 
3.56% 
15.12% 
3.56% 
15.12% 
% First
Language
Not English
50.4
72.2
57.0
83.5
38.7
45.8
54.0
64.1
23.9% 
% English
Language
Learner
29.6
57.3
44.5
72.7
31.0
32.8
16.9
43.0
11.0% 
% Low-
income
54.9
68.6
62.4
82.9
60.6
66.2
62.0
73.7
43.8% 
Total # of
Students
8,824
668
465
502
297
467
533
632 
BOLD RED notes more than double the state average; BOLD BLACK notes higher than state average 
2. Impact: 
a. Who benefits from this work and how? 
The Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning seeks CDBG funds to subsidize
visits specifically for Framingham out-of-school time (OST) programs and schools that primarily
serve low-income students in elementary and middle school. Funds pay for program fees for
schools and OST programs to participate in the space mission simulations in the McAuliffe
Center’s Challenger Learning Center. The simulations are complemented by STEM explorations
in the FSU Planetarium and hands-on activities. 
CLC mission scenarios offered at the McAuliffe Center allow students to build an understanding
of the careers involved in supporting space exploration that include the same skills and expertise
needed by STEM employers in our region. During the mission scenarios, students assume the
roles of communications engineers, biologists, computer scientists, electrical engineers, 
meteorologist, medical analysts and mathematicians in support of the mission’s overall goals. 
McAuliffe Center programs deepen student engagement by putting STEM concepts into a real-
world context and by showing students what types of skills STEM careers entail. CLC
experiences give youth a sense of who they can become if they study STEM. 
CLC missions are STEM experiences in a fully-immersive environment that includes three
rooms – Briefing, Mission Control and Spacecraft. Students start in the Briefing Room where
they learn their roles and set goals for the Mission. Half of the students then go to the
Spacecraft, a room designed to look like the interior of a space station. The other half reports to
Mission Control with a design inspired by actual Mission Control rooms. In Spacecraft, student
teams use real science equipment to conduct hands-on labs and gather data. In Mission Control, 
students analyze data received from Spacecraft. Together, the students engage in meaningful
communication, collaboration, and problem solving to achieve their mission goals. Flight
Directors lead the simulation-based experience. 
The sponsorship awarded to a school or OST program includes the cost of the combined CLC
mission and planetarium program, complemented by a professional development workshop for
7
Page 8
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
educators. The workshop is customized to provide educators with information and resources
needed to skillfully and knowledgeably introduce their students to topics related to space
exploration, the research being conducted on board the International Space Station, and the
wide range of STEM expertise, i.e. STEM professional roles, necessary to support the work
currently done in space and planned future missions. Educators are introduced to a range of
grade-appropriate NASA resources that support their work with their students in preparation for
their visit to the McAuliffe Center and then for post-visit career explorations. 
b. How many will be served? 
The amount of people served will depend upon the age group of attendees and the number of
desired programs selected, i. e. mission simulation plus planetarium, or just one of those
activities. We anticipate serving six ASOST sites/organizations, with an average of 24 students
per site, for a total of 144 students and educators. For the requested budget, we assumed that six
sites serving Middle – High Schoolers (5th grade and up) would select the combination of both a
simulation and mission, and 11 sites (serving elementary age and up) would pick just the
planetarium. If more sites pick just the planetarium (elementary school students are too young
for the simulation), then we will be able to serve more people. A planetarium presentation can
accommodate up to 48 participants per presentation for a total of 528 participants based on 11
sponsorships. 
3. Solution Design 
a. What is the evidence base to support this project’s design and outcomes? 
Challenger Learning Center programs are interdisciplinary and use an active learning approach
approach to engage and excite students who learn key science concepts, and improve their
communication, collaboration and problem-solving skills. An array of long-standing national
partners and sponsor organizations like NASA and NOAA have subject matter experts who
advise about program development. They provide the latest and most relevant, scientific content
and data to use with students and teachers. 
Programming is designed to be modular to give educators the flexibility to complement their
classrooms as they see fit. They are designed not as a detractor for your everyday classroom, but
as a complementary experience to drive home fundamental 21st century skills and scientific
concepts. Missions are aligned to both Common Core and Next Generation State Standards. 
b. With whom have you collaborated and how did their input impact the solution design? 
Over the years, McAuliffe Center staff have worked with MSEN’s Collaborating Partners and
Advisory Committee, Framingham Public Schools, Pelham Rec Center, Girls Inc, Framingham
Girl Scouts, Girl Scouts of Eastern Massachusetts, and the Boys and Girls Clubs of MetroWest. 
All groups have participated in the McAuliffe Center programming that is sponsored, free, fee-
based, and/or with in-kind contributions (from FSU). Some groups participated in pilot and
special projects to determine the efficacy of potential programming. Feedback from the groups
and McAuliffe Center staff determined any changes needed to improve the program and
whether the program was viable based on staffing needs, supplies, and other costs required to
successfully implement the program and sustain it. 
The McAuliffe Center has previous experience with offering sponsorship programs to
underserved and underrepresented groups throughout our Commonwealth. Program evaluation
based on demographics proved the program was successful in increasing the total number of
8
Page 9
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
underserved and underrepresented groups served by the program. 
d. How have you designed your solution to maximize impact to reach critical needs? 
Starting in 2016, the McAuliffe Center has provided sponsorships to economically-
disadvantaged groups with support from program fees and funding provided by the Center for
the Advancement of Science in Space. The CLC mission scenarios allow youth to build an
understanding about the careers involved in supporting space exploration that include the same
skills and expertise needed by STEM employers in our region. As mentioned previously, during
the scenarios youth assume a variety of STEM positions in support of the mission’s overall
goals. The National Science Foundation has prioritized federal funds to increase the numbers of
people of color in STEM fields, as they represent only 23 percent of the STEM workforce due
to underrepresentation of Black, Indigenous, and People Of Color (BIPOC) in obtaining
Bachelor’s degrees (The STEM Labor Force of Today: Scientists, Engineers, and Skilled Technical
Workers, Okrent and Burke, 2021).
Programs can be customized to best meet the needs of a group’s visit. McAuliffe staff are
professional educators trained to tailor programs to address specific needs of its audience such
as language, special needs, and special interests in STEM fields. Study guides and NASA
resources are provided to educators so they can prepare their students in advance of their visit
and for post-visit career exploration. 
e. How will you validate your design/methodologies/approach and track and report impact? 
In our experience, focus groups conducted remotely have been fruitful in yielding greater
participation. We will conduct focus group meetings with all sponsored organizations at the end
of the year to solicit feedback and plan adaptations for future implementations. 
4. Community Engagement: 
a. Describe how your organization has engaged and continues to engage those intended to benefit
from this work in the design, delivery and evaluation of services to be provided? 
Program feedback from participants has helped inform staff of program elements to maintain
and change to ensure a quality education. As opportunities arise, we contact partner
organizations to explain the program and determine their desire to participate. Due to the
pandemic, we anticipate the possibility of modifications during program implementation to
facilitate participation. Conversations may discuss the learning format of in-person or virtual. 
Partners share any special accommodations needed due to wheelchair access, language, or other
ability concerns in participation. MSEN Membership provides a network of educators, nonprofit
staff, and STEM professionals to discuss how the program may better serve its constituency, 
especially with current trends. 
We maintain a list of Framingham-based organizations that have participated in a simulated
mission in the CLC. This includes Stapleton Elementary, Fuller Middle School, Fuller Summer
Program, Framingham High School, Wayside Academy, MetroWest YMCA, Big Brothers Big
Sisters of Central MA/MetroWest, Framingham Girl Scouts, and Adventure 360 from the
MetroWest College Planning Collaborative (CPC).
b. Marketing and Promotion Plans
The McAuliffe Center uses flyers, its website, emails to FSU staff and faculty, e-newsletters, and
social media (Twitter and Facebook) for its marketing and promotions. MSEN will conduct
9
Page 10
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
direct outreach to its partners to assist in distributing the information to their networks and will
share information via its website, e-newsletters and social media, asking subscribers to share the
information with their networks. 
c. How do you intend to keep the community informed of your progress? 
The McAuliffe Center plans to keep the community informed by using the McAuliffe Center
website to list groups that visited with CDBG funding and the activities they participated in. 
Similarly, this information would be shared with McAuliffe Center e-news and posts on social
media (Twitter and Facebook) that tag groups. 
5. Organizational Capacity: 
a. What experience, skills and leadership does your agency bring to this work? 
Irene Porro, Ph.D. is the Director of the McAuliffe Center. Under her leadership, the Center
adopted its new mission to be a leader in developing opportunities for integrated science
learning through the sharing of resources, building of partnerships, and the advancement of
educational practices. She is also the lead for the MetroWest STEM Education Network
Ecosystem, a member of an international community of practice dedicated to promoting quality
education and career pathways in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. She is a
professional scientist with a deep commitment to social justice. In her work, she combines
research skills in physics and astrophysics with an interdisciplinary approach to education to
promote equity and diversity in STEM fields. She works to support initiatives where both the
arts and the sciences are fully respected and valued. 
Evan Pagliuca manages all educational programs for the McAuliffe Center. He is responsible for
the coordination, facilitation, and delivery of a range of educational programming activities
offered through the Challenger Learning Center, stand-alone STEM programs and community
events. He leads the development and implementation of program enhancements focused on
accessibility. His professional membership included serving in various roles on the executive
committee of the Massachusetts Association of Science Teachers (MAST) and facilitated the
planning of a national conference. He was elected and appointed to the Challenger Center’s
Network Council, which is a focus and advisory group of other Challenger Centers that provide
guidance to the national Challenger Center office. 
The McAuliffe Center is a science center that provides informal science education (ISE), which
means that it provides science education outside of a school setting. As an ISE, the McAuliffe
Center has the potential to offer alternative entry points to STEM engagement and to
complement STEM learning that occurs in a formal learning environment like schools. 
The McAuliffe Center is open to families and students in grades K-16. The total number
typically served annually was 12,000, pre-COVID. When COVID-19 prevented in-person
learning, our programs immediately switched to virtual programming, which complemented our
programs. Virtual programs served more than 10,000 and helped broaden and deepen learning
opportunities, access and participation for many underserved audiences. 
b. Collaborating Partners
Letters of support are attached for the following partners: 
1. Framingham Public Schools - Community Resource Development: This program includes
the six Explorers afterschool/out-of-school time (OST), school-based programs in
10
Page 11
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
elementary and middle schools with a focus on South Framingham sites. 
2. Pelham Lifelong Learning Center: This program primarily serves the Pelham Apartments
Housing Development in one of the poorest census tracts in the City of Framingham. 
3. Hoops and Homework: Based in South Framingham, this program assists youth most at risk
due to language, income, and other barriers. 
Due to potential health and safety guidelines due to the COVID-19 pandemic and other
unforeseen circumstances effecting participation, we will reach out to other Framingham-
based agencies with ASOST programs to inform them about the sponsorship program and
invite them to apply for a sponsored field trip. 
6. Equity: 
a. How will you ensure equitable access and success for underserved populations? 
Support from the City of Framingham through the CDBG program will help address the issue
of underrepresentation in STEM careers by exposing students to high quality, interactive
experiences that increase STEM literacy, support educators, highlight STEM learning platforms, 
and get youth excited about STEM careers. By opening the door to education and career paths, 
these combined experiences provide an entry point for young people to develop an interest in
STEM fields and believe that a STEM career can be in their future, especially for potential first-
generation college students. 
b. What barriers to access exist in your community and how will you address them? 
The barriers most often mentioned are program fees and transportation in order for groups to
attend programming at the McAuliffe Center. While we hope that we could accommodate both
challenges, this request is for program fees as it is something we can directly oversee. We ask our
partners to coordinate their own transportation, which costs less than the program fees. 
Another option is to provide the program virtually to eliminate the cost of transportation. 
The McAuliffe Center’s program fees are necessary to cover operating costs. We realize this can
pose a steep barrier that often hinders economically disadvantaged groups from participating in
our educational programs. Past experience with our sponsorship program yielded success in
increasing participation of economically-disadvantaged groups and those underrepresented in
STEM. The last reporting period for our sponsorship program noted 960 youth served that
included 66 percent economically disadvantaged compared to 13 percent for full fee groups; and
56 percent were from racial/ethnic populations underrepresented in STEM professions
compared to 19 percent for full fee groups 
This project will strengthen the collaborative relationship the McAuliffe Center has with
Framingham Public Schools. There will be a specific focus on Title I schools that includes
elementary schools (Barbieri, Brophy, Harmony Grove, Stapleton, McCarthy) and middle
schools (Cameron and Fuller). If we host Middle School sites, we may be serving students who
live in all the eligible Framingham census tracts. While the state average for Hispanic students is
23.1 percent, these schools have greater and up to triple the state average ranging from 23.6
percent to 79.6 percent Hispanic. 
CDBG funding will provide a solid contribution towards the McAuliffe Center's goal to serve a
significantly larger number of economically-disadvantaged youth and youth from populations
underrepresented in STEM. While we are pursuing this goal with all of our K-16 and lifelong
11
Page 12
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
learning programs, this grant will allow us to establish a solid foundation towards creating a
welcoming and supporting learning environment for a widely-diverse group of 5th to 9th
graders. The McAuliffe Center will be able to implement well-designed and tested pedagogical
strategies through which economically-disadvantaged youth access resources and opportunities
that will encourage them to persevere, thrive and succeed in their STEM endeavors. 
c. How will you ensure marginalized voices in your community are amplified and consulted in the
design, delivery, and evaluation of your project/program? 
The McAuliffe Center sponsorship program is designed to serve low-income, underserved and
underrepresented populations. McAuliffe Center staff work closely with the Framingham Public
Schools and non-profit partners to meet the needs of their respective populations. Through
MSEN, there are networking opportunities to gain current insight to educational practices and
activities that work effectively and may be suitable to enhance our programming. As needed, 
program staff contact colleagues to learn more to enhance programming. 
d. Describe efforts underway within your organization to promote diversity, equity and inclusion. 
The MetroWest College Planning Collaborative at FSU provides programs for early access to
college and targets potential first-generation to college students. These programs include: 
•  MetroWest Scholars Early Start (MWSES): This open access early college program for
students and families starts in 8th grade by learning about completion of a higher education, 
professional fields, and career pathways. Program activities include exploratory classes and guest
speakers. CPC staff provide support and guidance, along with student coaches and faculty from
FSU and Mass Bay Community College. MWSES is open to all but targets first generation to
college and other underserved populations. 
•  100 Males to College: Created in 2015, this program increases college access, enrollment, 
retention, and success for underrepresented, underserved and first-generation youth in area high
schools. The overall project framework is anchored in strengthening young people through a
positive youth development model that embraces culture, identity, community, academic success
and career internships; engaging some of our Commonwealth’s most promising yet underserved
young men in a personally and educationally transformational journey. 
The McAuliffe Center has past experience in providing sponsorships to school and community
groups representing low-income and underrepresented populations. Work with MSEN includes
numerous webinars about racial equity, social justice, and other current and relevant topics
specific to STEM. FSU is a six-time recipient of the Higher Education Excellence in Diversity
(HEED) Award by INSIGHT into Diversity in recognition of our efforts to promote diversity, 
equity, and inclusion. 
7. Sustainability: 
a. CDBG funds
This request relies on CDBG funds for Framingham-based out-of-school time programs and
schools only. Continuous fundraising efforts identify other potential donors to support our
sponsorship program, as a whole. If this request is not met with full funding, then we will serve
a smaller number of groups based on the grant budget. 
b. Sustainability
Funding to support this program provides an entry point to build sustainability for the
12
Page 13
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
McAuliffe Center OST initiative. Participating OST organizations often are exposed to the
McAuliffe Center’s STEM educational resources and facilities for the first time. It is our
expectation that exposure will generate interest in pursuing further engagement with the
McAuliffe Center and motivate action to raise funds. OST educators who have attended field
trips at the Center, or who have utilized our virtual, online resources, become advocates for
funding repeat visits within their schools or organizations. Funding is required to subsidize low-
income groups. The McAuliffe Center has been successful in obtaining private, corporate and
foundation funds. For groups who cannot afford transportation to and from the Center, our
virtual programming created last year is a new, affordable option as well. 
McAuliffe Center staff ensure the robustness of the program. They participate in professional
development opportunities to ensure high quality programming. Maintaining communications
with our networks of visitors, colleagues and community members to learn how we can support
each other to deepen our collaborative work together. 
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, program staff immediately shifted to provide virtual learning
opportunities to assist individuals and families maintain their connection to ISE and STEM
exploration. As a result, planetarium shows and CLC missions are virtual on an as needed basis. 
Although virtual learning was initially created due to health and safety protocols, it became a
viable option for those with transportation challenges. 
8. Additional Information about Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth
In 2020, the McAuliffe Center won the Teens Dream Competition Mentor Award from the
Global Co Lab Network due to its See Yourself in STEM – Team Mentorship program. It
included nine teams of which six made it to the finals of the Teens Dream Competition 2020
Global Changemaker Challenge. One of the award-winning teams produced qualitative
comparisons within the city of Framingham that showed air pollution, tree loss, and respiratory
problems are more significant where the majority of populations of color live. See their video on
the MSEN YouTube page, [URL: "https://youtu.be/NB1e4lw-XNY"] https://youtu.be/NB1e4lw-XNY. Having diverse populations
exposed to and excited about STEM can advance the field with new perspectives and research. 
We know that Framingham has a large number of school-age residents who speak Spanish or
Portuguese as the primary language in the home and are recent immigrants. There are 41.3
percent Hispanics in the Framingham Public Schools compared to the state average of 23.1
percent. As an emerging Hispanic-serving institution, FSU would like to serve this population
better. Thank you for your consideration. 
13
Page 14
C. Logic Model 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS
FRAMINGHAM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
FISCAL YEAR 2023
INPUTS  ACTIVITIES OUTPUTS SHORT-TERM
OUTCOMES 
LONG-TERM- 
OUTCOMES
Resources to be used to
undertake this project or
program. 
Specific events, actions, 
partnerships, and processes. 
McAuliffe Center staff and
facilities 
Challenger Learning
Center mission
simulation (active
learning) for Middle or
High School students (5th 
– 9th grade) 
Artifacts and evidence of the
activities. 
Exposure to STEM
careers for up to 672
Framingham students 
Measurable changes that will
occur in the next year. 
Develop awareness of the
range of both STEM and
non-STEM expertise
involved in supporting
space exploration activities 
Long-term intended effects. 
Students, especially
underrepresented students, 
develop a positive attitude
towards STEM careers
Busing/vans for transport
to/from McAuliffe Center
[ASOST organizations] 
Planetarium Program at
Framingham State
University or virtual
program for Elementary, 
Middle or High School
students 
90% satisfaction with
active learning activity
by students 
Students develop an
appreciation and
understanding of the range
of scientific and engineering
skills and expertise applied
to planned space missions. 
Out-of-School- 
Time Program staff 
8
Page 15
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth 
D. PROJECT COSTS
1. Detailed Project Budget: 
Budget Item (A)  CDBG Funds (B) 
i.e. Personnel, Office 
Supplies, etc. 
Challenger Learning Center 700 per group x 6
Mission Simulation /  groups = $4,200
Planetarium Program for
Framingham Out-of-School
Time Programs: 4 Staff
salaries, 
6 hours per program
Supplies/printing 
Planetarium Program Only
Indirect Cost (de minimis 
10%) 
300 per group x 11
groups = $3,300
$750 
Other Sources (C) 
0
$530 
Total (B + C) 
$4,200
$530
$3,300
$750
Total Project Cost  $8,250  $530  $8,780
2. Anticipated Project Funding Sources (Include all funding sources for which you’ve applied
CDBG  Projected Committed Amount
a) Other sources (Please Specify which 
are projected and which are
committed):
b) Donations for project use 
c) In kind Donations (please specify)  $530 
d) Total CDBG Amount  $8,250 
*Total Project Funding:  $8,250  $530
*Project costs in Table 2 must match Table 1 Total Project Costs. 
9 
$8,780
Page 16
City of Framingham – CDBG FY23
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
Integrated STEM Learning for Framingham Youth 
E. DOCUMENTED CAPABILITY
Organizations must submit copies of their most recently completed audits or audited and certified
financial statements. 
If you are applying as a new entity or organization and do not have existing evaluations or reports, 
please provide letters of support. 
Please note, if there are any irregularities identified in this documentation, you may be contacted by
a member of the staff for further clarification. 
FAILURE TO INCLUDE THIS INFORMATION MAY RENDER THIS APPLICATION INCOMPLETE AND
INELIGIBLE FOR FUNDING. 
F. SIGNATURE AND CERTIFICATION STATEMENT
On behalf of this organization, I affirm that all activities to be supported with these funds shall comply
with the provisions of applicable federal and state statutes, regulations, directives, guidelines, ordinances, 
and orders which encourage the inclusion and participation of all segments of the community and prohibit
discrimination against individuals based on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, disability, familial
status, or age. Under penalties of perjury, I affirm that the information contained in this proposal is
complete and accurate. I represent that the organization has the capacity and resources to carry out the
activities and achieve the outcomes cited in this proposal. 
Irene Porro, PhD
Name 
Director, C. McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning
Title (type or print) 
Signature 
12/09/21 
Date
10
Page 17
Page 18
Page 19
Page 20
December 7, 2021 
A nonprofit 501 c3 charity licensed by
the Commonwealth of Mass. to
provide after school and summer
programs
56 Agnes Dr., Framingham, Ma. 01701
 herbchasan@aol.com 508-380-1196
 www.HoopsandHomeworkinc.com
Eliot Yaffa
Community Development
City of Framingham
150 Concord Street, Suite B3
Framingham, MA 01702
Dear Mr. Yaffa,
As the Founder of Hoops and Homework, which is based in South Framingham
assisting youth most at risk due to language, income, and other barriers, I am
excited to partner with the Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning
at Framingham State University (FSU). The McAuliffe Center is able to provide our
participants with a thoroughly enriching education with its Challenger Learning
Center, FSU planetarium and other STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering,
Mathematics) activities. We are fortunate that the McAuliffe Center is centrally
located in our city for us to participate for half-day field trips.
The Challenger Learning Center mission simulator offers a fully immersive,
hands-on STEM education and experience, like no other locally. The mission
scenarios put learners in charge of a simulated space flight to the red planet, the
Moon, or studying climate change from the International Space Station. For two
hours, participants are transformed into astronauts, scientists, and engineers with a
single common purpose – the success of the mission. Teamwork, communication,
problem solving, and decision-making skills are put to the test.
There are full-dome film and live presentations in the Framingham State University
Planetarium. Participants may experience a tour of the seasonal night sky, fly
through space to visit other planets, or analyze the interconnected components of
the Earth system. Programming includes a wide range of earth and space science
topics that promote STEM education and inspire exploration of STEM and
STEM-related careers.
A sponsorship program with the McAuliffe Center offers us an opportunity for field
trips that we often cannot afford. A local visit for our elementary and middle school
students is a great way for our students to see local resources in our City while
learning about STEM careers and exploring the FSU campus, thereby instilling
higher education aspirations in first-generation students. We often search for free
Page 21
programs for our students whose families have limited resources to provide them
with additional, educational enrichment activities that facilitate career exploration.
This is a special learning experience for both our students and educators.
Sincerely,
Herb Chasan
Founder
Page 22
EDUCATION 
IRENE L. PORRO
Christa McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning
2012 Certificate in Management and Leadership Development
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Human Resources Department
1996 Ph.D. in Space Science and Technology
University of Padova, Italy and Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
Cambridge, Massachusetts
1991 Laurea in Physics (equivalent to master’s degree): Magna cum Laude
University of Torino, Italy
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
April 2014 – current
Director, Christa Corrigan McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning
Lead and overseer of all educational activities of the McAuliffe Center including educational
programs in the Challenger Learning Center, teacher professional development programs, 
summer educational programs, undergraduate programs and public programs, including the
Science on State Street festival. Responsible for McAuliffe Center budget and operations and
overseer of full-time staff, contractors, interns and work study students. Responsible for
fundraising and a wide range of communication efforts to engage larger and more diverse
audiences in the Center’s programs. Engages STEM and non-STEM faculty in innovative, 
interdisciplinary projects. Promotes STEM education and STEM workforce development across
Massachusetts by serving as project manager of the MetroWest STEM Education Network. 
November 2011 – December 2013
Outreach Programs Officer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, School of
Engineering
Responsible for identifying measures, indicators and methods for the evaluation of science and
engineering programs and for needs assessment for overall operations. Manager of operations
for the office and programs to improve infrastructure and build capacity to serve larger
audiences. Leader for the submission of written reports, proposals, policy briefs and program
fact sheets. Supervisor for the implementation of internal and external communications
strategies. Advisor to the Executive Director to investigate the need and feasibility of new
enrichment opportunities for students, parents, and program instructors. 
2007 – October 2011
Director of Education and Outreach, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Kavli
Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research
Designer, developer and director of formal and informal science education initiatives. Co- 
developer of science museum exhibits, science theater productions and planetarium shows. 
Manager and instructor of professional development activities in science and math for in service
teachers and after-school professionals. Grant proposal writer. Organizer of professional
conference. Presenter at professional conferences in formal and informal science education, 
20
learning in out-of-school time, astronomy. Leader of national working group to promote STEM
learning in out-of-school time. Kavli Institute liaison with MIT press office and news agencies. 
Guest science lecturer for courses for non-science majors. Science speaker for initiatives in
support of public engagement with science. 
2000 – 2007
Education and Public Outreach Scientist, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Kavli
Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research
Designer and director of teacher professional development programs and outreach initiatives in
support of NASA space missions Chandra X-ray Observatory and High Energy Transient
Explorer. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Page 23
The Human Space Program: Member of the Board of Directors, 2018 -
The Professional Development Institute: Member of the Board of Advisors, 2016 -
Catalyst Collaborative @ MIT: Member of the Advisory Board, 2008 -
American Association for the Advancement of Science: Member, 2008 -
MIT School of Science’s Infinite Mile Awards: Award recipient in 2009
Science for the Public: Member of the Board of Directors, 2009 - 2013
Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard University: Bunting Fellow 1999-2000
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory: Predoctoral Fellow, 1994-1997
International Space University: Alumna - Japan 1992, United States 1993
PUBLICATIONS (SELECTED) 
Porro I., “Youth Astronomy Apprenticeship: Addressing STEM Underrepresentation as a Human
Capability Realization Issue” Spectrum, Newsletter of the American Astronomical Society, 2011. 
Porro I.,  “Insights on Engaging Older Youth in STEM Learning Experiences,” white paper for
ITEST Conference Event – Defining an Afterschool Research Agenda, St. Paul, June 9-11 2010. 
Porro I., “Making the Case for Quality Science Programming for Older Youth in Out-of-School
Time,” ASP Conference Series, Science Education and Outreach: Forging a Path to the Future, 2009. 
Porro I., Dussault M., Reinfeld E., “After-School Astronomy: From the Basement to the Roof Top!,”
ASP Conference Series, “Science Education and Outreach: Forging a Path to the Future,” 2009. 
Sakimoto P. J., Luckey V., Landsberg R.H., Hawkins L., Porro I. “Building an IYA Legacy for
Underserved Communities,” ASP Conference Series, p. 68, Vol. 400, 2008. 
Porro I., Dini V.,  Prol T., "Youth Astronomy Apprenticeship (YAA): An Initiative to Promote
Science Learning Among Urban Youth and Their Communities,” ASP, Conference Series, p. 187, 
Vol. 389, 2007. 
 Krishnamurthi, A., [URL: "http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/author_form?author=Porro%2C%2BI&fullauthor=Porro%2C%20I.&charset=UTF-8&db_key=AST"] Porro, I., “Astronomy After-School Programs: Effective Pathways to Success.”
ASP Conference Series, Vol. 389, “EPO and a Changing World: Creating Linkages and Expanding
Partnerships,” 2007. 
Traub W.A., Porro I.L., “True Learning Is All About Making The Connections - An Astrobiology
Course For Secondary School Teachers,” ASP’s 117th Annual Meeting, 2005. 
 Porro, I., “Enlarging the STEM pipeline working with youth-serving organizations,” Bulletin of the
American Astronomical Society, Vol. 37, p.1416, 2005. 
