Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.8 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
Keywords: Online sexual solicitation; Adolescents; Content analysis
CrossMarkDomains[1]: springer.com
ModDate: 2016/02/24 06:26:50+01'00'
Subject: Crime Science, doi:10.1186/s40163-016-0050-0
Creator: Springer
Title: An exploratory study of public reports to investigate patterns and themes of requests for sexual images of minors online
CrossMarkDomains[2]: springerlink.com
robots: noindex
doi: 10.1186/s40163-016-0050-0
CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
CreationDate: 2016/02/20 11:21:32+05'30'
Author: Ethel Quayle
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2016-02-20T11:21:32+05:30
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Springer
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2016-02-24T06:26:50+01:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2016-02-24T06:26:50+01:00
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.8 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Online sexual solicitation; Adolescents; Content analysis
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: doi:10.1186/s40163-016-0050-0
xmp:dc:publisher: Springer Berlin Heidelberg
xmp:dc:description: Crime Science, doi:10.1186/s40163-016-0050-0
xmp:dc:subject: Online sexual solicitation; Adolescents; Content analysis
xmp:dc:title: An exploratory study of public reports to investigate patterns and themes of requests for sexual images of minors online
xmp:dc:creator: Ethel Quayle; Emily Newman
xmp:crossmark:DOI: 10.1186/s40163-016-0050-0
xmp:crossmark:MajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
xmp:crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:crossmark:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:prism:url: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40163-016-0050-0
xmp:prism:doi: 10.1186/s40163-016-0050-0
xmp:prism:issn: 2193-7680
xmp:prism:aggregationType: journal
xmp:prism:publicationName: Crime Science
xmp:prism:copyright: Quayle and Newman.
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:pdfx:doi: 10.1186/s40163-016-0050-0
xmp:pdfx:robots: noindex
xmp:pdfx:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:c5079970-9b27-457c-a96f-cc25ba4de27c
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:5a16791f-78cc-4984-ba7e-41ed29e4ef0b
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:ab8e0d37-ea4e-493c-9143-9c56faf2bbca
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2016-02-20T11:20:31+05:30
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:4cf81f62-aff2-407d-b691-41560a0598ac
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2016-02-20T11:21:09+05:30
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Ethel Quayle
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9862-0301
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkMajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrosMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: robots
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://crossref.org/crossmark/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: crossmark
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Crossmark Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Usual same as prism:doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The date when a publication was publishe.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: seq Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://prismstandard.org/namespaces/basic/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: prism
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Prism Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: This element provides the url for an article or unit of content. The attribute platform is optionally allowed for situations in which multiple URLs must be specified. PRISM recommends that a subset of the PCV platform values, namely “mobile” and “web”, be used in conjunction with this element. NOTE: PRISM recommends against the use of the #other value allowed in the PRISM Platform controlled vocabulary. In lieu of using #other please reach out to the PRISM group at prism-wg@yahoogroups.com to request addition of your term to the Platform Controlled Vocabulary.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: url
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The Digital Object Identifier for the article. The DOI may also be used as the dc:identifier. If used as a dc:identifier, the URI form should be captured, and the bare identifier should also be captured using prism:doi. If an alternate unique identifier is used as the required dc:identifier, then the DOI should be specified as a bare identifier within prism:doi only. If the URL associated with a DOI is to be specified, then prism:url may be used in conjunction with prism:doi in order to provide the service endpoint (i.e. the URL).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ISSN for an electronic version of the issue in which the resource occurs. Permits publishers to include a second ISSN, identifying an electronic version of the issue in which the resource occurs (therefore e(lectronic)Issn. If used, prism:eIssn MUST contain the ISSN of the electronic version.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: issn
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Volume number
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: volume
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Issue number
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: number
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Starting page
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: startingPage
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Ending page
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: endingPage
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The aggregation type specifies the unit of aggregation for a content collection. Comment PRISM recommends that the PRISM Aggregation Type Controlled Vocabulary be used to provide values for this element. Note: PRISM recommends against the use of BOOKMARKS:
An exploratory study of public reports to investigate patterns and themes of requests for sexual images of minors online
  Abstract
  Background
  Methods
    Selection of sample
    Analysis
  Results
    Descriptive statistics on victims and suspects of luring
      The relationship of the reporter to the victim (available for 150 cases)
      Victim gender and age
      The age of suspect in relation to the gender of the victim
      The gender of the suspect
    Content analysis of additional text
      Additional text and chat log data
      Sexual images
      Voyeurism
      Exhibitionism
      Contact request
    Resistance
    Threats
    Self-generated content
    Mobile phones
    Deception
    Vulnerability
    Peer sex
    Vigilantism
  Discussion and implications
  Limitations of the study
  Conclusion
  Authors’ contributions
  References
Page 1
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2
DOI 10.1186/s40163-016-0050-0
RESEARCH  Open Access
An exploratory study of public reports
to investigate patterns and themes of requests
for sexual images of minors online
Ethel Quayle[URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9862-0301"] *   and Emily Newman
Abstract 
There is a growing body of research on sexually motivated online communication with minors that has been variously
described as luring, grooming and solicitation. Evidence from US studies would suggest an increase in aggressive
sexual solicitations, with adolescent girls being more likely to be targeted. Existing research has involved adolescent
as well as offender populations, and has largely relied on surveys with young people, interviews and official record
data with offenders and ethnographic work with police officers. There have also been a number of studies using chat
log data between offenders and adults pretending to be children. In addition, while the use of sexual images has
been noted in both offender and victim studies, this has not been critically examined. The present study is different as
it used reports from the public to Cybertip.ca to make sense of the types of behaviour that alerted concerned adults, 
and occasionally young people, to make a report; information available about the young person; information about
the suspect, and the interaction between the two. The results of this study show strong similarities with previous
research in relation to both offender and victim populations. Implications are discussed in relation to the importance
of reporting mechanisms, awareness raising with parents and the need to recognize sexual agency and resilience in
many adolescents.
Keywords:  Online sexual solicitation, Adolescents, Content analysis
Background
A variety of terms are used to describe sexually moti-
vated communication with a child: luring (Canada), solic-
itation (United States) and grooming (United Kingdom) 
being the most common. In Canada, the offence of lur-
ing criminalises the act of communicating with children
via a computer system for the purpose of facilitating or
committing certain sexual offences, such as sexual exploi-
tation or abduction. The person being lured only needs
to have been believed to be a child by the accused; police
undercover operations are a possibility under this provi-
sion. Because the luring offence enumerates a number
of child sexual exploitation offences, the applicability of
the provision varies and can capture communications
with children up to 18 years of age. Grooming has been
*Correspondence: Ethel.Quayle@ed.ac.uk
School of Health in Social Science, University of Edinburgh, Teviot Place, 
Edinburgh EH8 9AG, UK 
defined by Craven et al. (2006) as a process by which a
person prepares a child, significant adults and the envi-
ronment for the abuse of this child. Whittle et al. (2013) 
suggest that this definition may apply to a real world set-
ting, or that which occurs online. Under UK law, this
refers to meeting a child with the intent to have sexual
contact with him or her. Where it can be proven that an
offender has arranged to meet a child and sufficient evi-
dence has been gathered of this (for example, reserva-
tion of a hotel room), then the offender could be arrested
before setting off for the meeting (Gillespie 2000).  In
the United States the term sexual solicitation has been
used to refer to ‘requests to engage in sexual activities or
sexual talk or to give personal/sexual information that
was unwanted or made by an individual ≥5 years older, 
whether wanted or not’ (Jones et al. 2012). These authors
also defined a subgroup of aggressive sexual solicitations, 
in which solicitors attempted or made offline contact
© 2016 Quayle and Newman. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons
license, and indicate if changes were made.
Page 2
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 2 of 12
with youth through regular mail, by telephone, or in
person.
Three US youth Internet safety surveys (2000–2010) 
indicated that 1 in 10 young people (aged 10–17) 
reported an unwanted sexual solicitation, which was a
50 % reduction from the 2000 survey (Jones et al. 2012).
This survey is not a measure of online sexual predation by
adults, and the results indicated that most youth believed
solicitors to be other youth (defined as someone under
the age of 18). In 2000 the proportion of solicitations
that were aggressive in nature was 15 %, 31 % in 2005, 
and 34 % in 2010 (Mitchell et al. 2014). However, prev-
alence rates vary across studies and in two studies from
Europe, 6–8 % of male and 19 % of female adolescents
reported experiences of unwanted sexual solicitation or
cyber victimization, in young people aged 12–17 (Baum-
gartner et al. 2010) and 15–17 (Averdijk et al. 2011). Dif-
ferences in rates of unwanted solicitations may reflect
differing methodologies in data collection or the demo-
graphics of the population studied. Adolescent girls are
more likely to be the targets of online solicitation (Jones
et al. 2012), although boys who are gay or questioning
their sexual orientation may also be particularly vulner-
able (Wolak et al. 2008).  Priebe and Svedin (2012) in
their nationally representative sample of Swedish youth
(16–22 years) found that male adolescents with sexual-
minority identity had a 2.7-fold increase in the odds of
ever having been exposed to at least one type of problem-
atic sexual meeting off-line with a person or persons they
first had met online, and female adolescents had almost
threefold increased odds. Rice et al. (2015),  in a sur-
vey of 1831 US high school students aged 12–18, found
that bi-sexual identifying students reported higher rates
of being approached online for sex. A further US study
of 100 adolescents (aged 12–17) with suspected sexual
abuse seen in a Child Advocacy Centre (Rood et al. 2015) 
revealed that 74 % had experienced at least one online
problematic experience with 50 % indicating five or more
exposures. Of note, 57 % had been asked to send nude
or nearly nude photographs or videos, 21 % of the total
sample did so and 42 % of the sample had received sexual
images. There was a higher level of exposure to prob-
lematic experiences in ages ≥14 years. This relationship
between online-initiated and offline sexual abuse experi-
ences has been noted in other studies (e.g. Sumter et al. 
2012).
There has been little offender research on vulnerabili-
ties of young people targeted online, and existing stud-
ies are limited by small sample sizes. This lack of research
may relate to access to samples and the ethical challenges
of questioning offenders about how they approached vic-
tims. In a qualitative study (Webster et al. 2012), offend-
ers aligned their grooming tactics with the profile of their 
victim in order to maximize the likelihood of contact and
to fulfill their needs for intimacy or sex. Whittle et al. 
(2015) compared interviews with three female victims
of on-line grooming and contact sexual abuse and the
three adult males who groomed and abused them. There
were a number of disagreements between these dyads in
relation to sexual aspects of the online behavior, includ-
ing initiation of the relationship, the stage when sexual
activity took place, the production of photos and videos, 
and the initiation of contact sexual abuse. These authors
concluded that there was a complex dynamic between
offenders and their victims that was evidenced across this
sample.
Outside of internet-mediated offending, Olson et al. 
(2007) proposed a luring communication theory (LCT) 
that explicated the communicative processes of entrap-
ment used by child sexual predators to lure their vic-
tims into sexual relationships. These authors suggested
that offenders typically identify children who exhibit low
self-esteem or lack of confidence, as they may be easier
to emotionally or physically isolate. This is often char-
acterized as alienation from their family or fragile rela-
tionships with parental figures where unknowingly the
young people behave in ways that appeal to perpetrators, 
responding to promises of affection and attention. Cru-
cially for this model, how a young person responds to
an abuser’s sexual acts makes a significant difference in
whether a sexual act will follow. This has also been noted
in a qualitative study of online grooming (Quayle et al. 
2014) in which respondents talked about how they chose
young people, initially making as many contacts as pos-
sible until someone responded in the way they wanted. 
These young people were construed as being sexually
curious and, in many instances, vulnerable, and social
media created by young people were often used when
making a decision about whom they would contact.
Earlier work in this area described a process model of
online grooming, where the offender, in looking for a
potential target, focuses on accessibility, opportunity and
vulnerability (O’Connell 2003).  This online observation
study, using the researcher as a ‘decoy’,  suggested six
sequential stages that form the grooming process: friend-
ship and relationship forming; risk assessment; exclusiv-
ity; sexual; fantasy re-enactment, and damage limitation.1
1  Friendship forming stage:  this comprises conversation in which the
offender tries to befriend the child by exchanging name, location and so on. 
Relationship forming stage: the offender talks about family, school life and
hobbies with the child, and encourages the child to think of themselves as
being in a relationship. Risk assessment stage: an attempt is made to gauge
the level of threat and danger in talking to a child (whether they are alone, 
conversation is monitored etc.). Exclusivity stage: an attempt to gain the
trust of the child completely through claims of a special bond. Sexual stage:
often begins with question like are you a virgin? or do you touch yourself? 
Conclusion stage: the child is approached for an offline meeting.
Page 3
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 3 of 12
Three studies have examined this model using open-
source data from the Perverted Justice Website (Gupta
et al. 2012; Williams et al. 2013; Black et al. 2015). Gupta
et al. (2012) used a linguistic analysis tool and found that
relationship forming was the most prominent stage out of
the proposed six stages of online grooming. Williams
et al. (2013) identified three ‘themes’ within their data
which reflected rapport-building, sexual content and
assessment. More recently Black et al. (2015) used linguis-
tic analysis and content analysis of 44 chat log transcripts. 
They identified similar strategies to those used by offend-
ers in face-to-face grooming, including discussing plans to
meet, the use of flattery, identifying parental work sched-
ules and talking about sexual topics, but noted differences
in the nature and timing of strategies. These studies do
suggest that there are discrete stages of online grooming
but that they do not conform to any one sequence nor are
all of these stages evident across all offenders.
Parallel research into offender typologies has led to a
classification according to the function of the images in
the offending behavior, the underlying motivation and
the level of social networking in the behavior (Elliott and
Beech 2009; Merdian et al. 2013). Both studies resulted
in typologies that focus on whether the motivation is to
enable fantasy or direct contact victimization. This dis-
tinction has also been noted in relation to offenders who
attempt to entice an adolescent into a sexual relation-
ship using an Internet chat room (Briggs et al. 2011). This
US study divided the sample of offenders into two sub-
groups: driven by the motivation to engage in an offline
contact offense with an adolescent or driven by fantasy
and a wish to engage in online cybersex, but without an
express intent to meet offline. Minors targeted in this and
other offender studies (e.g. Seto et al. 2011) would sug-
gest that they are likely to be adolescents.
Research to date has used survey-type data with chil-
dren and young people, interviews and official records
data with offenders and ethnographic work with police
officers. Fewer studies have used archival data, such as
chat logs, or have looked at the characteristics of the
offenders in relation to those of the children and young
people targeted. Where chat logs have been used, these
involved adults pretending to be children. In addition, 
while the use of sexual images has been noted in both
offender and victim studies, this has not been critically
examined (Quayle and Newman 2015). The aims of the
present study were to use online reports from the pub-
lic to Cybertip.ca to explore: the types of behaviour that
alerted concerned adults, and occasionally young people, 
to make a report; information available about the young
person; information about the suspect, and how both
suspect and young people interacted in the exchange of
text and images. 
Methods
Anonymised data were obtained from Cybertip.ca.,
which invites reports from the Canadian public of con-
tent or activities that they believe to be problematic or
illegal.2 All information supplied by the reporting person
and the analyst is stored within a relational database and
is ‘hard-coded’ so that it cannot be altered. For each
report one analyst (a trained staff member of Cybertip.
ca) reviews the information supplied by the reporting
person and provides supplemental information for the
report, including: queries in the internal database of the
reported child victim and/or suspect information for pre-
vious reports involving the same individual(s);  online
searches for public information related to the suspect
and/or child victim; online queries in an attempt to con-
firm the information contained in the report, and a clas-
sification and summary of the online incident.
Selection of sample
Cybertip.ca reviewed all reports classified by their ana-
lysts as luring between September 2007 and June 2011 to
determine if the report contained enough information to
support the allegation that an offence may have occurred. 
This offence of luring a child through the Internet relates
to communication with a person under 18 years of age
for the purposes of facilitating the offences of sexual
exploitation, incest, corrupting morals, procuring sexual
intercourse, sexual assault, or the abduction of a person
under the age of 14 or 16 or, as to a person under 14, sex-
ual interference, invitation to sexual touching, bestiality, 
and indecent acts. The sample was generated from this
assessment and distinguished reports where luring could
be confirmed (n = 264). These were included in this anal-
ysis. Confirmed cases would have been reported to law
enforcement although it is not known what proportion of
these cases resulted in a charge or prosecution. Reports
where there was insufficient information for confirmation
that grooming had taken place (n = 74) were excluded
and are not represented in the analysis. Information
about the total number of reports made to Cybertip.ca
during this period was not available to the researchers. 
Additional text comprised: notes made by the analyst, 
additional comments supplied by the reporting person
and complete, or fragments of, chat logs and image snap-
shots for each report. These were exported into folders
2  Cybertip.ca receives and addresses online and telephone reports from
the public regarding: child pornography (child abuse images and material);
online luring; child exploitation through prostitution; travelling to sexually
exploit children; child trafficking; making sexually explicit material available
to a child; agreement or arrangement with another person to commit a sex-
ual offence against a child; non-consensual distribution of intimate images
(of an individual under 18 years of age).
Page 4
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 4 of 12
identified by the report number which corresponded
to the number on the excel file used to capture demo-
graphic information. All personal identifying information
(i.e. first or last names, email addresses, IP address) was
removed before analysis. The study was reviewed by the
Research Ethics Committee in the School of Health and
Social Sciences at the University of Edinburgh.
Analysis
Numerical data were analysed by examining frequencies
and cross-tabulations using SPSS version 22. T tests were
used to examine gender differences in age of victims. 
There were 166 cases where additional text was provided
by the reporting person and also noted by the analyst. For
94 of these cases chat log data were available. Content
analysis methodology was employed to analyse the addi-
tional text, using themes as the units of analysis (Robson
2011). Content analysis is a scientific methodology and
thus reliability, validity and the opportunity for replica-
tion are central advantages of using it as an analytical
tool. The additional text was read and re-read, identifying
the occurrence of themes and generating a coding frame
of 13 categories, which were clearly operationalized to
allow for consistency and coherence in the coding (see
Table 1). 
Results
The results are presented in two parts. The first gives an
overview of demographic information which describes
who made the reports, victim gender and age, the age of
the suspect in relation to the gender of the victim, and
the gender of the suspect. In the second part, the con-
tent analysis of the additional text (n = 166 reports) is
presented.
Descriptive statistics on victims and suspects of luring
The relationship of the reporter to the victim (available
for 150 cases)
Of the 150 cases, 75 (50.0 %) were listed as being reported
by a family member: parent or guardian (66; 44 %), sibling
(3; 2 %), grandparent (3; 2 %) and other family member
(3; 2 %). Forty-six (30.7 %) reports were made by the vic-
tim, 6 (4 %) from a friend, 2 (1.3 %) from a babysitter and
1 (.67 %) from a neighbour. Twenty cases (13.3 %) were
recorded as ‘other’. It was possible to examine the rela-
tionship to the reporter in 55 cases where the reporter
was younger than 18 years of age: 46 (83.64 %) reporters
were the victims themselves, 6 (10.91 %) were a friend of
the victim, 1 (1.82 %) was a babysitter and 2 (3.64 %) were
family members (a sibling in both cases).
Victim gender and age
Gender was available for 243 cases. Two cases involved
multiple victims and these were removed from the analysis
Table 1  Coded categories
Suspect themes
 Voyeurism
 Exhibitionism
 Peer sex
 Contact request
 Cell phone
 Threat
 Money
 Deception
 Vigilantism
 Sexual images
Victim themes
 Resistance
 Self-generated 
content
 Vulnerability 
Recurrent and intense sexually arousing fantasies, sexual urges, or sexual behaviors involving the observing of a person who
is naked, in the process of disrobing, or engaging in sexual activity. This was a modification of Långström’s (2010) suggested
criteria for the diagnostic and statistical manual (DSM V) as it excluded the necessity of the object of the behaviour being
an unsuspecting person, or that it should cause the suspect distress
Similar to the above, recurrent and intense sexual fantasies, sexual urges, or sexual behaviors involving the exposure of one’s
genitals to an unsuspecting stranger
Sexual activity with someone of the same or opposite sex who is within 2 years of the same age
Suggestion/request/demand that the young person meet face-to-face
Evidence of a request for contact or actual contact via a cell phone
Language that indicates that the young person is being threatened physically, verbally or emotionally to ensure further
compliance
Offer of financial reward for engagement in sexual activity, either online or offline
Evidence that the suspect is pretending to be someone who is a different gender or significantly (more than 5 years) younger
than their actual age
Vigilante acts taken through the internet, as a way of identifying anti-social behaviour (such as online luring)
Requests for sexual images to be produced through mobile devices or web cameras and sent to the suspect
Young person indicates that the do not wish to have contact with the suspect and use strategies to terminate it
Sexual images that are created and uploaded by the young person, usually using a cell phone or web cam. These images may
be produced as part of a coercive online relationship, or out of sexual curiosity or part of a romantic relationship
Evidence given by the reporting person that the victim had been identified as having psychological difficulties, or intellectual
or physical disabilities
Page 5
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 5 of 12
(n = 241). Of the 241 cases, 207 (85.89 %) involved female
victims and 34 (14.11 %) involved male victims. This is
broadly consistent with previous indications that females
are more likely to targeted (e.g. Jones et al. 2012). The age
of the victim was available for 191 cases; however, in 8
(4.19 %) the ‘victim’ was confirmed as an adult posing as
a child (i.e. aged 18 years or over). Only 2 (1.05 %) of the
cases were under 9 years and these cases were removed
(n = 181 cases). Of the remaining cases, the age of the vic-
tim ranged from 9 to 17, with a mean of 13.47 (SD = 2.22).
Of those victims with confirmed gender and ages (153
females and 19 males), there were similar mean ages (male
mean age = 13.47, SD = 2.22; female mean age = 13.28, 
SD = 1.93). A t test indicated no significant differences in
the age of male and female victims (t (170) = .56, p = .58).
Nevertheless, the distribution for female victims indicated
more of a peak around the age of 13 while the males had
a more even distribution between the ages of 10 and 17, 
though the small number of reports relating to males
means it is difficult to detect any emerging pattern.
The age of suspect in relation to the gender of the victim
Victim gender was determined in 241 cases and this was
cross-referenced with the age of the suspect. For the con-
firmed female victims, the age of the suspect was known
for 59 of the cases and ranged from 14 to 65 years, with
a mean age of 26.88 (SD  = 11.97). For the confirmed
male victims, the age of the suspect was known for seven
cases and was slightly more restricted, ranging from 14 to
48 years, with a mean age of 24.43 (SD = 11.43). 
instant messaging clients (e.g. MSN and subsequently
Windows live messenger); moderated game-sites; social
networking sites; software applications that allows users
to make voice and video calls; games that have a video
and chat function; online chat groups; online dating sites; 
online community sites featuring advertisements; web-
based email, and video-sharing sites that allow comments
to be posted. It was not possible to quantify this.
Additional text was available in 166 reports (62.9 %)
and 94 of the 166 reports included chat log data (56.6 %),
(which in some reports amounted to over 75 A4 pages).
Themes were rated across all of the data (additional text, 
including chat logs) by the first author and subsequently
32 of the 166 reports were randomly selected and were
independently coded by the second author. Ratings noted
the presence or absence of the theme in each case, rather
than the number of occurrences across all of the cases. 
This was influenced by the fact that there was consider-
able variation in the amount of additional data available
for each case. Coefficient kappa was calculated on the
relationship between the levels of agreement between
the two sets of ratings (Lombard et al. 2002).  Kappas
ranged from .70 to 1.0, which would be seen as accept-
able in most situations (Neuendorf 2002). The frequency
of these themes across 166 reports can be seen in Fig. 1. 
Throughout the following section anonymised extracts
are used from the additional text and the chatlogs to
illustrate the analysis. The language in the chat logs was
extremely graphic and we have therefore limited the
number of extracts used to illustrate the themes.
The gender of the suspect
The gender of the suspect was recorded in 240 cases.3
Four of these involved multiple suspects and these were
removed (n = 236). In 23 cases the gender of the suspect
was indicated as female (9.75 %) while the majority were
male (n = 213; 90.25 %). The gender of the victims and
suspects were cross-referenced where the data for both
were available (n = 220 cases). In 35 of these (15.91 %),
the victim and suspect were of the same gender (11
female victims to female suspects and 24 involving male
victims and male suspects).  Therefore in most cases
(n = 185; 84.09 %) the suspect and victim were of differ-
ent genders.
Content analysis of additional text
Additional text and chat log data
The additional text provided by the reporting person
came from a variety of sources that reflected in part
where the online activity took place. This included: 
3  Age and gender of the suspect was ascertained through information pro-
vided by the reporting person and confirmed through intelligence gained by
the analyst through open source searches. 
Sexual images
In 155 of the 166 reports (93.37 %) where additional text
was provided, there were specific requests by suspects for
pictures (either still or moving), or discussion of pictures
that had previously been uploaded that were explicitly
sexual. However, in only 3 (1.81 %) cases information was
provided that indicated that sexual images of minors had
been sent to a young person or child to persuade them to
engage in sexual activity. The following extracts are taken
from the analysts’ notes of information obtained from the
reporting person:
“Suspect met victim on a social network site and
migrated onto MSN. Sexual chat where he indicated
a liking for much younger girls and sent her sexual-
ised images of young females. Indicated that he con-
tacts them through (another social networking site)”
Analyst’s note.
“Highly sexualized chat on Runescape with 13-year-
old boy. Request for boy to expose himself” Analyst
note.
Page 6
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 6 of 12
Vulnerability
Money
Deception
Peer sex
Vigilantism
Cell phone
Self-taken
Threat
Resistance
Contact request
Exhibitionism
Voyeurism
Sexual images 
8
9
11 
17
19 
28
31 
40 
54
56
59
Fig. 1  Frequency of themes evidenced in additional text and chat logs 
137 
155
While some requests were part of a series of communi-
cations, others were immediate and had no context:
“The child victim received a message from a person
she thought was her friend on MSN messenger. The
person provided a URL and instructed the girl to
login. Once the girl logged in, her Hotmail account
was compromised. The suspect indicated that if the
girl did not send naked photos of herself then they
would post the images from the Hotmail account
onto a sex website”. Analyst’s note.
An edited example of this immediate request for sexual
pictures can be seen in the following, which took place
within minutes of the suspect making contact for the first
time with the young person:
S: is your pussy ready for sex?
V: idk lol i guess
V: im 13
S: your name?
(Victim supplies her name)
S: ok
S: do u have well grown breast?
V: theyr ok
S: can i have ur photo at least?(Chat log). 
Voyeurism
In 82.5 % (n = 137) of these reports, the suspect made a
direct request for the young person to do sexual things or
send sexual images. Examples of these include:
“Beginning the previous week, the suspect posted 1
to 2 messages per night on her 11-year-old female’s
Youtube.com profile. Suspect posted the comments “I
want to see you naked” and ‘My penis in your bum’.”
Analyst’s note.
“12 year old female met suspect on gaming site. Since
then he has sent 200 + messages on a cell phone ask-
ing her to do sexual things and telling her sexual acts
that he would like to do with her”. Analyst’s note.
While these requests look similar to voyeuristic behav-
iour involving achievement of sexual arousal through
viewing the sexual activities of others or through watch-
ing others disrobe, this activity would not meet the diag-
nostic statistical manual (DSM5) criteria for voyeurism
(First 2014) which normally refers to non-consensual
behavior, although provision is made for occasions when
the person is aware of the presence of voyeur and con-
sents to this behavior. In the present study the behavior
was mediated by technology, which removes the suspect
Page 7
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 7 of 12
and young person from immediate contact with each
other, and outside the existence of any relationship.
Exhibitionism
A percentage of the suspects seemed more interested
in sending sexual images of themselves to the young
person, which was coded as exhibitionism. In 59 of the
166 (35.54 %) reports the suspect sent a photograph or
requested that the young person open their web cam, 
only to be presented with an image of the suspect’s
genitalia:
“Suspect asks the child if she wants to see his penis
and he exposes himself and asks her to describe what
she saw”. Analyst’s note.
“Suspect sent an image of his genitalia to the child
victim’s Ipad as well as her mobile smartphone”.
Analyst’s note.
Of concern in relation to many of these instances is
that the photographs were not requested by the young
person, nor were they expected. Such decontextual-
ized exposure may be particularly harmful and dis-
tressing to some young people (Livingstone and Bober
2005).
Contact request
A third of all reports with additional text (n  = 55; 
33.13 %) included explicit demands to meet offline and
for online sexual activity:
“Report of 18-year-old luring 14-year-old female
through Facebook into having sex. He set up meeting
at a local park. He has suggested that if they cannot
be together he will commit suicide” Analyst’s note.
“The girl met this 18-year-old online and he came
to her house and touched her in a sexual way” Ana-
lyst’s note.
Requests to meet offline rarely culminated in actual
contact as evidenced in the additional text (13 reports in
all where contact was recorded: 7.83 %). In 9 (4.42 %) of
the reports there were offers of money for either sexual
pictures or payment for sexual activity, including sexual
intercourse and masturbation. All the offers except one
were made by the suspect to the young person.
“Contact by IM with someone saying they are female
asking 15-year-old female and her friends to send
pictures of themselves in underwear for fashion
photographs and offering $1000. Suggests coming
to meet them for an appointment in a hotel near to
them” Analyst’s note. 
The exception to this was a case where the chat log
indicated highly sexualised chat between a man claiming
to be 22 and a 13-year-old girl.
“Appears to be highly sexualised chat between man
claiming to be 22 and a 13-year-old girl. She asks
him for money to arrange to meet and have oral, 
vaginal and anal intercourse. He asks her to bring
along a friend and he will pay more” Analyst’s note.
However, the majority of reports involved a request
for ‘cybersex’ only, where chat logs often began with
a greeting, such as ‘hi hottie’, ‘how r u today?’ followed
by a request for information about age, sex and loca-
tion, before quickly moving on to ask for photographs
or online sex. The language was often crude, ‘my d… is
sweaty for u’ and unambiguous ‘u a vergin still?’ and ‘I’d
like to lick ur c…..’  There were often early requests for
information about physical appearance, ‘can i ask ur bra
size not that i care’ or information about the likelihood
of responding sexually ‘umm r u naughty or not really’.
Many chat logs began with repeated invitations for the
young person to open their web cam (sometimes occur-
ring up to 30 times), followed by numerous texts about
wanting to meet the person. Sometimes young people’s
responses were sexual:
“yes we are developed we both have nice little tits for
you to play with” Chat log.
A few of the logs were very short and to the point: ‘so
do u wanna cam 2 cam or no?’
On occasion there was explicit reference to the fact that
the suspect was not a child. If the reaction to this was
negative, the suspect terminated the chat: ‘im not 9 im
40 year old’.Others made reference to the sexual behav-
iour of the suspect, either in the context of photographs, 
the use of a web cam or the exchanges of sexual texts:
“come on baby, im going to c.. Right away you have
to type faster than that” Chat log.
However, the tone of the logs was not always so crude
or aggressive, and three of the suspects engaged their vic-
tim in a lot of ‘romantic exchanges’ before the content
became sexual. This was often positioned as introducing
the young person to the pleasures of sex:
“Suspect: I will be tender and loving with you, I sure, 
I can bring you to an orgasm, alone just the two of
as…..;)
Victim: sounds like fun:)” Chat log.
Flattery was often used by the suspect, especially in the
context of young people who clearly felt that they were
Page 8
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 8 of 12
ugly, too thin or that no-one liked them: “ur cute”. This
turned sexual, regardless of apparent intent, very often
with explicit acknowledgement that the young person
was underage and the conversation was inappropriate:
“Suspect: i have big penis.
Victim: ok.
Suspect: i can show you it.
Victim: no.
Suspect: why.
Victim: i am 10 and i have a boyfriend i do not want to
see your penis” Chat log.
Where the young person showed no resistance and did
not either terminate the chat or seek help from some-
one else, the conversation was often explicit, and fol-
lowed a description of a variety of sexual acts including
oral and penetrative sex as well as frequent reference to
masturbation.
Resistance
Many young people (n  = 54: 32.53 %) resisted the
approaches of the suspect and showed a lot of resilience
in the face of persistent demands:
“The suspect threatens to delete the child/block her
if she does not comply with his requests to show
him her face and chest. The suspect is specific about
wanting to see the child’s bare chest. She refuses”.
Analyst’s note.
However, many young people simply announced that
they would tell their parents (or more specifically their
mother):
“12-year-old female disclosed to her mother that she
had received an email from an unknown individual
which stated, ‘I want to see you naked’.” Analyst’s
note.
Other strategies involved blocking the suspect, deleting
them from their friends list and asking a friend to join the
chat.
Threats
In 40 (24.10 %) reports threats were identified. The larg-
est number involved the distribution of existing images
through websites, or to a list of contacts known to the
young person (including their parents).
“The suspect indicated that if the girl did not send
naked photos of herself then they would post the
images from the Hotmail account onto a sex web-
site”. Analyst’s note. 
Threats also were made of compromising the young
person’s computer or their accounts:
“The suspect then told the victim that if she didn’t
show him her breasts he would delete all her MSN
contacts and would erase all the information on her
computer”. Analyst’s note.
When she refused he threatened to “fuck ur com-
puter? “… She indicated that the suspect was able to
turn her webcam and microphone off and on, as well
the suspect has taken over her Messenger account
and blocked her out. Analyst’s note.
There were also emotional threats made by suspects that
they would commit suicide if the young person did not
comply, or that they would end contact with them.
Self‑generated content
In 31 (18.67 %) of reports there was documentation to
indicate that the young person had in fact sent images of
themselves to the suspect, usually where the suspect was
older, or where threats were made if the young person did
not comply.
“The suspect appears to be in possession of a video
clip acquired from the victim where the the child
victim is topless and now is demanding additional
images.” Analyst’s note.
“The reporting person indicated that their daughter
was lured into sending pornographic images of her-
self to numerous people she had met on MSN mes-
senger” Analyst’s note.
Mobile phones
In 28 reports (16.87 %) there was evidence of move-
ment from Internet related activity to the use of a mobile
phone to exchange texts and images:
“RP found two images of the child victim which were
sent by cellphone to the suspect. In one image, the
child was naked while in the other, the child was
wearing her bra and underwear” Analyst’s report.
Mobile phones were also used to maintain contact
between the suspect and the young person.
“The suspect is sending the child victim sexual
images of himself and asked for the child victim to
perform sexual acts for him over the Internet. He has
been sending her cell phones to maintain contact” 
Analyst’s report.
Page 9
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 9 of 12
However, in only 13 of the 28 reports was there evi-
dence that the use of mobile phones was associated with
an attempt to meet the young person offline.
“Report of a 14-year-old girl who met suspect online
on Speed date. Subsequently communicated through
messages sent by cell phone texts and arranged to
meet.” Analyst’s note.
Deception
There were few reports (n = 11: 6.63 %) where deception was
clearly indicated in the additional text (e.g. the age or gen-
der of the suspect was determined through searching online
public information). Deception largely involved the age of
the suspect, with adult males (in one case an adult female) 
pretending to be young adolescents (12–17 years of age).
“Sexualised chat on Runescape between a 10 year
old boy and someone saying they were 13. Request
for cell number and question whether it is a camera
phone. Suggested sending an image of his penis to the
child and also a request for pictures”. Analyst’s note.
“Chat and request for a 10-year-old girl to take off her
clothes and show him her chest. He claims that his web-
cam isn’t working. He gives her lots of compliments and
says that he is a twelve-year-old boy. Analyst’s note.
Other cases of deception involved claims of being the
opposite gender.
“17-year-old boy who had a relationship with per-
son he thought was a girl the same age via MSN. 
Exchanged photographs.” Analyst’s note. 
she is underage” Analyst’s report.
One young person with anorexia nervosa was targeted.
“15-year-old female, the suspect, who was 29 years old, 
requested her to show herself on her webcam in addi-
tion indicated he wanted to meet her in person. Sus-
pect would surf internet sites pertaining to “pro-ana” 
and would promise to help girls to lose weight. The sus-
pect indicated to her he was in favor of anorexic girls
as they had the body of a child in addition, the suspect
told her he was a pedophile”. Analyst’s report.
Peer sex
In a relatively small number of cases the text was strongly
suggestive of peer sex (n = 17:10.24 %), with two young
people engaging in what appeared to be highly sexualised
chat (including an exchange of images or the use of a web
cam) but where they seemed to be similar in age with lit-
tle suggestion of aggression or coercion:
“12-year-old accepted this contact on MSN who
asked if he/she had a webcam. Said his age was 11
but subsequently said he was 16.”. Analyst’s note.
“17-yea- old boy engages in sexualised chat with
14-year-old girl on Runescape. Appears to be
mutual”. Analyst’s note.
However, this was not always the case:
“13-year-old girl received lewd comments on Face-
book from an acquaintance who is a minor. Face-
book account deleted” Analyst’s note.
Vulnerability
Eight cases (4.82 %) made specific reference to some
aspect of psychological or physical vulnerability.
“The reporting person indicated that her 15-year-old
granddaughter is involved in a sexual relationship
with the suspect who is 19. The granddaughter has
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, and is on medica-
tion. The suspect is sending the child victim sexual
images of himself and asked for the child victim to
perform sexual acts for him over the Internet. He has
been sending her cell phones to maintain contact. 
They have also met at hotels” Analyst’s report.
“15-year-old female who is deaf and does not have
age-appropriate social/emotional development, has
been involved in role playing on Facebook. Contact
involves explicit sexual role playing with an adult. 
Suspect offers to send her gifts and appears to know 
Vigilantism
There was one final category that was identified in the
additional text and that included ‘vigilantism’:  reports
made by adults and young people who went online to dis-
cover what was usually termed sick or ‘pedo’ activity. Nine-
teen (11.45 %) reports in all were included in this category.
“Vigilante activity by young man who engaged with
offender who was supposedly a teacher and who
reported sexual interest in boys”. Analyst’s note.
“Person pretending to be a 13-year-old girl chatting
online with a man who said he was 30 and wanted
to have cybersex” Analyst’s note.
Discussion and implications
The results of this study show strong similarities with
previous research in relation to both offender and victim
populations. While there was insufficient data to make
Page 10
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 10 of 12
direct comparisons with other offender typologies (for
example, Seto et al. 2011), there were similarities with
the study by Briggs et al. (2011) in that one third of all the
cases included explicit demands to meet offline as well as
online sexual activity, but the majority of cases involved
a request for ‘cybersex’ only, supporting the division
between contact driven and fantasy driven offenders. In
only 13 reports was there evidence that contact had taken
place. It is impossible to know whether demands to meet
were part of the sexual fantasy. There was also little evi-
dence within the additional text of a clear process model, 
although the results were similar to those of Black et al. 
(2015) in that the additional text indicated discussion of
plans to meet, the use of flattery, and talking about sex-
ual topics. There was no reference to identifying paren-
tal work schedules. The majority of the reports involved
a request for cybersex involving sexual images and using
explicitly sexual language, with little to suggest ‘relation-
ship building’ or ‘romantic’ relationships (Gupta et al. 
2012). However, as with the study by Olson et al. (2007) 
the suspects’ strategies included promises of attention, 
but even in the few reports that evidenced a bid to estab-
lish a relationship with a minor, the exchange quickly
became sexual.
Similar to the data from the two Youth Internet Safety
Surveys (YISS) (Wolak et al. 2008) there was not much
evidence to indicate deception by suspects, outside of a
few claims by suspects to be younger than they were or
of a different gender. The reported age of suspects was
similar to that in the YISS survey, although this should be
interpreted with caution in relation to the present study
as suspect age was often not known. Requests for sexual
pictures were similar to the offender-driven data from
Webster et al. (2012), but while a large number of sus-
pects (over 35 %) sent sexually explicit images of them-
selves to young people, this was lower than the 68.6 % 
from Briggs et al. (2011) study. The data did indicate that
in 31 reports there was evidence of self-generated images
by young people, although the behavior evidenced by the
suspects would suggest that requests for still and moving
images through mobile phones and webcams was perva-
sive and possibly central to the grooming process.
The similarities between victims in the present study
and those of the Youth Internet Safety Surveys, the Swed-
ish Media Council survey (2010) and the offender data
from Briggs et al. (2011) are marked. The majority of
victims were female, and the mean age of those targeted
was 13.5 years. Approximately 14 % were male, and it is
important that greater consideration is made concern-
ing the factors that may result in boys being targeted
and also what may influence the reporting of these cases
(Grosskopf 2010). For example, other research has indi-
cated that boys who are gay or questioning their sexual 
orientation may be particularly vulnerable (Wolak et al. 
2008). A small number of young people in this study were
targeted because of specific vulnerabilities, but this did
not appear to include issues about sexual identity.
About one third of of young people (32.4 %) showed
resistance to the contacts by suspects and in spite of a
lot of sexually explicit and persistent behaviour managed
to terminate the contact. Sometimes this was by disclos-
ing what had happened, but also through simple strate-
gies such as blocking or deleting the suspect. Of note is
that some of the incidents were reported by the victims
themselves. Livingstone et al. (2011) have suggested
that teenagers may face particular risks that worry them
and that they may have to struggle with alone, and that
they may need particular coping strategies and support. 
In addition to existing supports, it is possible that fur-
ther support for peer mediation, both online and offline, 
would be a valuable addition to the array of supports that
are offered to young people. Smahel and Wright (2014) 
in a study using focus groups with young people aged
9–16 years demonstrated that a strategy used when con-
fronted with sexual chat was talking to friends to prevent
further victimization from happening in the future. This
included girls trying to dissuade friends from talking to
boys/men online, from meeting them offline or sending
them intimate photos.
Reporting mechanisms are one way to respond to, and
manage, unwanted online sexual contact. However, the
Internet does offer opportunity for some young peo-
ple to experiment online with relationships and sexual
intimacy and that while this may bring with it risks, it
also provides opportunities to build relationships with
others. Access to sexually explicit materials, along with
the ability to create content via media technologies, 
may be used to aid adolescent understanding of sexu-
ality and the self (Korenis and Billick 2014; Van Ouyt-
sel et al. 2014). However, differences between the age
of majority and the age of consent in International law
may mean that the self-production of images by those
under the age of 18 is potentially illegal (Gillespie 2013).
Awareness raising efforts with parents may increase
their capacity to recognise risk but also give them the
strategies to enable more constructive discussion about
sexuality online. In contrast, parents who practise
restrictive regulation may have children who encounter
fewer risks, but these young people will also experience
fewer opportunities (Livingstone et al. 2011).  Having
the digital skills to manage privacy and personal dis-
closure is important, particularly in relation to mobile
devices, and may empower young people and enhance
resilience. Nevertheless, for a small number of young
people, online sexual activity is likely to be associated
with harm (Livingstone and Smith 2014), and in these
Page 11
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 11 of 12
cases in order to promote recovery, it may be necessary
to provide child-sensitive approaches to the recovery of
information by law enforcement, and preparation for
court, as well as treatment interventions for both chil-
dren who are victimised and those young people who
display sexually harmful behaviour online.
Limitations of the study
Sampling was purposeful, in that it included all cases
between September 2007 and June 2011 where there
was sufficient evidence to confirm that these were lur-
ing cases. While every effort was made by the analyst
to confirm the veracity of the information provided by
the reporting person it is possible that some of the data
may be inaccurate, particularly in relation to the sus-
pect. There may have been a smaller number of suspects
than is represented in this sample, and potentially mul-
tiple reports of the same suspects. Suspect data was also
incomplete in many reports. However, the strength of
this research is that it does not rely on disclosures, either
from the suspect or the victim: chat logs in particular, 
in the same way as photographs, provide a permanent
record of what took place. We cannot know whether the
verbal exchanges represented fantasy on the part of the
suspect, or actual sexual activity, although from the per-
spective of the victim, the images remained long after the
termination of contact with the suspect.
Conclusion
This study is unique in that the data were drawn from val-
idated reports of online grooming of minors. The results
of the study show similarities with previous research
with both offender and victim populations. The analysis
of reports and associated text indicated that majority of
victims were female, and the mean age of victims was
13.5 years. However, greater consideration of the factors
that may result in boys being targeted and the reporting
of these cases is required. Requests for sexual pictures
from minors dominated the reports and over one third
of suspects sent sexual pictures of themselves to their vic-
tims. Approximately one third of the reports indicated
that the young people had terminated contact with the
suspect and victims reported many of the incidents. For
some young people online grooming may lead to harm
and practitioners need to be sensitive to how information
is recovered and the therapeutic needs of both victims
and juvenile suspects.
Authors’ contributions
EQ and EN designed the study, gained ethical approval for the research and
prepared the data for analysis. EN completed the quantitative analysis of the
data and EQ the content analysis of the reports and additional text. Both
authors read and approved the final manuscript. 
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Cybertip.ca who were central to the design
and governance of the research, the provision of anonymised data and feed-
back concerning the initial analysis. Without their support this research would
not have been possible.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 22 June 2015 Accepted: 9 February 2016
References
Averdijk, M., Müller-Johnson, K., & Eisner, M. (2011). Sexual victimization of chil-
dren and adolescents in Switzerland. Zurich: UBS Optimus Foundation.
Baumgartner, S. E., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2010). Unwanted online
sexual solicitation and risky sexual online behavior across the
lifespan. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.appdev.2010.07.005"] 10.1016/j.
 appdev.2010.07.005.
Black, P. J., Wollis, M., Woodworth, M., & Hancock, J. T. (2015). Research article: 
a linguistic analysis of grooming strategies of online child sex offend-
ers: implications for our understanding of predatory sexual behavior
in an increasingly computer-mediated world. Child Abuse and Neglect.
doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2014.12.004"] 10.1016/j.chiabu.2014.12.004.
Briggs, P., Simon, W. T., & Simonsen, S. (2011). An exploratory study of internet
initiated sexual offenses and the chat room sex offender: has the Internet
enabled a new typology of sex offender? Sexual Abuse: A Journal of
Research and Treatment, 23(1), 72–91.
Craven, S., Brown, S., & Gilchrist, E. (2006). Sexual grooming of children: review
of literature and theoretical considerations. Journal of Sexual Aggression, 
12, 287–299.
Elliott, I., & Beech, A. (2009). Understanding online child pornography use: 
applying sexual offense theory to internet offenders. Aggression and
Violent Behavior, 14(3), 180–193.
First, M. (2014). DSM-5 and paraphilic disorders. The Journal of the American
Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 42(2), 191–201.
Gillespie, A. A. (2000). Children, chat rooms and the law. Childright, 172, 19–20.
Gillespie, A. (2013). Adolescents, sexting and human rights. Human Rights Law
Review, 13(4), 623–643.
Grosskopf, A. (2010). Online interactions involving suspected paedophiles
who engage male children. Crime and Criminal Justice, 403, Australian
Institute of Criminology.
Gupta, A., Kumaraguru, P., Sureka, A. (2012). Characterizing pedophile conversa-
tions on the internet using online grooming. In proceedings of CoRR. 2012.
Jones, L. M., Mitchell, K. J., & Finkelhor, D. (2012). Trends in youth internet vic-
timization: findings from three Youth Internet Safety surveys 2000–2010. 
Journal of Adolescent Health, 50, 179–186.
Korenis, P., & Billick, S. (2014). Forensic implications: adolescent sexting and
cyberbullying. Psychiatric Quarterly, 85(1), 97–101.
Långström, N. (2010). The DSM diagnostic criteria for exhibitionism, voyeurism, 
and frotteurism. Archives of Sexual Behaviour 39(2), 317–324.
Livingstone, S., & Bober, M. (2005). UK children go online: Surveying the experi-
ences of young people and their parents. London: LSE Research Online.
Livingstone, S., Haddon, L., Gorzig, A., K. Olafsson (2011). Risks and safety on
the internet. Perspective of European children. Full findings and policy
implications from EU Kids Online survey of 9–16 year olds and their
parents in 25 countries. Accessed online from [URL: "http://www.eukidsonline.net"] http://www.eukidsonline.
 net 14 Jan 2012.
Livingstone, S., & Smith, P. K. (2014). Annual research review: harms experi-
enced by child users of online and mobile technologies: the nature, 
prevalence and management of sexual and aggressive risks in the digital
age. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 55(6), 635–654.
Lombard, M., Snyder-Duch, J., & Bracken, C. C. (2002). Content analysis in
mass communication: assessment and reporting of intercoder reliability. 
Human Communication Research, 28, 287–304.
Page 12
Quayle and Newman ﻿Crime Sci (2016) 5:2  Page 12 of 12
Merdian, H. L., Curtis, C., Thakker, J., Wilson, N., & Boer, D. P. (2013). The three
dimensions of online child pornography offending. Journal of Sexual
Aggression: An international, interdisciplinary forum for research, theory and
practice, 19(1), 121–132.
Mitchell, KJ., Jones, L., Finkelhor, D. Wolak, J. (2014). Trends in unwanted sexual
solicitations: findings from the Youth Internet Safety Studies. Accessed
online from [URL: "http://www.unh.edu/ccrc/pdf/Sexual%20Solicitation%201%20of%204%20YISS%20Bulletins%20Feb%202014.pdf"] http://www.unh.edu/ccrc/pdf/Sexual%20Solicitation%20
 1%20of%204%20YISS%20Bulletins%20Feb%202014.pdf on 10 Apr 2015.
Neuendorf, K. A. (2002). The Content Analysis Guidebook. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
O’Connell, R. (2003). A typology of child cybersexploitation and online groom-
ing practices, Cyberspace Research Unit, University of Central Lancashire. 
Retrieved 18.08.12 from [URL: "http://www.image.guardian.co.uk/sysfiles/"] http://www.image.guardian.co.uk/sysfiles/.
Olson, L. N., Daggs, J. L., Ellevold, B. L., & Rogers, T. K. K. (2007). Entrapping the
innocent: toward a theory of child sexual predators’ luring communica-
tion. Communication Theory, 17, 231–251.
Priebe, G., & Svedin, C.-G. (2012). Online or off-line victimisation and psycho-
logical well-being: a comparison of sexual-minority and heterosexual
youth. European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 21, 569–582.
Quayle, E., & Newman, E. (2015). The role of sexual images in online and offline
sexual behaviour with minors. Current Psychiatry Reports, 17(6), 1–6.
Quayle, E., Allegro, S., Hutton, L., Sheath, M., & Loof, L. (2014). Rapid skill
acquisition and online sexual grooming of children. Computers in Human
Behavior, 39, 368–375.
Rice, E., Winetrobe, H., Holloway, I., Montoya, J., Plant, A., & Kordic, T. (2015). Cell
phone internet access, online sexual solicitation, partner seeking, and
sexual risk behavior among adolescents. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 44(3),
755–763. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10508-014-0366-3"] 10.1007/s10508-014-0366-3.
Robson, C. (2011). Real World Research (3rd ed.). Chichester: Wiley.
Rood, C. J., Thackeray, J., Letson, M., Leder, R., & Berlan, E. (2015). Prevalence of
sexting, online solicitations, and offline meetings among adolescents of
a large Child Advocacy Center with suspected sexual abuse. Journal Of
Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology,. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpag.2015.02.024"] 10.1016/j.jpag.2015.02.024.
Seto, M., Wood, J. M., Babchishin, K. M., & Flynn, S. (2011). Online solicitation
offenders are different from child pornography offenders and lower risk
contact sexual offenders. Law and Human Behavior: Advance online publi-
cation. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/h0093925"] 10.1037/h0093925. 
Smahel, D., & Wright, M. F. (Eds.). (2014). Meaning of online problematic situa-
tions for children. Results of qualitative cross-cultural investigation in nine
European countries. London: London School of economics and political
science. (EU Kids Online).
Sumter, S. R., Baumgartner, S. E., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2012). Develop-
mental trajectories of peer victimization: off-line and online experiences
during adolescence. Journal of Adolescent Health, 50(6), 607–613.
Swedish Media Council (2010). New reports on Idol, online gaming and Swed-
ish media habits. Accessed online from [URL: "http://www.medieradet.se/"] http://www.medieradet.se/ 11
Feb 2012.
Van Ouytsel, J., Ponnet, K., & Walrave, M. (2014). The associations between
adolescents’ consumption of pornography and music videos and their
sexting behavior. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking, 17(12),
772–778.
Webster, S., Davidson, J., Bifulco, A., Gottschalk, P., Caretti, V., Pham, T., Grove- 
Hills, J., Turley, C., Tompkins, C., Ciulla, S., Milazzo, V. Schimmenti, A. 
Craparo, G. (2012). Final report. European Online Grooming Project. 
Accessed 15 January 2013 from [URL: "http://www.europeanonlinegroomingproject.com/wp-content/file-uploads/European-Online-Grooming-Project-Final-Report.pdf"] http://www.europeanonlinegroom-
 ingproject.com/wp-content/file-uploads/European-Online-Grooming-
 Project-Final-Report.pdf.
Whittle, H., Hamilton-Giachritsis, C., & Beech, A. (2015). A comparison of victim
and offender perspectives of grooming and sexual abuse. Deviant Behav-
ior, 36(7), 539–564.
Whittle, H., Hamilton-Giachritsis, C., Beech, A., & Collings, G. (2013). A review of
young people’s vulnerabilities to online grooming. Aggression and Violent
Behavior, 18, 135–146.
Williams, R., Elliott, I. A., & Beech, A. R. (2013). Identifying sexual grooming
themes used by internet sex offenders. Deviant Behavior, 34(2), 135–152.
Wolak, J., Finkelhor, D., Mitchell, K. J., & Ybarra, M. L. (2008). Online “predators
and their victims: myths, realities and implications for prevention and
treatment. American Psychologist, 63, 111–1128.
