Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.8 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
Keywords: Routine activity; Rational choice; Opportunity; Trafficking; Sex; Abuse; Exploitation; Child; Offender; Victim
CrossMarkDomains[1]: springer.com
ModDate: 2015/11/26 12:25:01+01'00'
Subject: Crime Science, doi:10.1186/s40163-015-0047-0
Creator: Springer
Title: Everyday atrocities: does internal (domestic) sex trafficking of British children satisfy the expectations of opportunity theories of crime?
CrossMarkDomains[2]: springerlink.com
robots: noindex
doi: 10.1186/s40163-015-0047-0
CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
CreationDate: 2015/11/25 20:00:42+05'30'
Author: Ella Cockbain
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2015-11-25T20:00:42+05:30
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Springer
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2015-11-26T12:25:01+01:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2015-11-26T12:25:01+01:00
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.8 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Routine activity; Rational choice; Opportunity; Trafficking; Sex; Abuse; Exploitation; Child; Offender; Victim
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: doi:10.1186/s40163-015-0047-0
xmp:dc:publisher: Springer Berlin Heidelberg
xmp:dc:description: Crime Science, doi:10.1186/s40163-015-0047-0
xmp:dc:subject: Routine activity; Rational choice; Opportunity; Trafficking; Sex; Abuse; Exploitation; Child; Offender; Victim
xmp:dc:title: Everyday atrocities: does internal (domestic) sex trafficking of British children satisfy the expectations of opportunity theories of crime?
xmp:dc:creator: Ella Cockbain; Richard Wortley
xmp:crossmark:DOI: 10.1186/s40163-015-0047-0
xmp:crossmark:MajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
xmp:crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:crossmark:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:prism:url: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40163-015-0047-0
xmp:prism:doi: 10.1186/s40163-015-0047-0
xmp:prism:issn: 2193-7680
xmp:prism:aggregationType: journal
xmp:prism:publicationName: Crime Science
xmp:prism:copyright: Cockbain and Wortley.
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:pdfx:doi: 10.1186/s40163-015-0047-0
xmp:pdfx:robots: noindex
xmp:pdfx:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:73a107ac-b95c-41da-9fec-8d0809802b88
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:9522b5ee-9c88-44fc-a74a-291d62cf26cd
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:72034f16-a2c3-49c8-a7d8-dad31493afea
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2015-11-25T20:03:41+05:30
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:f2d2d83e-f764-4373-a871-91b628082afe
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2015-11-25T20:04:24+05:30
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkMajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrosMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: robots
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://crossref.org/crossmark/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: crossmark
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Crossmark Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Usual same as prism:doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The date when a publication was publishe.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: seq Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://prismstandard.org/namespaces/basic/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: prism
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Prism Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: This element provides the url for an article or unit of content. The attribute platform is optionally allowed for situations in which multiple URLs must be specified. PRISM recommends that a subset of the PCV platform values, namely “mobile” and “web”, be used in conjunction with this element. NOTE: PRISM recommends against the use of the #other value allowed in the PRISM Platform controlled vocabulary. In lieu of using #other please reach out to the PRISM group at prism-wg@yahoogroups.com to request addition of your term to the Platform Controlled Vocabulary.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: url
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The Digital Object Identifier for the article. The DOI may also be used as the dc:identifier. If used as a dc:identifier, the URI form should be captured, and the bare identifier should also be captured using prism:doi. If an alternate unique identifier is used as the required dc:identifier, then the DOI should be specified as a bare identifier within prism:doi only. If the URL associated with a DOI is to be specified, then prism:url may be used in conjunction with prism:doi in order to provide the service endpoint (i.e. the URL).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ISSN for an electronic version of the issue in which the resource occurs. Permits publishers to include a second ISSN, identifying an electronic version of the issue in which the resource occurs (therefore e(lectronic)Issn. If used, prism:eIssn MUST contain the ISSN of the electronic version.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: issn
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Volume number
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: volume
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Issue number
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: number
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Starting page
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: startingPage
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Ending page
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: endingPage
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The aggregation type specifies the unit of aggregation for a content collection. Comment PRISM recommends that the PRISM AggBOOKMARKS:
Everyday atrocities: does internal (domestic) sex trafficking of British children satisfy the expectations of opportunity theories of crime?
  Abstract
  Background
  Method
    Data
    Procedure
  Results and discussion
    Offender criminal versatility
      Many offenders are criminally versatile and have convictions for non-sexual offences
    Offenders’ routine activities
      Offenders’ routine activities facilitate access to suitable co-offenders, potential victims and appropriate crime facilitators
    Victims’ routine activities
      Victims’ routine activities help explain their availability, attractiveness and vulnerability to offenders
    Offender connectivity and offending rates
      Better-connected offenders typically offend at a higher rate
    Locations for abuse
      Abuse occurs at locations lacking supervision and familiar to offenders from their everyday lives
  Conclusion
  Authors’ contributions
  References
Page 1
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35
DOI 10.1186/s40163-015-0047-0
RESEARCH  Open Access
Everyday atrocities: does internal
(domestic) sex trafficking of British children
satisfy the expectations of opportunity theories
of crime?
Ella Cockbain* and Richard Wortley*
Abstract 
In this study we examine the internal (domestic) sex trafficking of British children using unique data from six major
police investigations. This particular type of internal sex trafficking (sometimes known as ‘street grooming’) has been
popularly conceptualised as a highly sophisticated, skilled and well-organised phenomenon. This study shows that
this characterisation does not withstand empirical scrutiny. Instead, the routine activities and everyday associations of
both offenders and victims are shown to play key roles in facilitating, sustaining and spreading the abuse. While the
criminal acts associated with internal child sex trafficking can be atrocious, the people, places and processes involved
are shown to be far from exceptional. In this respect, the results may be unsettling: they undermine explanations
of an emotive crime that rest on reassuring but ultimately naïve errors of attribution. We argue that it is important, 
however, that preventative strategies are underpinned not by sensationalised narrative and untested assumptions but
by sober and robust assessments of appropriate empirical data. The paper contributes to the theoretical and empiri-
cal literature on opportunity theories of crime, on human trafficking and on child sexual abuse/exploitation. While the
sample size is not especially large (55 offenders and 43 victims), this study helps to expand a sorely limited knowledge
base on a topical threat. It is also distinguished by its hard-to-access data and novel analytical approach. The work is
likely to interest a broad and international audience of academics, practitioners and policy makers concerned with
crime prevention and child protection.
Keywords:  Routine activity, Rational choice, Opportunity, Trafficking, Sex, Abuse, Exploitation, Child, Offender, Victim
Background
In 2004, the distinct criminal offence of ‘trafficking within
the UK for the purposes of sexual exploitation’ came into
force in England and Wales (Section 58 of the Sexual
Offences Act 2003, amended in 2013 to Section 59a). One
key function of the new legislation was to criminalise sex
trafficking within the boundaries of a single country, oth-
erwise known as internal (or domestic) sex trafficking. 
The new law was designed to cover both adult and child
victims. In recent years, however, it is the internal sex
trafficking of British children that has garnered particular
*Correspondence: e.cockbain@ucl.ac.uk; r.wortley@ucl.ac.uk
Department of Security and Crime Science, UCL, 35 Tavistock Square, 
London, WC1H 9EZ, UK 
attention and concern. For brevity’s sake we will refer to
this issue hereafter simply as ‘internal child sex traffick-
ing’ (ICST), although we recognise that children of other
nationalities and/or in other countries can be internally
sex trafficked too.
From 2008, a series of high-profile ICST cases such
as those in Derby, Oxford and Rochdale have attracted
concerted media, public and political attention (Bray-
ley and Cockbain 2014; Cockbain 2013a). Growing con-
cern around a possible systemic failure of prevention
prompted various official enquires and reports (e.g.,
Association of Chief Police Officers 2012; Child Exploi-
tation and Online Protection Centre 2011; Home Office
2011, 2012; House of Commons 2013). While the specif-
ics of the recent high-profile cases varied, many shared
© 2015 Cockbain and Wortley. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons
license, and indicate if changes were made.
Page 2
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 2 of 12
certain common features. A ‘typical’ case that attracted
extensive media attention: occurred in a town or city
in the North and Midlands areas of England; involved
groups of male perpetrators and female victims; and, 
particularly controversially, mostly involved South
Asian (primarily Pakistani) offenders and white victims. 
Whether and if so to what extent such characteristics are
representative of all ICST remains unclear, for reasons
including major data gaps, confusion around definitions
and potential biases in the news production process (see
also Cockbain 2013a).
Like internal trafficking in general (Laczko and Gozd-
ziak 2005; Winterdyk and Reichel 2010), ICST has been
subject to little empirical research and its dynamics
remain poorly understood. While ICST is clearly a form
of child sexual abuse, it has some distinctive features. 
According to Brayley and Cockbain’s (2014) definition, 
which we use here, ICST involves multiple perpetrators
and involves movement integral to the abuse (the ‘traf-
ficking’ element).
In contrast, the involvement of multiple perpetrators
is not characteristic of sexual offending against either
children or adults (see, e.g.,  Horvath and Woodhams
2013; Smallbone and Wortley 2000). Compared to other
offence types, sexual offences have repeatedly and con-
sistently been found to have one of the lowest co-offend-
ing rates of any crime studied (Andreson and Felson
2012; Carrington 2009; Smallbone and Wortley 2000; van
Mastrigt and Farrington 2009).
With the notable exception of a small-scale exploratory
study on ICST victim and offender networking (Cock-
bain et al. 2011), there has been little research into the
interpersonal associations and activities underpinning
ICST. Nonetheless, the group-based nature of ICST has
been characterised in the media and elsewhere as indica-
tive of high levels of sophistication and organisation (e.g. 
Barnardo’s 2012).
In the absence of evidence to the contrary, we begin
with the assumption that ICST can be explained using
models applied to child sexual abuse generally. Our study
was informed by prior research that has examined the
situational dynamics of child sexual abuse. Drawing on
opportunity theories such as rational choice perspective
(Clarke and Cornish 1985) and routine activity theory
(Cohen and Felson 1979), situational analyses involve a
shift in analytic focus. Like all human behaviour (Mis-
chel 1968), crime can be understood as the product of an
interaction between disposition and situation (Wortley
2012). Rather than focus on the distant factors leading
to supposed ‘criminality’, situational researchers focus on
the immediate context of ‘criminal events’.
Applied to the problem of child sex offending, the situ-
ational perspective would suggest that many offenders 
are flexible in their sexual preferences and take opportu-
nities to sexually abuse children as and when the situa-
tional conditions are favourable (Wortley and Smallbone
2006a).  Taking into account individual differences in
criminal propensity, child sex offenders can be arguably
be categorised as opportunity takers, seekers and crea-
tors (Wortley and Smallbone 2006b).
Research into other forms of child sexual abuse has
demonstrated the importance of opportunity and offend-
ers’ and victims’ routine activities. Offenders tend, for
example, to abuse children to whom they have ready
access and the offence itself often occurs at convenient
locations where guardianship is absent and in the context
of everyday care-giving or recreational activities (Deslau-
riers-Varin and Beauregard 2010; Leclerc and Felson
2014; Wortley and Smallbone 2006a).  Many offenders
do not display the specialised interest in sexually abus-
ing children that might be expected of those psychologi-
cally driven to offend (Simon 1997, 2000; Smallbone and
Wortley 2000, 2004). Smallbone and Wortley (2000), for
example, examined the criminal records of 323 adult
males in Australia who had been convicted of sexual
offences against children. Although 62 % had previous
conviction histories, only 21 % had a prior sexual offence 
conviction. Their findings indicate that the average child
sex offender is more likely to be an ‘opportunity taker’ 
than a committed and specialised predator (see also
Smallbone and Wortley 2004).
Marcus Felson and colleagues (Andreson and Felson
2010; 2012; Felson 2003; Felson and Boba 2010) have
written from a routine activities perspective about the
role of co-offending in crime generally. Felson’s work pro-
vides a basis for us to speculate about how the involve-
ment of multiple offenders intrinsic to ICST might
impact on the individual offending behaviour of those
involved. Felson challenges the popular view of group-
based crime as highly organised. Instead he charac-
terises offender groups as loose structures with little
cohesion or formal hierarchy, a view shared with other
researchers whose work addresses co-offending and/
or criminal networks (e.g. McGuire 2012; McGloin and
Nguyen 2011; McGloin et al. 2008). From Felson’s per-
spective, the group may have a relatively stable core of
members who account for most of the criminal activity, 
but most members are peripheral and drift in and out
of the group. Members may co-offend with one or more
other members and/or with others outside of the group
and/or alone; the group rarely offends as a co-ordinated
unit. Nevertheless co-offending can and does change
the offending dynamic. Compared to solo-offenders, 
those involved in co-offending tend to have higher rates
of offending and to commit more serious offences. If the
patterns described above apply to ICST then, portrayals
Page 3
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 3 of 12
of offenders as highly sophisticated and organised are
likely to be inaccurate. We might expect, however, to
observe persistent and serious levels of offending among
core group members in particular.
Our study examines the extent to which ICST conforms
to the expectations of opportunity theories of crime, with
a particular focus on the routine activity approach. We
examine five propositions:
1. Many offenders are criminally versatile and have con-
victions for non-sexual offences;
2.Offenders’ routine activities facilitate access to suit-
able co-offenders, potential victims and appropriate
crime facilitators;
3. Victims’ routine activities help explain their availabil-
ity, attractiveness and vulnerability to offenders;
4.Better-connected offenders within the group typi-
cally offend at a higher rate; and
5.Abuse occurs at locations lacking supervision and
familiar to offenders from their everyday lives.
Method
Data
This study took place within a broader programme of
research into ICST, conducted by the first author for
her doctoral studies (Cockbain 2013b).  Gaining access
to restricted police data was a lengthy process, involving
negotiations with each investigative team to build trust
and convey the value of the proposed research as well as
the formulation of ethical approvals, security vetting pro-
cedures and data sharing contracts (see Cockbain 2015).
The data used here derived from six of the earliest and
largest ICST police investigations in the UK, all of which
were concentrated in the North West and Midlands areas
of England and the period 2008–2012. Table 1 provides
an overview of the core characteristics of the six cases. 
Our data included thousands of pages of detailed police
operational files and court records, offering a valuable
opportunity for an in-depth exploration of the character-
istics of the crime commission process and those
involved. Our sample contained 55 offenders (54 of
whom were male) and 43 victims (all female)1.
While our dataset was both novel and extensive, we
acknowledge that the sample size is not large in a statistical
sense. Additionally, readers should be mindful that cases
that are identified and investigated may differ from those
that are not. This issue is common to much criminological
research, however, and should not detract from the value
of this novel exploration of a little-understood crime. 
Procedure
Data were interrogated using content analysis (Berelson
and Lazarsfeld 1948), selected due to its broad applicabil-
ity, well-established nature and particular utility in struc-
turing and systematising documentary analysis (Bryman
2001; Reason and Garcia 2007). In incorporating both
qualitative and quantitative aspects to the analysis, we
ensured a systematic and well-rounded exploration of
ICST that did not reduce this complex social issue to
numerical assessment alone.
There is no standardised procedural logic for content
analysis and there is invariably some subjectivity in its
design and conduct (Krippendorff 2004).  To maxim-
ise reliability and transparency, we designed a clear and
explicit coding framework (shown in Table 2). Due to the
sheer volume of data to be reviewed, coding was a slow
and iterative process. The first author sifted carefully
through the available documentation, identifying and
extracting any relevant information and entering it into
the codesheet as she went (Excel spreadsheets). During
the data extraction process, she continuously reviewed
the information in the codesheet, updating it as neces-
sary whenever new information emerged (e.g. informa-
tion on an earlier offence that affected the code ‘age at
first offence’). Unfortunately, we were unable to double-
code the data due to their sensitive nature and the conse-
quent constraints of our data-sharing agreements.
For concision’s sake we present statistical results for the
combined sample for the six investigations. Due to pos-
sible bias introduced by the clustering of individuals by
case, we also ran case-by-case analysis and relevant dis-
crepancies are highlighted in the results.
Results and discussion
We now examine each of the five propositions in turn, 
reviewing whether and to what extent they were sup-
ported. We present percentages to aid interpretation and
facilitate comparison with other work, but readers should
be mindful of our sample size when considering whether
observed differences are likely to be meaningful.
Offender criminal versatility
Many offenders are criminally versatile and have convictions
for non‑sexual offences
With the notable exception of Operation Span, the
majority of offenders on every case had previous convic-
tions. The prior conviction rate (51 %, n = 22) was mark-
edly higher than the comparable national baseline of 28 % 
of 18–52 year old males (Ministry of Justice 2010)2. Addi-
1  The terms offender and victim reflect the conventions of Crime Science
but in legal terms they were the ‘defendants’ and ‘complainants’.  Conse-
quently the qualifier ‘suspected’ or ‘alleged’ should be treated as implicit. 
2  This discrepancy is unlikely to be explicable in terms of offenders’ race as
Asians are not generally overrepresented among offender groups, including
sex offenders, relative to the general population (Ministry of Justice 2011; 
Ministry of Justice et al. 2013).
Page 4
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 4 of 12
Table 1  Key information on cases in the sample
Name of   Investigative
operation launch date 
Police force  Key location(s) of 
investigation
Wheat
Central
Retriever
Chalice
Engage
Span 
Feb 2008
Aug 2008
Oct 2008
Aug 2009
Dec 2009
Jul 2010 
Greater Manchester
South Yorkshire
Derbyshire
West Mercia
Lancashire
Greater Manchester 
Rochdale; Manchester
Rotherham
Derby
Telford
Blackburn
Rochdale 
Number of offenders
(defendants)
11
8
11
10
4
11 
Number of victims
(complainants)
1
4
25
6
2
5 
End date of 
prosecution
Aug 2010
Nov 2010
Jan 2011
Dec 2012
Sep 2011
May 2012
Table 2  Coding framework
Proposition
1. Offenders are involved in other crimes as well as ICST
2. Offenders’ everyday activities facilitate access to suitable co-offenders, potential
victims and appropriate crime facilitators
3. Victims’ everyday activities help explain their availability, attractiveness 
and vulnerability to offenders
4. Better-connected offenders tend to commit more offences
5. Abuse occurs at locations lacking supervision and familiar to offenders from 
their everyday lives 
Data extracted
Criminal histories
Age at first ICST-type offence
Ethnicity and nationality
Marital status
Living circumstances
Employment status
Presence and nature of links between offenders
Offender-based rates of co-offending (as defined by Reiss 1988)
Age at first ICST-type victimisation
Ethnicity and nationality
Living circumstances
Other background information
Presence and nature of links between victims
Modes of recruitment
Inducements received
Offenders’ degree scores (obtained already via social network
analysis of the offender networks)
Number of contact offences
Levels of offending
Nature of locations where offenders abused their victims
Precautions taken by offenders to evade detection
tionally, prolific offenders (defined as having three or
more convictions) comprised 29 % (n = 16) of our sam-
ple, compared with 11 % of males nationally (Ministry of
Justice 2010). The modal number of convictions among
those with records in our sample was 3.5 and the mean
was 6.4 (SD = 7.3, range 1–28).
The results indicate a generalist pattern of offending
among the ICST offenders with previous offences. Only
two had prior sexual offence convictions; for the other
20 offenders, convictions came from a total of ten other
offence types, as categorised by Blackstones (2013). Fif-
teen of the 22 offenders with convictions (including the
two with sexual offending records) had records spanning
multiple offence categories. Both in terms of prevalence
and incidence, prior convictions were most commonly
offences against the administration of justice, road traffic
offences and theft offences.
The findings support the proposition that many ICST
offenders are involved in other criminal activity beyond 
ICST, which in turn suggests a generalised lack of self-
control and a readiness to seize criminal opportuni-
ties. Our findings are broadly comparable with previous
research on sex offender versatility (Simon 1997, 2000; 
Smallbone and Wortley, 2000, 2004), although the pro-
portion with prior sexual convictions (4 %, n = 2) in our
sample was markedly lower than the 21 % documented by
Smallbone and Wortley (2000). This discrepancy might
suggest ICST could involve even more opportunism and
less specialism than other forms of child sexual abuse.
Offenders’ routine activities
Offenders’ routine activities facilitate access to suitable
co‑offenders, potential victims and appropriate crime
facilitators
Offenders were aged 17–56 years at the time of the first
ICST offence recorded in our data: a proxy for age of
ICST onset. The only minor was also the only female
offender. The mean age was 29 years (SD = 9 years) but
Page 5
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 5 of 12
there was actually considerable variation in the age dis-
tribution by case (see Fig. 1). Overall, there was a general
skew towards the younger age groups: 73 % (n = 40) of
offenders were 31 years or younger at their first ICST
offence (see Fig. 2).
All or most offenders on every case and 96 % (n = 53) 
overall were of Asian heritage—defined according to the
UK census category as being from South Asia rather than
the Far East. The remaining two offenders, including the
female offender, were white. At 80 % (n = 44), Pakistani
heritage offenders were clearly overrepresented relative
to the demographics of the general English population
(2 % Asian Pakistani) and of the relevant local authority
areas (1–12 % Asian Pakistani) (Nomis 2013). National-
ity data were available for the two white offenders, who
were both British, and for 43 of the 53 Asian offenders. 
Contrary to media stereotypes that ICST is a Pakistani
import (Cockbain 2013a), most of these ethnically Asian
offenders (n = 34, 79 %) were British nationals. Typically
they were born and raised in the UK, rather than emi-
grating later in life.
Almost half the offenders (45 %, n  = 25) were in an
adult relationship, although the precise configuration
varied by case. Operation Central was anomalous here
as it was only case in which most offenders were single. 
The majority of offenders in most cases and overall (65 %,
n = 36) lived with their families (parents, wives or both).
The overall unemployment rate of 35 % (n  = 9) was
notably higher than comparable national rates: for Paki-
stani-heritage males these stand at 10 % for 16–24 year-
olds and 8 % for 25–49 year-olds (Nomis 2013). The 60 % 
Fig. 1  Age distribution of offenders by case 
Number 
of 
offenders
Age distribution of full offender sample 
15
12  13 
5  6 
1  1  2
17-21 22-26 27-31 32-36 37-41 42-46 47-51 52-56
Age group in full years
Fig. 2  Age distribution of the full offender sample
(n = 33) who were employed were typically in low-skill
and low-pay jobs, most commonly working as taxi driv-
ers, shop assistants, counter-staff in takeaways or food
delivery drivers.
Offender connectivity was a major feature of all six
cases: 96 % (n = 53) of the offenders were directly linked
to at least one other offender. These connections were
generally bonds typical of everyday life: many were rela-
tives, friends, neighbours, flatmates and/or colleagues. 
Qualitative analysis of the data indicated that at least
62 % (n = 60) of the linked pairs were connected by social
bonds extrinsic to and likely predating co-involvement in
ICST. This finding undermines the stereotype of mem-
bers of sex offender groups as deviant ‘others’ who con-
verged around a shared interest in child abuse alone.
Not only were offenders embedded in networks of
association but 89 % (n  = 49) of them co-offended in
ICST activity with one or more of their co-defendants
and/or with other suspects beyond the immediate
offender network. Interestingly, over half of these co-
offenders (n = 27) also offended alone. Most offenders in
each case and overall (84 %, n = 41) contributed tangible
commodities to co-offences, including by providing alco-
hol, drugs, transportation, abuse locations and victims.
The above results support the proposition that offend-
ers’ routine activities facilitate access to suitable co-
offenders, potential victims and appropriate crime
facilitators. Particularly important were the high levels
of connectivity (offender networking) and co-offending. 
The level of group cohesion was, for some but not all
cases, higher than that described by Felson (2003) for
the typical offender group. This may be explained by the
pre-existing nature of most of the social bonds linking
offenders. The shared ethnicity of most of the offenders
in each case corresponds with extensive research high-
lighting ethnic homogeneity as a common characteristic
of co-offending groups (Bijleveld et al. 2007; Horvath and
Page 6
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 6 of 12
Kelly 2009; Reiss 1988; Warr 1996) and indeed of social
groups in general (e.g. McPherson et al. 2001). From a
routine activity perspective, it seems self-evident that
the groups to which we belong would influence our asso-
ciations and activities. As predicted by Felson, the ICST
offenders engaged in both co- and solo- offending. This
result suggests pattern of individual opportunism cou-
pled with the spread of offending opportunities through
the offender networks.
Higher-than-average unemployment levels are poten-
tially informative since unemployment might result in
less formal surveillance, reduced commitment to con-
ventional action and more free time to offend. Further
support for a routine activity explanation of ICST comes
from employed offenders’ concentration in jobs that pro-
vided ready, opportunistic access to potential victims and
enticements to offer them (e.g. free food and lifts).
The age profile of the offenders in our study differed
in some respects from what has previously been docu-
mented in studies on child sexual abuse. On the one
hand, the mean age of first documented ICST offence
was—at 29 years—consistent with that found for extra-
familial child sexual offenders in an Australian study
(Smallbone and Wortley 2000). The same study found dif-
ferences in age profile between intrafamilial (n = 79) and
extrafamilial (n = 60) offenders, with respective means of
33.1 and 29.4 years. The between-group differences were
not statistically significant but this may be a reflection of
the limited sample size. Offenders’ age, it was suggested, 
may influence the types of opportunities they encounter
(or create) to abuse children inside or outside the fam-
ily. On the other hand, the skew in our sample towards
the younger age groups indicates ICST offenders may be
different from that for extrafamilial child sexual abusers
as a general group. The age distribution for our sample
was more closely associated with the age-crime curve for
crime more broadly (Hirschi and Gottfredson, 1983)—
including sexual assault against adults (Gannon et al. 
2008; Miller 2013)—than for child sexual abuse. The age
distribution for child sexual abuse tends to be bimodal
with twin peaks in adolescence/early adulthood and mid
to late thirties (Smallbone et al. 2008).
Victims’ routine activities
Victims’ routine activities help explain their availability, 
attractiveness and vulnerability to offenders
Since we selected cases based on the inclusion criterion
that the case had involved child trafficking, we were sur-
prised to find four adults in the victim sample (all from
Operation Retriever).  After deliberation, we included
them in the analysis since all were directly connected to
one or more of the underage victims and were abused by
the same offenders as the children were. Overall, victims 
ranged in age from 11 to 20 years with a mean of 15
(SD = 2 years). Although the precise age distribution var-
ied by case (see Fig. 3), the overall distribution was nor-
mal with a modal age of 14 years (see Fig. 4).
As shown in Table 3, most or all victims in each case
and 79 % (n = 34) overall were white British. This figure
was broadly proportionate with an English population
that is 80 % white British (the individual local author-
ity areas in question are 67–92 % white British) (Nomis
2013).
In each case and overall most victims (86 %, n = 37) 
were at school or college when the abuse began and most
(81 %, n = 35) lived with their families. Only four girls
were in local authority care initially; another eight went
into care after the ICST began due to resultant behav-
ioural deterioration. Although the available data did not
support a comprehensive assessment of victims’ back-
grounds, the limited information we could find suggested
a clustering of trauma. At least 70 % of victims (n = 30) 
had a pre-ICST history involving one or more of the fol-
lowing: social services involvement (n = 10); going miss-
ing (n = 7); disruptive or aggressive behaviour (n = 9);
drug abuse (n  = 3); mental illness (n  = 2); and sexual
abuse (n = 16). Thirty per cent of the victims (n = 13),
including some with no other prior traumas docu-
mented, had criminal records. A minority of victims had
stereotypically ‘normal’ backgrounds, which highlights
the dangers of assuming ICST only affects children with
problematic lives.
There were multiple victims in all cases except Opera-
tion Wheat; 91 % (n = 39) of them were connected to at
least one other victim. Common links included friend-
ship, kinship and being schoolmates. Close analysis
showed 75 % (n  = 39) of the links were strong social
bonds predating and extrinsic to the abuse.
As shown in Table 4, victims came into contact with
their subsequent abuser(s) in three ways: a direct meeting; 
an introduction by another girl, usually a victim herself; 
or an introduction by another offender. Some victims met
multiple offenders through multiple different pathways.
Introductions through offenders or other girls ranged
from the casual to the calculated. Indicative of worryingly
risky behaviour, nine victims described meeting up with
strangers who had obtained their telephone numbers. 
Direct meetings were largely opportunistic and typically
occurred on the street but also in parks, shopping cen-
tres, transport hubs, takeaways etc. There was evidence
to suggest that many offenders happened across targets
in the course of their everyday activities, such as driving
taxis or simply ‘cruising’ around town.
Overall 91 % (n  = 39) of the victims received tangi-
ble commodities from offenders. These were typically
low-value consumables, especially free lifts, alcohol and
Page 7
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 7 of 12
Fig. 3  Age distribution of victims by case
Number 
of 
victims
Age distribution of full victim sample
11 
8
6  6
2  3  3  3 
0  1
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Age in full years
Fig. 4  Age distribution of full victim sample
drugs. These ‘gifts’ functioned variously as inducements
to attract victims or means of lowering their inhibitions
and facilitating abuse or securing continued compliance 
with offenders’ demands. The following quotation from
a victim’s police interview captures the way in which
the promise of such goods motivated some victims to
respond to offenders’ initial advances:
You’re a young girl, Friday night, your mum and dad
don’t give you much money… if someone pulls over
and says they’re going to buy you a bottle of vodka
obviously you’re going to get in and want to go for a
drink.
Other identifiable push- and pull-factors that led vic-
tims to engage and continue engaging with offenders
included: their friends’ involvement; boredom; thrill-seek-
ing; lack of economic power; loneliness; conflict at home; 
and attraction or emotional attachment to offenders. 
While a detailed discussion of the interpersonal dynam-
ics and grooming processes underpinning ICST is beyond
this paper’s remit, it should be noted here that some vic-
tims described their entire lives becoming entrenched in
the abuse. The routinisation of ICST is illustrated well in
this quotation from a victim’s police interview:
It was like a lifestyle. Like get up, go out and then do
whatever—like you’d get up and go to work.
Our findings support the proposition that victims’ 
everyday activities help explain their availability, attrac-
tiveness and vulnerability to offenders. We stress that
acknowledging ways in which victims’ activities may
translate into risk should not be confused with victim
blaming. Nor is it an attempt at exculpating the offend-
ers, with whom the ultimate moral and legal responsibil-
ity rests. Ignoring victims’ activities and their agency only
serves to promote idealised stereotypes of victims as pas-
sive objects. As a basis for crime prevention, stylised and
inaccurate conceptions of victims are at best useless and
at worst counter-productive.
The victims were characterised by connectivity to
one another and (even more so than for offenders) links
Table 3  Victims’ ethnicity
Case
Op. Wheat
Op. Central
Op. Retriever
Op. Chalice
Op. Engage
Op. Span
All cases
Proportion of sample (n = 43)
Proportion of English population 
Ethnicity
White British
1
4
17
5
2
5
34
79 %
80 % 
Black British
–
–
2
1
–
–
3
7 %
3 % 
Mixed race (Black/white)
–
–
3
–
–
–
3
7 %
1 % 
Mixed race (Asian/white)
–
–
2
–
–
–
2
5 %
1 % 
Asian Pakistani
–
–
1
–
–
–
1
2 %
2 %
Page 8
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 8 of 12
Table 4  Modes by which victims came into contact with their abusers
Case  Pathway to contact
Introduced by another girl  Introduced by offender
Op. Wheat
Op. Central
Op. Retriever
Op. Chalice
Op. Engage
Op. Span
All cases
Proportion of sample (n = 43) 
–
3
13
6
2
5
29
67 % 
1
3
9
3
–
3
19
44 % 
Direct meeting with offender
1
2
10
3
–
2
18
42 %
between them were typically extrinsic to shared involve-
ment in ICST. There has previously been very little explo-
ration into victim networking and how it may promote, 
spread or sustain patterns of victimisation (an exception
is Cockbain et al. 2011). Our results indicate that just as
offenders’ social networks can create offending opportu-
nities, so too victims’ social networks can create victimi-
sation opportunities.
The limited information available on victims’ back-
grounds indicated that many had chaotic or problematic
histories. This finding resonates with prior research into
child sexual exploitation as a broader category (Beckett
2011; Cockbain et al. forthcoming; Cockbain and Brayley
2012; Jago et al. 2011). Such findings are sometimes inter-
preted as implying offenders are well attuned to vulner-
ability and select victims accordingly. We would caution
against over-estimating offenders’ skills by confusing cor-
relation with causality. Offenders may deliberately target
vulnerable individuals but equally victims’ vulnerabili-
ties may translate into lifestyle factors that increase their
exposure to offenders and/or make them more suscepti-
ble if targeted.
The overlap between internal sex trafficking of children
and young adults suggests an opportunistic approach to
victim selection, also supportive of routine activity the-
ory. The concentration of victims in their teens is impor-
tant, as this is an age at which children become more
independent and spend more time unsupervised outside
the home. Such entirely normal changes might explain
the modal age of the victims, which was similar to that
found in the Child Exploitation and Online Protection
Centre’s (2011) study on localised grooming: another
form of extrafamilial child sexual abuse. In general, aca-
demic reviews have shown victims of extrafamilial child
sexual abuse to have a higher age at onset than those of
intrafamilial abuse (Fischer and McDonald 1998; Small-
bone et al. 2008). The ICST victims’ age may also help
explain how openly many offenders acted; sexual activity 
with teens might reasonable be expected to be less taboo
than that involving younger children.
While primarily driven by Operation Retriever (also the
case with the most victims), black and minority ethnicity
victims were not underrepresented relative to national
demographics. This finding challenges some media and
right-wing political contentions that so-called ‘Asian sex
gangs’ prey exclusively and deliberately on white girls
(Cockbain 2013a; Meleagrou-Hitchens and Brun 2013).
The predominance of white victims may simply be a
reflection of the demographics of the available ‘pool’ of
potential victims locally. Other possible influences on the
target pool include socio-cultural and socio-economic
factors affecting both teenagers’ everyday activities and
the norms and expectations that constrain them.
Offender connectivity and offending rates
Better‑connected offenders typically offend at a higher rate
The majority of offenders in every case and overall (89 %,
n  = 49) were implicated in contact sexual offences; 48
of these were accused of penetrative abuse. The other
contact offender was convicted on DNA evidence alone
and no further material was available about his offend-
ing behaviour. The remaining six offenders, including the
only female, offended purely in a facilitation capacity, for
example by procuring victims. In this section, we focus
on the 48 contact offenders just described.
We were able to identify 414 distinct incidents3 of con-
tact sexual offences between these 48 offenders and the
victims in our sample. All victims bar one were subject to
contact sexual offences; for most (n = 32, 76 %) the abuse
included at least one incident of anal, vaginal or oral
3  Defined as a direct contact sexual offence committed by offender or suf-
fered by victim (e.g. two acts of penetration  = two incidents). We took
victims’ age at the time into consideration when assessing if something
should be considered an incident or not, using the parameters of the Sexual
Offences Act 2003. For example, an act of consensual sex (however exploita-
tive) with a girl aged 16 years or over was not counted as an incident but a
rape was.
Page 9
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 9 of 12
penetration. The figure of 414 incidents is in fact con-
servative as some of the most heavily-abused victims
struggled to recall every incident. Additionally, around
half the contact offenders (49 %, n = 24) were implicated
in further offences against victims outside the core sam-
ple that were not included in this figure.
We found that the 414 incidents were not equally dis-
tributed across the 48 contact offenders. Individual
offenders were implicated in one to 46 incidents each
with a mean of eight (SD = 10) and a mode of three. The
high standard deviation relative to the means and the
large range indicates wide variance both between and
within cases in levels of offending. Nonetheless, levels of
repeat offending (88 %, n = 42) were high across all cases.
To test for a relationship between offender connectivity
with their criminal counterparts and abuse rates we used
inferential statistical tests. Here we had to take some
additional precautions due to the clustering of offenders
by case, which risked violating the assumption of inde-
pendence underpinning most inferential statistical tests
(Kreft and de Leeuw 1998). This problem is common to
most co-offending research as the datasets involved often
feature clustering or nesting. With a few notable excep-
tions (e.g. McGloin and Nguyen 2012), the issue has often
simply been overlooked when running statistical analy-
ses. As Kreft and de Leeuw (1998) note, inferential statis-
tics may still be applied if it can first be shown that the
independent variable is not correlated with the case4. We
first calculated the intraclass correlation coefficient to
check for the effects of clustering. The low5 score (0.09),
together with the non-significant f test result [f(51) = 1.2, 
p  = ns] provided confidence in the legitimacy of pro-
ceeding with inferential tests.
We then proceeded to test for a correlation between
offender connectivity and ICST offending rates. Connec-
tivity was measured using individuals’ degree scores that
were calculated previously using social network analy-
sis (Cockbain 2013b). Degree is a common metric used
in social network analysis that is calculated based on an
individual’s direct links to others in the network relative
to total network size. It measures the extent to which an
individual entity is directly connected to others or ‘in the
thick of things’ (Morselli 2009: 390).
Due to the non-normal distribution of the offending
rates we used non-parametric tests. The results were sig-
nificant at the p < 0.001 level with a Spearman’s correla-
tion co-efficient of 0.56. The associated R2 value was 0.31, 
4  An alternative would be multi-level modelling that builds in case as a vari-
able but we were unable to do this here due to the small sample size.
5  We remind readers that intraclass correlation coefficients are not assessed
using the same conventions used for other correlations (e.g. Pearson corre-
lations). At close to zero, our result of 0.09 is considered small. 
indicating that offender connectivity had a medium sized
effect on offending rates.
Our results support the proposition that better-con-
nected offenders tend to commit more offences. It is
generally well established in the crime literature that a
disproportionately large amount of offences are com-
mitted by a small number of prolific offenders (Ever-
son 2003).  The positive correlation we found between
offender connectivity and offending rates supports Fel-
son’s arguments that better-connected offenders commit
more offences. One possible explanation for this is that
the more connected a child sex offender is to other child
sex offenders the more opportunities (s)he has to offend. 
Another explanation, which is complementary rather
than competing, is that the group dynamics of sexual
offender networks serve to normalise and neutralise the
abuse. Better-connected members may well have fewer
inhibitions and thus be more willing to offend. In routine
activity terms, being embedded in an offender network
may help create ‘likely’ offenders.
Locations for abuse
Abuse occurs at locations lacking supervision and familiar
to offenders from their everyday lives
Here we used offenders as our unit of analysis to permit
comparison with prior research. Table 5 shows the loca-
tions where offenders abused victims, either directly or as
facilitators. Just over half (54 %, n = 29) of them abused
victims at multiple location types.
Qualitative analysis of the data showed variations in
abuse locations between and within cases that seem likely
to be connected to offenders’ age and routine activities. 
Parks and playing fields, for example, were more com-
mon among younger offenders, whereas abuse in takea-
ways and restaurants typically involved employees of
these premises or their friends. The three most prevalent
location types overall were cars or taxis (43 %), offend-
ers’ homes (35 %) and other private properties to which
offenders had access (46 %)  (typically co-offenders’ 
homes). The sheer volume of abuse locations and vari-
able level of information about exact times, dates and
addresses precluded more sophisticated analysis such as
hotspot mapping. Nonetheless, the results provided par-
tial support for the proposition, in that offenders appear
to have tended towards locations with which they were
already familiar.
There was some evidence to suggest ICST may dif-
fer from other child sexual abuse in terms of the offence
locations. It was previously found that offenders’ or their
victims’ homes were the most common location to abuse
children sexually (Smallbone and Wortley 2000). In our
study, such places were common but so too were semi-
public and public locations.
Page 10
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 10 of 12
Table 5  Offenders’ abuse locations (sample excludes offender prosecuted on DNA evidence alone)
Case  Location
Private
property
aside from
offender’s
home 
Car or taxi Offender’s
home 
Takeaway or Park or
restaurant playing
field 
Victim’s
home 
Victim’s
friend’s
home 
Street Hotel or bed Other
and 
breakfast
Op. Wheat
Op. Central
Op. Retriever
Op. Chalice
Op. Engage
Op. Span
All cases 
6
2
6
3
4
4
25
Proportion
of sample
(n = 54) 
46 % 
1  5
5  1
3  3
7  6
1  –
6  4
23  19
43 % 35 % 
1
–
–
4
–
3
8
15 % 
–  –
3  1
2  2
3  2
–  –
–  –
8  5
15 %  9 % 
–
–
5
–
–
–
5
9 % 
–  –
2  –
1  3
–  –
–  –
–  –
3  3
6 % 6 % 
–
1
–
–
–
–
1
2 %
The prevalence of non-private spaces was unexpected
given the taboo nature of child sexual abuse. This appar-
ent failure of guardianship could be linked various
factors, including: the physical absence of guardians: 
inattentiveness of those guardians present; reluctance of
potential guardians to intervene (e.g. due to fear of reper-
cussions, lack of moral censorship of the offending itself
or perhaps ambiguity over the victims’ apparent age);
and/or physical characteristics of the spaces that lim-
ited natural surveillance (e.g. offences in parks might be
hidden due to dense vegetation or limited lighting). The
fact that many offenders co-offended with their friends, 
family members, colleagues and so forth (see section on
offender connectivity) is also worth highlighting here. 
From a guardianship perspective, such contacts would
normally be expected to act as intimate handlers rather
than actively participating in offences.
Most offenders took few if any steps to conceal these
locations from their victims in order to frustrate any
eventual investigation. They employed few if any other
safeguards against detection or investigation. The follow-
ing behaviours, for example, were common: not masking
faces; limited or erratic condom use6; using their normal
telephones7; and using their own names. Such a general
lack of precautions undermines the media portrayal of
the offenders as calculating predators. It also indicates
that ICST activity was not perceived as particularly risky. 
Given the long periods over which much of the offending
6  At least 79 % (n = 25) of the victims of penetrative abuse were abused on
one or more occasion without a condom.
7  According to police investigators, normal practice in drug cases of equiv-
alent severity would be for offenders to use separate ‘clean’ (for legitimate
life) and ‘dirty’ (for crime) telephones. 
had gone unchallenged, such a belief might have been
well-founded—rational even.
Conclusion
When faced with an issue as emotive and widely stig-
matised as child sexual abuse there is an understandable
tendency to assume that abhorrent crimes must involve
exceptional people and processes. There are many myths
and untested assumptions around internal trafficking of
British children, or ‘on street grooming’ as it is sometimes
known. In this paper, we closely examined the character-
istics of victims, offenders and crime events across six
major cases. We found that in many respects ICST satis-
fies the expectations of opportunity theories of crime.
Our results provided strong support for four of the five
propositions tested: many of the offenders were crimi-
nal generalists; offenders’ everyday activities facilitated
access to co-offenders, victims and crime facilitators; vic-
tims’ everyday activities helped explain their availability, 
attractiveness and vulnerability; and better-connected
offenders typically committed more offences. There was
limited evidence supporting our final proposition: offend-
ers abused victims at a wide range of locations familiar
from their everyday lives, but it was not clear whether
and how supervision was lacking. Our study makes an
important empirical contribution towards expanding
the limited knowledge base on ICST and internal traf-
ficking more broadly. It also makes a contribution to the
literature on opportunity theories by highlighting their
explanatory utility in the context of a serious and com-
plex crime.
In light of on-going efforts to improve responses to
ICST, our results also have implications for practice. 
The findings offer a counterbalance to popular myths
Page 11
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 11 of 12
and assumptions about ICST. When examined carefully
and dispassionately, the evidence about ICST and the
people, places and processes involved recalls Arendt’s
(1963) famous notion of the ‘banality of evil’.  While
treating ICST offenders as uniquely deviant criminal
masterminds may be comforting, it is unlikely to assist
in designing and delivering effective counter-measures. 
In contrast, recognising the importance of opportu-
nity and routine activities opens up new avenues for
interventions. As Wortley and Smallbone (2006b) have
suggested, offenders who are ‘opportunity takers’ may
well be deterred through situational crime prevention
(Clarke 1980).
It is a fundamental principle of situational preven-
tion that interventions need to be tailored to the spe-
cific dynamics of the crime problem in question. For this
reason we are loath to suggest a cook-book of generic
interventions for ICST based on our findings. However, 
by way of illustration, in the cases we examined mapping
the social connections of existing victims (e.g. via social
network analysis) could help identify others at particu-
lar risk of involvement in ICST. Preventative and protec-
tive interventions—such as helping young people look
out for one another—might be then be targeted at high-
risk children (e.g. friends or classmates of existing vic-
tims) rather than delivered through universal education
efforts. Given the public and semi-public nature of much
of the ICST we examined, efforts might also be directed
at improving surveillance at known pick-up and offend-
ing locations (hotspots),  be that through enhancing
CCTV coverage, educating place managers to look out
for suspicious behaviour, or increasing targeted police
patrols.
There is growing evidence on the effectiveness of situ-
ational interventions in tackling diverse crime problems
(e.g. Bowers et al. 2011; Clarke 1997). Yet, the majority
of such work to date has focused on so-called ‘volume’ 
crimes, such as burglary. It is only more recently that
researchers have begun to explore situational crime pre-
vention’s application to more serious or complex crimes
(Bullock et al. 2010; Wortley and Smallbone 2006c). Our
study contributes to a small but growing literature that
suggests even the most reviled of crimes may be respon-
sive to situational interventions.
Abbreviations
ICST: internal child sex trafficking (used here to refer to trafficking of British
children within the UK).
Authors’ contributions
EC conceived and designed the study, collected and analysed the research
data and led on writing the manuscript. RW provided support and guidance
throughout the design and conduct of the research and its write up. Both
authors read and approved the final manuscript. 
Acknowledgements
We are hugely grateful to all those connected to the six police investigations
for their invaluable support, in particular to Terry Crompton, Mary Doyle, Pete
Horner, Debbie Platt, Jim Tozer and Mark Whelan. We would also like to thank: 
Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service for providing access to court files; 
Cheryl Thomas for her role as co-supervisor; and guest editor Danielle Reynald
and our anonymous reviewers for their insightful and helpful comments on
an earlier draft of this paper. This research in this article was conducted under
EPSRC funding (SECReT Doctoral Training Centre) and the paper itself was
written under ESRC funding (Future Research Leaders Fellowship).
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 18 May 2015 Accepted: 21 October 2015
References
Andreson, M., & Felson, M. (2010). The impact of Co-offending. British Journal of
Criminology, 50(1), 66–81.
Andreson, M., & Felson, M. (2012). Co-offending and the Diversification of
Crime Types. International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative
Criminology, 56(5), 811–829.
Arendt, H. (1963). Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. New
York: Viking Press.
Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) (2012) ACPO Child Sexual Exploita-
tion Action Plan, ACPO Child Protection and Abuse Investigation Working
Group.
Barnardo’s (2012). Cutting them free: How is the UK progressing in protecting
its children from sexual exploitation? Barkingside: Barnardo’s.
Beckett, H. (2011). Not a world away: the sexual exploitation of children and
young people in Northern Ireland. Belfast: Barnardo’s Ireland.
Berelson, B., & Lazarsfeld, F. (1948). The analysis of communication content. New
York: Bureau of Applied Social Research.
Bijleveld, C., Weerman, F., Looije, D., & Hendriks, J. (2007). Group sex offending
by Juveniles. Coercive Sex as Group Activity, European Journal of Criminol-
ogy, 4(1), 5–31.
Blackstone’s (2013). Blackstone’s Criminal Practice, Accessed via Lexis Library.
Bowers, K., Johnson, S., Guerette, R., Summers, L., & Poynton, S. (2011). Spatial
displacement and diffusion of benefits among geographically focused
policing initiatives: a meta-analytical review. Journal of Experimental
Criminology, 7(4), 347–374.
Brayley, H., & Cockbain, E. (2014). British children can be trafficked too: Towards
an inclusive definition of internal child sex trafficking. Child Abuse Review, 
23(3), 171–184.
Bryman, A. (2001). Social Research Methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bullock, K., Clarke, R., & Tilley, N. (Eds.). (2010). Situational Prevention of Organised
Crimes. Cullompton: Willan.
Carrington, P. (2009). Co-offending and the development of the delinquent
career. Criminology, 47(4), 301–355.
Child Exploitation and Online Protection Centre (CEOP). (2011). Out of Mind, 
Out of Sight: Breaking down the barriers to understanding child sexual exploi-
tation, Thematic Assessment. London: CEOP.
Clarke, R. V. (1980). Situational crime prevention: Theory and practice. British
Journal of Criminology, 20(2), 136–147.
Clarke, R. V. (Ed.). (1997). Situational Crime Prevention: Successful Case Studies 
(2nd ed.). Albany: Harrow and Heston.
Clarke, R. V., & Cornish, D. (1985). Modeling offenders’ decisions: A framework
for policy and research. In M. Tonry & N. Morris (Eds.), Crime and Justice: An
Annual Review of Research (Vol. 6). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cockbain, E. (2013a). Grooming and the ‘Asian sex gang predator’: the con-
struction of a racial crime threat. Race and Class, 54(2), 22–32.
Cockbain, E., (2013b). The trafficking of British children within the UK for sexual
exploitation: A situational analysis, PhD thesis, London: UCL.
Cockbain, E. (2015). Getting a foot in the closed door: Practical advice for
starting out in research into crime and policing issues. In E. Cockbain & J. 
Knutsson (Eds.), Applied Police Research: Challenges and Opportunities (pp. 
21–33). Abingdon: Routledge.
Page 12
Cockbain and Wortley ﻿Crime Sci (2015) 4:35  Page 12 of 12
Cockbain, E., Ashby, M., Brayley, H., (forthcoming). Immaterial boys? A large-
scale exploration of gender-based differences in child sexual exploitation
service users. Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment.
Cockbain, E., & Brayley, H. (2012). Child sexual exploitation and youth offend-
ing: A research note. European Journal of Criminology, 9(6), 689–700.
Cockbain, E., Brayley, H., & Laycock, G. (2011). Exploring Internal Child Sex
Trafficking Networks Using Social Network Analysis. Policing: A Journal of
Policy and Practice, 5(2), 144–157.
Cohen, S., & Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: A routine
activity approach. American Sociological Review, 44(4), 588–608.
Deslauriers-Varin, N., & Beauregard, E. (2010). Victims’ Routine Activities and Sex
Offenders’ Target Selection Scripts: A Latent Class Analysis. Sexual Abuse: A
Journal of Research and Treatment, 22(3), 315–342.
Everson, S. (2003). Repeat victimisation and prolific offending: chance or
choice? International Journal of Police Science and Management, 5(3),
180–194.
Felson, M. (2003). The Process of Co-Offending. In M. Smith & D. Cornish (Eds.),
Theory for Practice in Situational Crime Prevention, Crime Prevention Studies 
(Vol. 16, pp. 149–167). Monsey: Criminal Justice Press.
Felson, M., & Boba, R. (2010). Crime and Everyday Life (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
Fischer, D., & McDonald, W. (1998). Characteristics of intrafamilial and extrafa-
milial child sexual abuse. Child Abuse and Neglect, 22(9), 915–929.
Gannon, T., Ward, T., & Thakker, J. (2008). Rape: Psychopathology, theory and
treatment. Clinical Psychology Review, 28(6), 982–1008.
Hirschi, T., & Gottfredson, R. (1983). Age and the Explanation of Crime. Ameri-
can Journal of Sociology, 89(3), 552–584.
Home Office (2011). UK Action Plan on Tackling Child Sexual Exploitation, Lon-
don: Stationery Office.
Home Office (2012). First annual report of the Inter-departmental Ministerial
Group on Human Trafficking, London: Home Office.
Horvath, M., & Kelly, L. (2009). Multiple perpetrator rape: Naming an offence
and initial research findings. Journal of Sexual Aggression, 15(1), 83–96.
Horvath, M., & Woodhams, J. (Eds.). (2013). Handbook on the Study of Multiple
Perpetrator Rape. Abingdon: Routledge.
House of Commons. (2013). Child sexual exploitation and the response to
localised grooming, Home Affairs Select Committee, Second Report of Session
2013–14. London: The Stationery Office.
Jago, S., Arocha, L., Brodie, I., Melrose, M., Pearce, J., & Warrington, C. (2011).
What’s going on to safeguard children and young people from sexual exploi-
tation? How local partnerships respond to child sexual exploitation. Luton: 
University of Bedfordshire.
Kreft, I., & de Leeuw, J. (1998). Introducing Multilevel Modelling. London: Sage.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology 
(2nd ed.). London: Sage.
Laczko, F., & Gozdziak, E. (2005). Data and research on human trafficking: a
global survey. Geneva: International Organization for Migration.
Leclerc, B., Felson, M. (2014). Routine Activities Preceding Adolescent Sexual
Abuse of Younger Children. Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treat-
ment (online advanced publication version).
McGloin J., & Nguyen H. (2011). The Importance of Studying Co-Offending
Networks for Criminological Theory and Policy, paper presented at the
Third Annual Illicit Networks Workshop.
McGloin, J., & Nguyen, H. (2012). It was my idea: Considering the instigation of
co-offending. Criminology, 50(2), 463–494.
McGloin, J., Sullivan, C., Piquero, A., & Bacon, S. (2008). Investigating the stabil-
ity of co-offending and co-offenders among a sample of youthful offend-
ers. Criminology, 46(1), 155–188.
McGuire, M. (2012). Organised Crime in the Digital Age. London: The John Grieve
Centre for Policing and Community Safety.
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. (2001). Birds of a feather: Homophily
in social networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 415–444.
Meleagrou-Hitchens, A., & Brun, H. (2013). A Neo Nationalist Network: The
English Defence League and Europe’s Counter-Jihad Movement. London: 
International Centre of the Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence.
Miller, L. (2013). Rape: Sex crime, act of violence or naturalistic adaptation? 
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 19(1), 67–81. 
Ministry of Justice. (2010). Conviction histories of offenders between the ages
of 10 and 52. Ministry of Justice Statistics Bulletin, London: Ministry of
Justice.
Ministry of Justice. (2011). Statistics on Race and the Criminal Justice System
2010. London: Ministry of Justice.
Ministry of Justice, Home Office and the Office for National Statistics. (2013).
An Overview of Sexual Offending in England and Wales, statistical bulletin.
London: Ministry of Justice, Home Office and the Office for National
Statistics.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and Assessment. New York: John Wiley.
Morselli, C. (2009). Inside Criminal Networks. New York: Springer.
Nomis (2013). 2011 Census data, Office for National Statistics, last accessed
from [URL: "http://www.nomisweb.co.uk/"] http://www.nomisweb.co.uk/.
Reason, M., & Garcia, B. (2007). Approaches to the newspaper archive: content
analysis and press coverage of Glasgow’s Year of Culture. Media, Culture
and Society, 29(2), 304–331.
Reiss, A. (1988). Co-offending and criminal careers. Crime and Justice: A Review
of Research, 10, 117–170.
Simon, L. (1997). Do criminal offenders specialize in crime types? Applied and
Preventive Psychology, 6(1), 35–53.
Simon, L. (2000). An examination of the assumptions of specialization, mental
disorder and dangerousness in sex offenders. Behavioral Sciences and the
Law, 18(2–3), 275–308.
Smallbone, S., Marshall, W., & Wortley, R. (2008). Preventing Child Sexual Abuse: 
Evidence. Policy and Practice, Cullompton: Willan.
Smallbone, S., & Wortley, R. (2000). Child sexual abuse in Queensland: Offender
characteristics and modus operandi. Brisbane: Queensland Crime
Commission.
Smallbone, S., & Wortley, R. (2004). Onset, persistence and versatility of offend-
ing among adult males convicted of sexual offences against children. 
Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment, 16(4), 285–298.
Van Mastrigt, S., & Farrington, D. (2009). Co-Offending, Age, Gender and Crime
Types: Implications for Criminal Justice Policy. British Journal of Criminol-
ogy, 49(4), 552–573.
Warr, M. (1996). Organization and Instigation in Delinquent Groups. Criminol-
ogy, 34(1), 11–37.
Winterdyk, J., & Reichel, P. (2010). Introduction. European Journal of Criminology, 
Special Issue: Human Trafficking: Issues and Perspectives, 7(1), 5–10.
Wortley, R (2012).‘Exploring the person-situation interaction in situational
crime prevention’. In: N. Tilley. G. Farrell (eds.) The Reasoning Criminologist: 
essays in honour of Ronald V. Clarke (pp 170–179) Abingdon: Routledge.
Wortley, R., & Smallbone, S. (2006a). Applying situational principles to sexual
offenses against children. In R. Wortley & S. Smallbone (Eds.), Situational
Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse (pp. 7–36). New York: Criminal Justice
Press.
Wortley, R., & Smallbone, S. (2006b). Introduction. In R. Wortley & S. Smallbone
(Eds.), Situational Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse (pp. 1–6). New York: 
Criminal Justice Press.
Wortley, R., & Smallbone, S. (Eds.). (2006c). Situational Prevention of Child Sexual
Abuse. New York: Criminal Justice Press.
