Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.8 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
Keywords: Child sexual abuse; Sexual crimes; Youth-oriented organisations; Institutional abuse; Situational crime prevention; Offender-based research
CrossMarkDomains[1]: springer.com
ModDate: 2015/10/16 15:33:33+02'00'
Subject: Crime Science, doi:10.1186/s40163-015-0044-3
Creator: Springer
Title: Child sexual abuse in youth-oriented organisations: tapping into situational crime prevention from the offender’s perspective
CrossMarkDomains[2]: springerlink.com
robots: noindex
doi: 10.1186/s40163-015-0044-3
CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
CreationDate: 2015/10/14 20:10:00+05'30'
Author: Benoit Leclerc
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2015-10-14T20:10+05:30
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Springer
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2015-10-16T15:33:33+02:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2015-10-16T15:33:33+02:00
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.8 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Child sexual abuse; Sexual crimes; Youth-oriented organisations; Institutional abuse; Situational crime prevention; Offender-based research
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: doi:10.1186/s40163-015-0044-3
xmp:dc:publisher: Springer Berlin Heidelberg
xmp:dc:description: Crime Science, doi:10.1186/s40163-015-0044-3
xmp:dc:subject: Child sexual abuse; Sexual crimes; Youth-oriented organisations; Institutional abuse; Situational crime prevention; Offender-based research
xmp:dc:title: Child sexual abuse in youth-oriented organisations: tapping into situational crime prevention from the offender’s perspective
xmp:dc:creator: Benoit Leclerc; Jessica Feakes; Jesse Cale
xmp:crossmark:DOI: 10.1186/s40163-015-0044-3
xmp:crossmark:MajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
xmp:crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:crossmark:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:prism:url: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40163-015-0044-3
xmp:prism:doi: 10.1186/s40163-015-0044-3
xmp:prism:issn: 2193-7680
xmp:prism:aggregationType: journal
xmp:prism:publicationName: Crime Science
xmp:prism:copyright: Leclerc et al.
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2010-04-23
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:pdfx:doi: 10.1186/s40163-015-0044-3
xmp:pdfx:robots: noindex
xmp:pdfx:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:e35bd633-a8ac-49b4-88dd-ce1eb7431f4b
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:1c20a827-0994-4390-b6f0-4ed4434054ee
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:7beb4166-afd6-4629-885e-e8dcbdf997bf
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2015-10-14T20:10:31+05:30
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:7c8a48da-013d-48e6-961d-b07be2ec3558
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2015-10-14T20:11:09+05:30
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkMajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrosMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: robots
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://crossref.org/crossmark/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: crossmark
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Crossmark Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Usual same as prism:doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The date when a publication was publishe.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: seq Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://prismstandard.org/namespaces/basic/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: prism
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Prism Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: This element provides the url for an article or unit of content. The attribute platform is optionally allowed for situations in which multiple URLs must be specified. PRISM recommends that a subset of the PCV platform values, namely “mobile” and “web”, be used in conjunction with this element. NOTE: PRISM recommends against the use of the #other value allowed in the PRISM Platform controlled vocabulary. In lieu of using #other please reach out to the PRISM group at prism-wg@yahoogroups.com to request addition of your term to the Platform Controlled Vocabulary.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: url
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The Digital Object Identifier for the article. The DOI may also be used as the dc:identifier. If used as a dc:identifier, the URI form should be captured, and the bare identifier should also be captured using prism:doi. If an alternate unique identifier is used as the required dc:identifier, then the DOI should be specified as a bare identifier within prism:doi only. If the URL associated with a DOI is to be specified, then prism:url may be used in conjunction with prism:doi in order to provide the service endpoint (i.e. the URL).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ISSN for an electronic version of the issue in which the resource occurs. Permits publishers to include a second ISSN, identifying an electronic version of the issue in which the resource occurs (therefore e(lectronic)Issn. If used, prism:eIssn MUST contain the ISSN of the electronic version.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: issn
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Volume number
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: volume
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Issue number
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: number
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Starting page
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: startingPage
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Ending page
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: endingPage
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The aggregation type specifies the unit of aggregation for a conBOOKMARKS:
Child sexual abuse in youth-oriented organisations: tapping into situational crime prevention from the offender’s perspective
  Abstract
  Background
  Theoretical background
    Previous empirical research on child sexual offenders in youth-oriented organisations and their offending patterns
    Situational crime prevention and child sexual abuse
    Gaining insights on prevention by talking to sexual offenders
    Offender-based research
  Current study
  Methods
    Sample
    Procedure
  Results
  Discussion
  Conclusion
  Authors’ contributions
  References
Page 1
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28
DOI 10.1186/s40163-015-0044-3
RESEARCH  Open Access
Child sexual abuse in youth‑oriented
organisations: tapping into situational crime
prevention from the offender’s perspective
Benoit Leclerc1*, Jessica Feakes1 and Jesse Cale2
Abstract 
How to prevent child sexual abuse in youth-oriented organisations is a concern in our society for a number of reasons. 
One of these is that evidence indicates that sexual offenders, once they are recruited by a youth-oriented organisa-
tion, have the opportunity to abuse children for years before being detected and/or arrested. This phenomenon is
also under intense media scrutiny, which is likely to lead parents and society in a direction of panic. In the tradition of
offender-based research, and using a sample of 23 Canadian adult sex offenders who offended in a youth-oriented
organisation (e.g., schools), we examined self-reported data from a situational crime prevention perspective. We
specifically focused on information provided by offenders on three dimensions: (1) how to identify potential offend-
ers during recruitment interviews; (2) what policies or regulations to implement in youth-oriented organisations to
prevent child sexual abuse; and, (3) what parents could do to reduce the risk of sexual victimisation of their children. 
Then, the 25 situational prevention measures table is adopted to provide an organisational framework to map out
suggestions made by offenders to inform prevention.
Keywords:  Child sexual abuse, Sexual crimes, Youth-oriented organisations, Institutional abuse, Situational crime
prevention, Offender-based research
Background
Empirical research on the phenomenon of child sexual
abuse in youth-oriented organisations is critical for guiding
prevention initiatives. One of the most problematic issues
associated with the context of sexual offending in youth-
oriented organisations is that it provides a setting in which
offenders can repeatedly access children for sexual contact
with opportunities for actual abuse and a decreased likeli-
hood of being reported to authorities. Leclerc and Cale
(2015) indicated that offenders reported having had worked
in an organisation for an average of 16 years before being
caught. Another important facet of this phenomenon
as pointed out by van Dam (2001) is that many offenders
can move from one organisation to another without being
reported to authorities if discovered because work col-
leagues may be reluctant to tell on them due to personal
*Correspondence: b.leclerc@griffith.edu.au
1 School of Criminology and Criminal Justice, Mt Gravatt Campus, Griffith
University, Queensland 4111, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
relationships. This context, in part, increases the risk of
offenders sexually abusing a high number of victims as indi-
cated in the literature (e.g., Erooga et al. 2012; Leclerc and
Cale 2015; Sullivan and Beech 2004). Under these circum-
stances, any form of empirical data that can facilitate and
guide prevention practices is indispensable. One method to
provide additional insights into how best to prevent a crime
phenomenon from occurring is through asking offend-
ers themselves—an approach coined as offender-based
research (Bernasco 2010). In this tradition, the focus of this
study is to provide information for the prevention of sex-
ual offenses in youth-oriented organisations through self-
reported data obtained from offenders who have sexually
abused children in this particular setting.
Theoretical background
Previous empirical research on child sexual offenders
in youth‑oriented organisations and their offending patterns
Excluding child sexual offenses committed in the Cath-
olic church specifically (see Terry and Ackerman 2008),
© 2015 Leclerc et al. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, 
and indicate if changes were made.
Page 2
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 2 of 12
the bulk of empirical evidence accumulated from sex
offenders working in youth-oriented organisations and
their offending patterns arises from three main bod-
ies of work (i.e.,  Erooga et al. 2012; Leclerc and Cale
2015; Leclerc et al. 2005; Sullivan and Beech 2004; Sul-
livan et al. 2011). In the UK, Erooga et al. (2012) used a
sample of 19 offenders who were incarcerated or in the
community under the supervision of the National Proba-
tion Service. Leclerc and colleagues used a sample of 23
Canadian incarcerated or treated offenders and, Sullivan
and colleagues examined a UK sample of 41 offenders in
treatment. We briefly review four key dimensions that
have emerged from these studies as follows: (1) crimi-
nal histories of offenders; (2) offender access to organi-
sations; (3) victim selection; and, (4) offending patterns. 
These dimensions were selected because they offer a rele-
vant and evidence-based foundation for the current study
and have implications for situational crime prevention
and the prevention of this phenomenon from a crimino-
logical perspective more broadly.
In terms of criminal histories of offenders, Sullivan
and Beech (2004) found that in their sample, offenders
reported sexually abusing an average of 48 victims up
until they were caught. At their first sex offense, 49 % of
these offenders were older than 21 years of age and 37 % 
had never been convicted for a prior sexual offense. In
Leclerc and Cale’s (2015) study, the number of victims
reported per offender was on average 21 victims. Consist-
ent with Sullivan and Beech, the average age of offend-
ers at their first self-reported sexual offence was 23 years
old. Furthermore, of all offenders, 78 % had never been
arrested for a sexual offence prior to being caught and
convicted for their current offences, which is as twice
as many as what was reported by Sullivan and Beech. 
In a follow-up study, and consistent with Leclerc and
Cale’s (2015) findings, Sullivan et al. (2011) added that
organisational offenders were less likely to have previous
sexual convictions compared to both intrafamilial and
other extrafamilial offenders (16 % as opposed to 35 and
61 %, respectively). They were also more likely to abuse a
higher number of victims compared to these two groups
of offenders. These findings show that a large number
of offenders had not been discovered before their par-
ticipation in the respective studies, which may partly also
explain why the number of reported victims is high.
With respect to access to organisations, Erooga et al. 
(2012) reported that no offenders in their study openly
admitted to gaining access to organisations for the pur-
pose of engaging in sexual contact with children. About
half of these offenders (53 %) reported that they had no
awareness of a sexual interest in children prior to offend-
ing, potentially suggesting that a large proportion did. 
For example, Sullivan and Beech (2004) and Leclerc and 
Cale (2015) found that more than half of offenders in
their sample (57 and 52 %, respectively) sought work in a
youth-oriented organisation specifically for the purpose
of gaining access to children. Sullivan and Beech (2004) 
added that an additional 20 % indicated they were not
sure whether this was part of their motivation originally
and only 25 % clearly indicated that they did not seek
employment in youth-oriented organisations for gaining
access to children.
Interestingly, Leclerc and Cale’s (2015) findings are
consistent with those of Sullivan and Beech (2004) even
though the sample used is quite different. The sample
used by Sullivan and Beech (2004) was mostly com-
posed of religious-institutional offenders (n  = 27), but
also teachers (n = 10) and care workers (n = 4). In the
case of Leclerc and Cale (2015),  the setting in which
these offenders committed their offenses included sport-
ing activities, schools, foster care and a youth centre for
instance (see “Methods” section below for additional
details). These findings do differ dramatically from those
of Erooga et al. (2012). Nonetheless, what is clear is that
a potentially large proportion of offenders targets youth-
oriented organisations to gain access to potential victims. 
For example, the sample examined by Sullivan and Beech
consisted of treated offenders, which may suggest that
their findings are more reflective of the reality and as a
result, that a large proportion of these offenders actually
chose to work or volunteer in a youth-oriented organisa-
tion for gaining access to children.
Leclerc and Cale (2015) examined how offenders select
specific children in the context of youth-oriented organi-
sations. All of the offenders reported that they would
select children whom they knew had had some sort of
sexual contact in the past and/or whom they perceived
to know a lot about sex. Interestingly, almost all of the
offenders also indicated they were likely to select children
who they knew to have had attended a class at school on
sexuality (94 %).  These offenders’ perceptions of chil-
dren’s familiarity with sexuality are congruent with the
fact that offenders also perceived vulnerability in their
victims such as the need for emotional support (i.e., indi-
cated by 84 % of offenders in their sample) (Erooga et al. 
2012). Taken together, emotional vulnerability in addition
to perceived familiarity with sex/sexual activities seem to
represent important criteria upon which these offenders
are likely to select children for abuse.
In terms of the strategies adopted by offenders to sexu-
ally abuse children (sometimes labeled as ‘grooming’) in
youth-oriented organisations, manipulation emerges by
far as the norm (Colton and Vanstone 1996; Erooga et al. 
2012; Leclerc et al. 2005; van Dam 2001). Leclerc et al. 
(2005) examined the strategies adopted by these offend-
ers to gain victims’ trust and cooperation in addition to
Page 3
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 3 of 12
maintaining victims’ silence following abuse incidents. In
order to gain cooperation, most offenders indicated giv-
ing children attention, non-sexual touching, and saying
nice things about them while gradually introducing sex-
ual touching into the relationship (100, 96, 96, and 83 %,
respectively). The underlying theme emerging from this
evidence on modus operandi is that offenders are in close
proximity to potential victims and as a result, have the
opportunity to develop a trust-based relationship with
them often without the need to ask them to maintain
silence once sexual activities have been introduced into
the relationship (e.g., Leclerc et al. 2005; van Dam 2001).
Another interesting finding is that the majority of offend-
ers sexually abused their victims outside of the organi-
sational setting, which again is facilitated by the nature
of the relationship they have built with their victims ini-
tially. For example, Sullivan and Beech (2004) found that
85 % of their sample took the children away overnight at
some point and many offenders (68 %) reported taking
the children away overnight specifically for sexual activ-
ity purposes. Similarly, Leclerc and Cale (2015) found
that 78 % of offenders committed their offenses offsite
of youth-oriented organisations they were employed or
volunteering at. In particular, these offenders most often
used their own homes (52 %), took children for a drive in
their car (30 %) or used other isolated places (26 %).
Although evidence based knowledge is still quite lim-
ited, we can begin to see a profile of youth-oriented
organisation offenders that can be contrasted with more
conventional profiles of sexual offenders against chil-
dren that have emerged from research with offenders in
broader incarcerated and clinical settings. For example, 
they have far less extensive or non-existent criminal his-
tories upon entering youth-oriented organisations. This
means that these offenders are possibly more skilled at
evading detection, develop specific motivations to offend
after involvement with children through work or volun-
teer activities, and/or possibly a combination of both. For
example, a substantial proportion of offenders indicated
having sought employment in these contexts for the spe-
cific purpose of creating or exploiting opportunities to
offend, but many indicated they have not. Of course there
is the possibility that many offenders may not provide
truthful information along these lines, but this is none-
theless an important pattern to consider. Furthermore, 
the use of emotional manipulation facilitated by their
status and emotional proximity to children is paramount
in these contexts. Through the nature of the relationship
they can develop with children, they gain the opportu-
nity of exposing them to sexual activities in a manner
that eventually seems normal, take them places outside
the organisation for sexual activities specifically, and
neutralize, to some extent the risk of being discovered. 
Therefore, taking these patterns and unique contexts into
consideration it is necessary to consider what potential
prevention strategies may look like.
Situational crime prevention and child sexual abuse
Situational crime prevention represents the core of pre-
vention practices under the framework of environmen-
tal criminology. If environmental criminology seeks to
understand crime event patterns and criminal opportu-
nities, situational prevention seeks to dismantle them. 
Broadly speaking, environmental criminology is charac-
terized by the analysis of crime event patterns in space
and time, with the key aim of understanding opportuni-
ties to offend and preventing crime events from occur-
ring in the first place (Wortley and Mazerolle 2008). This
area of research primarily originated from grouping three
key theoretical approaches: (1) routine activity approach
(Cohen and Felson 1979); (2) the rational choice perspec-
tive (Cornish and Clarke 2008); and, (3) crime pattern
theory (Brantingham and Brantingham 1978) that taken
together tap into understanding criminal opportunities
(Felson and Clarke 1998).
Embedded in the rational choice approach, situational
crime prevention focuses on the implementation of situ-
ational measures to reduce criminal opportunities or
control crime precipitators (Cornish and Clarke 2003; 
Wortley 2001). The main objective of this approach is
to prevent crime before it occurs by manipulating the
environment into which it is likely to be committed. This
objective is based on the premise that the environment
plays a role in shaping the decisions and actions adopted
by offenders. In other words, the environment is not a
passive backdrop against which offenses simply occur, 
but rather influences what happens during criminal
events. A classification of measures has been designed
over the years to provide practitioners with a template to
use for guidance surrounding the design and application
of situational crime prevention measures (Cornish and
Clarke 2003). The most recent classification includes the
following techniques: (1) Increasing efforts, (2) Increas-
ing risk, (3) Reducing rewards, (4) Reducing provocations
and, (5) Removing excuses. With these techniques alone, 
a total of 25 prevention measures are listed in the clas-
sification model developed by Cornish and Clarke (2003).
Situational prevention is a relatively new concept in the
field of sexual offending. As a result, studies dedicated to
examining situational prevention of child sexual abuse
are scarce (see Leclerc et al. 2015). Based on specific type
of setting in which child sexual abuse is likely to occur
(i.e., organisational, public, domestic) and using the clas-
sification of 25 situational prevention measures, Wort-
ley and Smallbone (2006) discussed a number of ways in
which situational crime prevention principles could be
Page 4
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 4 of 12
applied to prevent child sexual abuse. In the context of
Catholic Church specifically, Terry and Ackerman (2008) 
made a number of suggestions for situational crime pre-
vention techniques. Through script analysis, Leclerc et al. 
(2011) demonstrated the relevance and utility of identi-
fying and understanding crime-commission processes
in order to stimulate thinking about potential situational
crime prevention measures. Kaufman and his colleagues
applied the situational crime prevention model designed
by Clarke (1995) to the opportunity structure of child
sexual abuse in order to better inform prevention initia-
tives (Kaufman et al. 2006). More recently, Kaufman et al. 
(2012) specifically illustrated an approach to obtain input
from staff and volunteers in organisations for prevention
purposes. To our knowledge, however, very few studies
have previously asked offenders about how to actually
prevent child sexual abuse.
Gaining insights on prevention by talking to sexual
offenders
Only in a handful studies have sexual offenders been
asked about their view on how best to prevent child sex-
ual abuse (Budin and Johnson 1989; Elliott et al. 1995).
Budin and Johnson (1989) surveyed 72 incarcerated adult
sexual offenders of children on the relative effectiveness
of a broad range of prevention methods—what works and
what does not—to prevent child sexual abuse. Offend-
ers in this sample were almost evenly divided between
incestuous offenders and non-incestuous offenders. Most
prominently, offenders reported that children should be
taught to report if they have been victimized, learn to
say no, know about the difference between appropriate
versus inappropriate touching and never get into cars
with strangers. On the other hand, few of these offend-
ers indicated that shouting, crying or not talking to stran-
gers were effective strategies for prevention. With respect
to what parents could do to prevent the sexual abuse of
their children, offenders suggested that parents should be
emotionally involved in their children’s lives. For exam-
ple, they indicated that parents should ask their children
periodically whether somebody has tried to touch them.
Elliott et al. (1995) surveyed 91 convicted adult child
sexual offenders about what they could recommend to
children, parents and teachers to prevent child sexual
abuse. In this sample, approximately one-third of offend-
ers did not know their victims (34 %),  another third
knew their victims but were not related to them (34 %),
and another third were related to their victims (32 %).
In terms of individual protection behaviors of children, 
these offenders suggested ways to prevent sexual abuse in
public places. For instance, they recommended that chil-
dren should avoid secluded places, never go into public
toilets alone, never walk to school alone, not accept car 
rides/lifts by strangers, knock on the door of a house if
they are being followed, always tell their parents where
they are going, and tell anyone if somebody abuses them. 
With respect to what parents could do to prevent abuse, 
offenders suggested that parents should be suspicious
when another adult is more interested in their child
than in them, teach children about sexuality and not to
keep secrets, and have family discussions about prevent-
ing child sexual abuse. Other suggestions included being
aware that there is a dangerous age when girls are becom-
ing women and knowing that some people, even family
members, could ask them to do sexual things. Regarding
what teachers could do to prevent sexual victimisation, 
offenders suggested that they should have discussions at
school to prompt children to disclose abuse, make sure
programs do not focus on stranger abuse, have children
role play what to do if they were attacked, have advertise-
ments in school about being safe, believe children if they
report abuse, and teach sex education.
Offender‑based research
The current study is situated in a situational crime pre-
vention framework but from the angle of offender-
based research in criminology. Offender-based research
involves examining data collected from a sample of
offenders (Bernasco 2010).  Too often overlooked in
social sciences, offender-based research is arguably the
most effective method to understand crime events sim-
ply because offenders are positioned to provide detailed
information that could not be revealed about offend-
ing otherwise. For example, police, victim and/or archi-
val data are limited in the ability to account for detailed
information about crime events. In fact, only offenders
are present from start to finish during crime events, that
is, from crime preparation to completion. Therefore, only
with offenders is it possible to reconstruct the complete
crime-commission process and understand what may
have prevented them from acting in a particular way or
how they may have overcame obstacles during the course
of actions leading to crime. The method of offender-
based research is obviously well suited for the purpose of
rational choice approach from which researchers seek to
put themselves in the shoes of the offender to understand
how crime events occur for prevention purposes.
Offender-based research is far from new. For example, 
Edwin Sutherland (1937) was among the first to investi-
gate crime through the eyes of offenders—professional
thieves in particular. During the past few decades, sev-
eral scholars have interviewed offenders about the crimes
they commit, how they select their targets, what may
have prevented them from offending in certain situations, 
and also what, if any information they would provide for
prevention purposes. One defining study in this area was
Page 5
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 5 of 12
conducted by Wright and Decker (1994) on active bur-
glars through snowball sampling. Since then, burglary is
potentially the crime that has most often been examined
through the lens of offenders (e.g., Homel et al. 2013; Nee
and Meenaghan 2006; Rengert and Walsilchick 2000).
Other common examples of studies include car theft
(Copes and Cherbonneau 2006),  drug dealing (Jacobs
1999; Jacques and Bernasco 2013) and armed robbery
(Wright and Decker 1997).
Jacques and Bonobo (2015) presented five ways by
which offender-based research can be used for inform-
ing situational crime prevention. The first way to inform
situational prevention is by determining what works to
prevent crime. The second way is to find out what pre-
vention measures should be put into place to prevent
crime. The third way is to learn about the reasons why a
given prevention strategy is effective. The fourth way to
provide evidence for situational prevention purposes is
to understand how offenders manage to overcome par-
ticular prevention measures. The last way to inform situ-
ational prevention practices is to collect data on negative
outcomes of prevention measures if any, such as crime
displacement. The current study focuses on the sec-
ond recommendation outlined by Jacques and Bonobo. 
The goal is to inform what prevention measures may be
adopted to prevent child sexual abuse in youth-oriented
organisations. If the objective of one’s research is to think
through the offender’s eyes for prevention purposes, 
offender-based research is arguably best placed to inform
situational crime prevention initiatives.
Current study
Using a Canadian sample of adult sexual offenders who
committed their offenses in youth-oriented organisations
(see also Leclerc and Cale 2015; Leclerc et al. 2005 for
more information on this sample), the current study aims
to tap into insights that can be provided by offenders for
prevention practices in this particular setting. Budin and
Johnson (1989) and Elliott et al. (1995) have previously
asked offenders on their views toward preventing child
sexual abuse. With a sample considerably larger than
the one used in the current study, these studies provided
insights into what offenders think in terms of prevention. 
However, their sample contained a large proportion of
stranger and/or incestuous offenders. In this context, it is
somewhat difficult to reconcile what these findings mean
for preventing sexual abuse in youth-oriented organisa-
tions because their recommendations were not specific
to this setting. In other words, most of these recommen-
dations may not be directly applicable to sexual offences
committed in youth-oriented organisations. Following
the argument made by situational prevention theorists
(e.g., Clarke 2008), we believe that the more specific the 
crime data available, the more effective it can be to con-
ceptualize situational prevention measures.
The ultimate objective of the current study is to tap
into situational prevention measures that could assist in
preventing child sexual abuse in youth-oriented organi-
sations from the perspective of offenders who have actu-
ally abused in this setting. First, we examine the answers
provided by offenders to the following questions: (1) 
how to identify potential offenders during recruitment
interviews; (2) what policies or regulations to imple-
ment in youth-oriented organisations to prevent child
sexual abuse; and, (3) what parents could do to reduce
the risk of sexual abuse victimisation. Second, we map
out these suggestions onto the twenty-five situational
prevention measures classification table designed
by Cornish and Clarke (2003) to clarify what the data
means for situational prevention (i.e., which strategies
and measures are reported by offenders). Even though
the sample used in this study is relatively small, it has
the advantage of being crime specific to the phenom-
enon under study, which provides an ideal context for
thinking of pertinent situational prevention measures. 
As we are aware of no similar work in the area of child
sexual abuse in youth-oriented organisations, this study
makes a much needed contribution to current evidence
on offending patterns.
Methods
Sample
The sample consisted of 23 adult males who had admit-
ted to committing a sexual offense against a person
less than 18 years of age through work or volunteering
activities in an institutional context in Canada. These
offenders were recruited through treatment centres in
the province of Quebec and the Correctional Service
of Canada (CSC) in 2002. The research protocols were
conducted according to the ethical guidelines stipulated
by the Research Ethics Board of the Université de Mon-
tréal during the time period in which the participants
were interviewed. The mean age of the participants was
49.7 years (SD = 8.6 years). Just over half had never been
married (52.1 %) and an equal proportion had a univer-
sity degree. With respect to sexual orientation, a total
of 34.1 % reported being heterosexual, 39.1 % reported
being homosexual and 26.1 % indicated a sexual attrac-
tion to both males and females. Regarding the setting in
which these offenders committed their offenses, eight
had gained access to sexually abuse children through
sporting activities [i.e., fencing, baseball (2), hockey (2),
soccer, gymnastics, softball] and five did through schools
[i.e.,  teacher (4),  school bus driver].  In addition, three
were in the role of a foster carer (one for child protec-
tion services), two were involved in scouts, one offender
Page 6
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 6 of 12
worked for a Big Brothers association, three for a youth
centre, and one for a newspaper delivery agency.
Procedure
Participants were first identified by a contact person in
each treatment centre/prison and approached by a prac-
titioner for participation in the study. Those who agreed
then met with the first author who invited them to com-
plete a modified version of the Modus Operandi Ques-
tionnaire (MOQ) (Kaufman 1991), a questionnaire that
emphasizes child sexual abusers’ offending behaviors
prior to, during, and following the abuse. This version of
the MOQ includes three open-ended questions for which
offenders were asked to provide suggestions for preven-
tion practices—the foundation of the current study. The
questions were the following: (1) how to identify poten-
tial offenders during recruitment interviews, (2) what
policies or regulations to implement in youth-oriented
organisations to prevent child sexual abuse and, (3) what
parents could do to reduce the risk of sexual abuse vic-
timisation. Before participation, participants were told
that their involvement in this study was strictly volun-
tary. They were presented with an information sheet, 
which explained the research project, its purpose and
benefits for research and its potential consequences 
(e.g., emotional stress) on participants. Each participant
signed a consent form, which stated that the information
would be used for research purposes only. No incentives
for participation were provided. At the time of comple-
tion of the questionnaire, the first author was present and
assisted each participant if needed in order to make sure
they would understand the questions. The administration
of the questionnaire was completed in a private office to
preserve confidentiality and ensure anonymity.
Results
On the first question, Table 1 shows examples of sug-
gestions made by sexual offenders working in youth-
oriented organisations on how to identify potential
offenders during recruitment interviews in these organi-
sations. While conducting criminal record checks was
the most common suggestion made by offenders, inves-
tigating prospective employees’ motivations for working
with children was also suggested as an important facet to
examine. Others suggestions involved examining candi-
dates past in terms of sexual development, alcohol abuse
and work experience. More specific questions on how
candidates spend their spare time and their preference
for working with children (e.g., hobbies, sports) were also
reported.
Table 1  Suggestions made by sexual offenders for preventing child sexual abuse in youth-oriented organisations
Questions  Examples of suggestions
How to identify potential offenders during recruitment interviews
What policies or regulations to implement in youth-oriented organisations
to prevent child sexual abuse
What parents could do to reduce the risk of sexual abuse victimisation 
Verifying criminal records (n = 8)
Investigating motivations for working with children (n = 3)
Investigating sexual development history (n = 3)
Examining previous work history with children (n = 2)
Investigating preferences for children (n = 2)
Asking references from past employers (n = 1)
Investigating problems with drugs/alcohol (n = 1)
Investigating how spare time is spent (n = 1)
Never leave a child alone with an adult (n = 15)
Eliminate hidden areas in organisations (n = 2)
Prohibit staff/volunteer to take children home (n = 2)
Integrate youth education programs (n = 2)
Prohibit adults to shower with children (n = 1)
Disclose the abuse immediately to authorities (n = 1)
Install surveillance technology (CCTV) (n = 1)
Design windows that overlook corridors (n = 1)
Avoid opportunities for staff to have ‘special’ relationships with children
(n = 1)
Prohibit physical contact between adults and children (n = 1)
Introduce committee panel on policies and regulations involving parents
(n = 1)
Talk to children about sexuality and sexual abuse (n = 6)
Build and keep an open dialogue with children (n = 4)
Take interest and get involved in children’s activities (n = 3)
Be wary of adults (n = 3)
Provide children with information on offenders (n = 2)
Monitor children closely (n = 2)
Teach children to say no (n = 2)
Get educated (n = 2)
Participate in the activities of the organization (n = 2)
Page 7
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 7 of 12
The second question asked offenders what policies or
regulations should be implemented in youth-oriented
organisations to prevent child sexual abuse. Interest-
ingly, a number of the responses given by offenders
tapped into the environmental design of youth-oriented
organisations. For instance, offenders indicated the need
to eliminate hidden areas, design windows that overlook
corridors and also to install CCTV surveillance cameras. 
Other responses emphasised the need for more gen-
eral policies/rules for increasing surveillance, such as
never leaving a staff member alone with a child, prohib-
iting staff from using the same showers as children and, 
importantly, policies preventing staff from bringing chil-
dren to their home. Some offenders even went as far as
to suggest to prohibit physical contact between staff and
children.
The final question asked offenders what parents could
do to reduce the risk of sexual abuse victimisation. Many
of the responses suggested the need for parents to have
a close relationship with their child characterized by
open communication. It was also suggested that parents
actively participate in the activities of the organisation. 
Two suggestions focused on the need for prevention edu-
cation for both parents and children (i.e., teach children
to say no and talk about sexuality). Two other suggestions
involved the need for children to be suspicious of adults
and have more information on offenders.
In summary, the important dimensions that emerged
from offenders on how best to prevent sexual abuse in
the context of youth-oriented organisations involved
attention toward recruitment and targeted screening
practices, the physical environments of youth-oriented
organisations, strict policies around contact between
staff and children, and finally, open and communicative
relationships between children and their parents/caregiv-
ers. While some of these may seem obvious at first, and
even commonplace, others require consideration as to
their relevance and how some may best be implemented
in youth-oriented organisational contexts.
Discussion
The main objective of this study was to learn about how
to prevent child sexual abuse in youth-oriented organisa-
tions through the lens of offenders themselves. Adult sex-
ual offenders who were previously convicted for sexually
abusing a child in youth-oriented organisations provided
recommendations for prevention. We have reviewed
these suggestions above. We now turn our attention
to discuss how these suggestions could be translated
into situational crime prevention measures. The most
recent classification of situational prevention meas-
ures designed by Cornish and Clarke (2003) is used as a
framework to map out ways to prevent child sexual abuse 
in youth-oriented organisations following these sugges-
tions (Table 2).
The first question asked to offenders focused on how
to detect potential offenders during recruitment inter-
views, that is, before they get access to potential victims. 
In this case, the suggestions given by offenders focused
on controlling access to facilities because the objective
is to stop potential offenders from getting employed into
these organisations in the first place. One such measure
is to examine past criminal records, which is a prudent
suggestion and likely common practice in many of such
organisations. However, there are a few problems related
to this measure. First, recent studies have found that sub-
stantial proportions of offenders had no criminal record
before being detected in these organisations (Erooga
et al. 2012; Leclerc and Cale 2015; Sullivan and Beech
2004). Second, Erooga et al. (2012) identified some cases
for which these verifications had not been conducted by
an organization because offenders were employed before
criminal record checks were possible or because offend-
ers sexually abused a child outside a regulated system
(e.g., context where parents hired a private tutor for their
child). Clearly, criminal record checks should be auto-
matically conducted for candidates seeking employment
or volunteering positions in youth-oriented organisa-
tions. However, other measures are essential to screen
for potential offenders and should be used in conjunction
with criminal record checks (Cleary 2012). One sugges-
tion made by offenders is to investigate previous work
experiences and ask for references of potential candi-
dates. This suggestion again seems logical and simple to
adopt and is probably common in many organisations. 
However, Erooga et al. (2012) emphasized the impor-
tance of seeking information from a number of histori-
cal sources. This can be resource intensive and requires
substantial support from human resources. For example, 
some previously detected offenders may try to overcome
these measures by not providing truthful or complete
references.
Other suggestions made by offenders were related to
the content that should characterise recruitment inter-
views conducted with candidates. Offenders reported
asking for specific motivations for working with chil-
dren and how candidates spend their spare time outside
of work. To some extent, these suggestions underlie the
notion of emotional congruence with children—a well-
established concept in sex offending literature (e.g., Fin-
kelhor 1984).  In line with these suggestions, previous
literature has also indicated that a preference for spend-
ing time with children over adults is a warning sign to
identify potential sexual offenders (e.g., van Dam 2001).
However, this is a difficult issue to approach from a
youth-oriented organisational standpoint because one
Page 8
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 8 of 12
Table 2 Mapping out suggestions of prevention made by sexual offenders in youth-oriented organisations onto the
twenty-five situational prevention measures framework
Increase the effort  Increase the risks  Reduce the
rewards 
Reduce provocations Remove excuses
1. Target harden
 Talk to children about sexuality
and sexual abuse
 Build and keep an open dia-
logue with children
 Teach children to say no
2. Control access to facilities
 Children-focused recruitment
interview
 Verifying criminal records
 Asking references from past
employers
 Signing in signing out
3. Screen exits
 CCTV overlooking entrance/exit 
6. Extend guardianship
 Parents participation in the
activities of the organization
 Two staff with children
 Collection of children only by
parents
7. Assist natural surveillance
 Eliminate hidden areas in
organisations
 Design windows that overlook
corridors
 Whistleblowers policies
 CCTV within the organizational
setting
8. Reduce anonymity
 Uniforms for staff and children 
11. Conceal targets
12. Remove targets
13. Identify property
4. Deflect offenders 9. Utilize place managers
 Management obligation to
disclose abuse immediately to
authorities
 Staff supervision 
14. Disrupt markets
5. Control tools/weapons
 Mobile phones no contact
policies
 Prohibit gift giving 
10. Strengthen formal surveil-
lance
 Install surveillance technology
(CCTV) 
15. Deny benefits 
16. Reduces frustrations/
stress
17. Avoid disputes
18. Reduce emotional arousal
 Prohibit adults to shower with
children
19. Neutralize peer pressure
20. Discourage imitation
 Awareness sessions for staff on
recent cases of unacceptable
conduct 
21. Set rules
 Code of conduct that prohibit
staff/volunteer to take children
home
22. Post instructions
 Signs “adults only”
 “children only”
23. Alert conscience
 Integrate youth education
programs
 Ethics training for all staff
24. Assist compliance
 Committee panel for rules and
policies with parents
 Clarify consequences of non-
compliance
 External audit for facilitating
disclosure
25. Control drugs/alcohol
 Strict alcohol and drug policy
would expect that some degree of emotional congruence
is necessary to work successfully with children in these
contexts. In addition, it may be illegal to ask for personal
information on activities of candidates in some countries. 
The question then becomes how should individuals be
subsequently screened? Suggestions put forth must be
considered in conjunction with a wider breadth of infor-
mation on prospective employees, and not in isolation
(Cleary 2012).
Erooga et al. (2012) also identified a much more pro-
found problem related to interviews. Many offenders in
their sample reported that the recruitment interview they
had to attend before being given a position contained no
discussion with regard to children and expectations of
how children should be treated by staff in the organisa-
tion. None of the offenders described an organisational
culture which was directly focused on the welfare of
children. Induction and child protection procedures
were not explained to them. Coupled with our find-
ings, this literature suggests that a rigorous step-by-step
process for screening during recruitment interviews is
needed by organisations. These should focus on children 
in particular and how best to serve their needs. Cleary’s
(2012) model on safe recruitment is consistent with this
view.
Cleary (2012) proposed a model for safer recruitment
of adults seeking positions in youth-oriented organi-
sations—PICK (Plan, Identify, Check and Keep).  This
model encapsulates the findings above and follows a
four-stage process with at its core rests the notion of a
safeguarding culture. This notion refers to the values and
actions of organisations and the ability of those in charge
of those organisations to effectively safeguard children
(Cleary 2012). The first step of the model is the need for
planning by organisations. Planning involves providing a
clear definition of the role of staff, safeguarding responsi-
bilities and the values and actions of the organisation in
job descriptions. Expectations from candidates have to be
set clearly as well as the procedures to undertake against
those who fail to protect children. Recruiters should be
trained in line with the values and actions adopted by the
organisation where the protection of children should pre-
vail and tools to assess values, behaviors, motives, skills
and experience for working with children developed. 
Page 9
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 9 of 12
For the second step, that is, to identify potential offend-
ers, the model recommends a face to face interview to
assess many of the factors just discussed above (i.e., moti-
vations, preferences).  The third step where checks are
conducted should include the verification of references, 
criminal record checks and ID checks as well as the com-
pletion of a self-disclosure form that emphasises the suit-
ability of the candidate for working with children. Lastly, 
the fourth step involves keeping the focus on a safeguard-
ing culture through a thorough induction of new recruits, 
ongoing training, regular supervision and management
of performance issues, the use of codes of conduct and
whistleblowing policies. As can be seen, the model itself
also taps into a range of situational prevention strategies, 
such as increasing efforts, increasing risks and removing
excuses. However, as mentioned by Cleary (2012), a rig-
orous recruitment process is necessary but again by no
means sufficient in and of itself.
The second question asked offenders about policies
and rules that should be implemented in youth-oriented
organisations to prevent child sexual abuse. Interest-
ingly, despite the fact that a majority of offenders did not
abuse children onsite of the organisation (Leclerc and
Cale 2015) many of their prevention suggestions had a
focus on situations; many suggestions gave rise to a large
range of potential situational prevention measures in
the organisations themselves. This evidence suggest that
such measures may be targeted at detecting manipula-
tion processes in addition to potential abuse incidents. A
number of these suggestions are applicable to the meas-
ure of assisting natural surveillance by eliminating hidden
areas in the organisation, installing CCTV surveillance
cameras and designing windows overlooking corridors
in organisations such as schools. These measures require
the manipulation of the immediate physical environment
to facilitate supervision. On a situational level, these
measures are important to ensure increased supervision
of children and would limit situations in which a child
could be left alone with a staff unsupervised. One con-
sideration here is that several of such measures may not
be easily introduced in certain organisations, especially
in older facilities as this may also involve a considerable
financial investment in terms of changes to architec-
tural designs and physical buildings. However, a range of
measures specific to the physical layout of certain facili-
ties may be applicable and warrant consideration against
financial cost. For example, eliminating hidden areas may
also include simply prohibiting access to unused rooms
or buildings as these are by definition unsupervised.
Other suggestions made in relation to implementing
policies and rules include prohibiting staff from using
the same showers (or shower at the same time) as chil-
dren. This measure could be classified under reducing 
emotional arousal as showering with children may pre-
cipitate or increase sexual arousal of potential offenders. 
Posted policies/instructions, such as ‘adults only’ and
‘children only’ may assist to avoid this type of situation. 
These measures seem logical and even obvious, but may
in fact be less common than expected especially in organ-
isations that provide little to no guidance or rules to staff
regulating interactions and how staff should spend their
time with children (Erooga et al. 2012). In fact, the study
of Leclerc et al. (2005) indicated that some offenders sex-
ually abused a number of children in this specific context. 
Another suggestion made by offenders was to never leave
a child with a staff alone. This suggestion maps onto the
measure of extending guardianship. Accordingly, rules
requiring the presence of two staff with a child or a group
of children also aim to extend surveillance of potential
victims and could be adopted onsite but also offsite for
activities taking place outside the organisation (e.g., sport
competition trip). Reducing anonymity through uniforms
for staff and children could also assist in limiting oppor-
tunities for staff to find time alone with children unsu-
pervised especially when traffic of people may be high in
the organisation (see also Kaufman et al. 2012).
Offenders also reported that opportunities for staff
to develop ‘special’ relationships with children should
be limited and that physical contact between staff and
children prohibited. The first suggestion makes sense
in light of offender modus operandi evidence. Leclerc
et al. (2005) showed that these offenders benefit from
their status, which provides them with the opportunity
to use manipulation to develop intimate relationships
with vulnerable children for obtaining sexual contact (see
also Erooga et al. 2012). In addition, Erooga et al. (2012) 
indicated that expectations of staff and their relation-
ship with children were rarely made explicit to offend-
ers in their study. How to prevent relationships leading
to intimacy and sexual contact between an adult and a
child might be addressed by a combination of measures, 
such as increased supervision by the presence of two staff
with children, eliminating unsupervised areas and per-
haps introducing whistleblowing policies that foster dis-
cussion of potential issues consistent with a safeguarding
culture. Measures, such as improved staff supervision by
managers (Erooga et al. 2012) and ethics training (Cleary
2012) may also help highlight the development of inap-
propriate relationships and reinforce organisational mes-
sages about the importance of the welfare of children. 
From a situational prevention perspective, whistleblow-
ing maps onto assisting natural surveillance, whereas
staff supervision by place managers and ethics training
are best categorised under alerting conscience measures. 
Other measures consistent with this suggestion could be
to introduce policies for prohibiting the use of mobile
Page 10
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 10 of 12
phone between staff and children and prohibit gift giving, 
which refer to controlling tools that may facilitate abuse. 
For instance, relaxing of rules around the usage of mobile
phones has been the starting point for an offender sexu-
ally abusing a child in several cases (Colton et al. 2012).
Some offenders suggested to prohibit staff from bring-
ing children to their own home. This suggestion is con-
sistent with evidence on offending patterns and falls into
the category of situational prevention measures aimed
at setting rules. Leclerc and Cale (2015) found that most
episodes of sexual contact between offenders and their
victims occurred outside the organisation—most often
in the offender’s home. Other studies also showed that
many of these offenders take children for overnight trips
outside their work for establishing relationships prior to
sexual contact or for sexual contact specifically (Erooga
et al. 2012; Leclerc et al. 2005; Sullivan and Beech 2004).
Based on this evidence and what was reported by offend-
ers in this study, it appears sensible to limit contact
between staff and children outside the organisation again
by designing policies and rules that would prohibit these
situations from occurring. In addition, upon appointment
in a role all staff and volunteers should be provided with
a copy of the contract with the expectations of the com-
pany upon them (Cleary 2012). This document should
then be signed by new recruits, returned and retained as
proof that they have received a copy of their obligations
and expectations (Parkinson et al. 2012; see also Won-
nacott 2012). This measure indirectly taps into another
suggestion made by offenders, that is, introducing a com-
mittee panel for the development and management of
policies and rules in youth-oriented organisations involv-
ing parents, which falls under the measure of assist-
ing compliance. Controlling access to facilities through
procedures for signing in and signing out when arriving
and leaving youth-oriented organisations and screening
exists through CCTV could also be used for that pur-
pose. Lastly, awareness sessions of recent cases of unac-
ceptable conduct, such as bringing children home, could
be used to discourage imitation or reproduction of these
behaviors.
Another suggestion made by offenders is for the organ-
isation to disclose the abuse immediately to authorities. 
This suggestion has to be contextualised to be under-
stood. An issue with underreporting in youth-oriented
organisations is that offenders develop personal rela-
tionships with other staff and these relationships then
neutralise the potential of disclosure when sexual
contact between them and children occurs (van Dam
2001). Erooga et al. (2012) discussed this issue as well
and reported that staff are unlikely to question offend-
ers, their colleagues, in this context. Underreporting
may also be exacerbated by the fact that some children 
are perceived as troublesome kids in some organisa-
tions (Erooga et al. 2012). In this context, place manag-
ers (and other persons in a management position within
the organisation) could be utilized to facilitate disclosure
by staff and children when a suspicious incident arises. 
Specifically, managers could have the obligation to inves-
tigate and disclose any form of sexual contact between
staff and children. Children could also be provided with
clear communication channels for disclosing abuse to
managers. It would be relevant here to not restrict the
disclosure process to one person only in case the man-
ager is the offender. However, to maximize the likelihood
of disclosure, there is also a need to understand situ-
ational factors that could facilitate or obstruct disclosure
in youth-oriented organisations. In fact, with a broad
sample of adult sexual offenders, Leclerc and Wortley
(2015) found that victim disclosure was more likely to
increase with victim age for victims who did not live with
the offender as opposed to victims who did live with the
offender. In other words, being sexually abused by an
adult within the home suppressed the increased empow-
erment that age provided for victims abused by someone
from outside of the home. This context may be compa-
rable, to some extent, to youth-oriented organisations. 
Any adults who are in a position to have direct and ongo-
ing authority over the victim may obstruct disclosure. In
their obligation of disclosing sexual contact, management
could also be responsible for organising regular external
audits to empower staff and children to report suspicious
incidents or cases of sexual abuse. This maps onto the
measure of assisting compliance.
The third question asked offenders about sugges-
tions to provide to parents for preventing child sexual
abuse. Interestingly, one suggestion that stood out was
to take interest in children’s activities and participate
in the activities of the organisation specifically. In situ-
ational prevention terms, the participation of parents in
the activities of the organisation could be translated as a
measure to extend guardianship. This measure also has
the potential of leading to other changes or modifications
of the physical environment and policies within youth-
oriented organisations because parents would not only
ensure better supervision but also likely identify addi-
tional measures that may be introduced to facilitate the
protection of their own children.
Offenders also suggested that parents and children
should be educated on the reality of child sexual abuse. 
This suggestion is consistent with a number of previ-
ous studies that have indicated the need for training or
informative sessions for parents on offending patterns
and offenders in youth-oriented organisations (e.g.,
Leclerc et al. 2005, 2011; Kaufman et al. 2006; van Dam
2001). Youth-oriented organisations represent a setting
Page 11
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 11 of 12
in which opportunities to offend are numerous because
potential offenders have authority over, and constant
access to, vulnerable children. Staff are also likely to
develop personal relationships with a number of children. 
In this context, disclosure, and under which circum-
stances it works best, should be a point of focus in train-
ing sessions (see discussion above on victim disclosure).
Offenders also made a number of suggestions that
focus mainly on how parents can make their children
resilient to sexual abuse attempts, which maps onto the
measure of target hardening in situational prevention. 
For instance, offenders reported that parents should
have and keep an open dialogue with their children, 
discuss with them the reality of sexual abuse and teach
them to say no. To some extent, these suggestions refer
to increasing children awareness but more importantly, 
to building childrens’ self-confidence and resilience. 
Once again, resilience building has been discussed many
times before in the literature (see a review by MacIntyre
and Carr 2000) and represents a reasonable approach in a
context where surveillance by others can fail. Fortunately, 
most parents also seem receptive to being taught ways in
which to talk about the topic of sexuality with their child
(Wurtele and Kenny 2010). Suggestions made by offend-
ers, such as being wary of adults more generally, does not
represent a relevant and sensible measure to us and may
lead parents to wrongly believe that any form of relation-
ship between adults and their children is unhealthy and
could cause prejudice to children.
Like any other study, the current one has limita-
tions too. Obviously, a number of suggestions made by
offenders may already be in place or failed in the past
in some organisations, which may limit the immedi-
ate relevance of some of the recommendations made
by offenders. In addition, as many prevention measures
focus on the recruitment process, it may be easy to forget
about offenders who did not intend to sexually abuse a
child when first recruited—this context requires further
research. The small sample size used in this study implies
that the situational prevention measures are hypotheti-
cal at best and as result, require additional evidence. 
There are also a number of limitations related to offender
self-report, such as the possibility that offenders will lie
or minimize what they have done for the very reason of
avoiding detection or a longer sentence especially when
they have never been convicted. However, it should be
noted that limitations are also evident in victim or police-
based data (Jacques and Bonobo 2015). Victims may pro-
vide inaccurate information to avoid shame, guilt or to
get revenge. Some may simply have diminished recollec-
tion of past events the longer time goes by. Police report-
ing practices are also influenced by a myriad of factors. 
For example, police reports of crime events may vary in 
accuracy and/or depth and detail. In effect, even though
there is a distinct possibility that offenders may provide
inaccurate information, there are limitations to self-
report data of any kind. Moreover, it is unclear whether
suggestions offered by offenders in this study may differ
from those that could be provided by active offenders. To
our knowledge, evidence-based knowledge on offender
modus operandi and situational crime prevention strat-
egies from active offenders is currently inexistent in the
literature.
Conclusion
The ultimate objective of this study was to stimulate
thinking of situational prevention measures that could
assist in preventing child sexual abuse in youth-oriented
organisations drawing from the perspective of offenders
who abused in this setting. Most suggestions were com-
plementary or consistent with scholarly work, which per-
haps provides new avenues for prevention or additional
support for the relevance of a number of situational pre-
vention measures. Despite the sample size, the innovative
approach of this study makes an essential contribution
to understanding a phenomenon that has been substan-
tially overlooked in the field to date (Erooga 2012). By the
same token, we see ourselves promoting offender-based
research to prevent child sexual abuse in youth-oriented
organisations and for examining any form of sexual
offending. This approach is consistent with the frame-
work of environmental criminology and crime analysis
under which researchers and criminologists put them-
selves in the offender’s shoes for understanding offend-
ing patterns and guiding situational prevention initiatives
(Ekblom and Tilley 2002). Too often overlooked, there is
no better place to start for understanding offending pat-
terns and thinking of how best to prevent crime. Consist-
ent with promoters of offender-based research (Bernasco
2010; Jacques and Bonobo 2015), we believe that sexual
offenders have unique insights to offer for situational
prevention.
Authors’ contributions
BL designed and participated in all the stages of the paper. He also collected
and analysed the data. JF participated in all the stages of the paper. JC
designed and participated in all the stages of the paper. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Author details
1 School of Criminology and Criminal Justice, Mt Gravatt Campus, Griffith Uni-
versity, Queensland 4111, Australia. 2 School of Social Sciences, Faculty of Arts
and Social Sciences, Morven Brown Building, The University of New South
Wales, UNSW, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. 
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 5 July 2015 Accepted: 8 October 2015
Page 12
Leclerc et al. Crime Sci (2015) 4:28  Page 12 of 12
References
Bernasco, W. (Ed.). (2010). Offenders on offending: Learning about crime from
criminals. Cullompton: Willan Publishing.
Brantingham, P. J., & Brantingham, P. L. (1978). A theoretical model of crime
site selection. In M. Krohn & R. Akers (Eds.), Crime, law, and sanctions (pp. 
105–118). Beverly Hills: Sage.
Budin, L. E., & Johnson, C. F. (1989). Sex abuse prevention programs: offenders’ 
attitudes about their efficacy. Child Abuse and Neglect, 13, 77–87.
Clarke, R. V. (1995). Situational crime prevention. In M. Tonry & N. Morris (Eds.),
Crime and justice: A review of research (Vol. 29, pp. 91–150). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Clarke, R. V. (2008). Situational crime prevention. In R. Wortley & L. Mazerolle
(Eds.), Environmental criminology and crime analyses (pp. 178–194).
Cullompton: Willan.
Cleary, K. (2012). Safer recruitment—guidance for organisations. In M. Erooga
(Ed.), Creating safer organisations: Practical steps to prevent the abuse of
children by those working with them. London: Wiley-Blackwell.
Cohen, L. E., & Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: a routine
activity approach. American Sociological Review, 44(4), 588–608.
Colton, M., Roberts, S., & Vanstone, M. (2012). Learning lessons from men who
have sexually abused children. The Howard Journal, 51, 79–93.
Colton, M., & Vanstone, M. (1996). Betrayal of trust: Sexual abuse by men who
work with children. London: Free Association Books.
Copes, H., & Cherbonneau, M. (2006). The key to auto theft: emerging methods
of auto theft from the offenders’ perspective. British Journal of Criminol-
ogy, 46, 917–934.
Cornish, D. B., & Clarke, R. V. (2003). Opportunities, precipitators and criminal
decisions: a reply to Wortley’s critique of situational crime prevention. In
M. Smith & D. B. Cornish (Eds.), Crime prevention studies: Theory for practice
in situational crime prevention (Vol. 16). Monsey: Criminal Justice Press.
Cornish, D. B., & Clarke, R. V. (2008). The rational choice perspective. In R. 
Wortley & L. Mazerolle (Eds.), Environmental criminology and crime analysis.
Willan: Cullompton.
Ekblom, P., & Tilley, N. (2002). Going equipped: criminology, situational crime
prevention and the resourceful offender. British Journal of Criminology, 40,
376–398.
Elliott, M., Browne, K., & Kilcoyne, J. (1995). Child sexual abuse prevention: what
offenders tell us. Child Abuse and Neglect, 19, 579–594.
Erooga, M. (Ed.). (2012). Creating safer organisations: Practical steps to prevent the
abuse of children by those working with them. London: Wiley-Blackwell.
Erooga, M., Allnock, D., & Telford, P. (2012). Sexual abuse of children by people
in organisations: what offenders can teach us about protection. In M. 
Erooga (Ed.), Creating safer organisations: Practical steps to prevent the
abuse of children by those working with them. London: Wiley-Blackwell.
Felson, M., & Clarke, R.V. (1998). Opportunity makes the thief: Practical theory for
crime prevention. Police research series paper 98. London: Home Office.
Finkelhor, D. (1984). Child sexual abuse: New theory and research. New York: Free
Press.
Homel, R., MacIntyre, S., & Wortley, R. (2013). How burglars decide on targets: 
a computer-based scenario approach. In B. Leclerc and R. Wortley (Eds.),
Cognition and crime: Offender decision-making and script analyses. Crime
Science Series. London: Routledge.
Jacobs, B. (1999). Dealing crack: The social world of streetcorner selling. Boston: 
Northeastern University Press.
Jacques, S., & Bernasco, W. (2013). Drug dealing: Amsterdam’s Red Light
District. In B. Leclerc and R. Wortley (Eds.), Cognition and crime: Offender
decision-making and script analyses. Crime Science Series. London: 
Routledge.
Jacques, S., & Bonobo, E. (2015). Learning from the offender’s perspective on
crime prevention. In B. Leclerc & E. Savona (Eds.), Crime prevention in the
21st century. New York: Springer.
Kaufman, K. L. (1991). Modus operandi questionnaire. Columbus: Children’s
Hospital. 
Kaufman, K. L., Mosher, H., Carter, M., & Estes, L. (2006). An empirically based
situational prevention model for child sexual abuse. In R. K. Wortley & S. 
W. Smallbone (Eds.), Situational prevention of child sexual abuse. Cullomp-
ton: Willan Publishing.
Kaufman, K. L., Tews, H., Schuett, J. M., & Kaufman, B. R. (2012). Prevention is
better than cure: the value of situational prevention in organisations. In
M. Erooga (Ed.), Creating safer organisations: Practical steps to prevent the
abuse of children by those working with them. London: Wiley-Blackwell.
Leclerc, B., & Cale, J. (2015). Adult sex offenders in youth-oriented organisa-
tions: evidence on sexual victimisation experiences of offenders and their
offending patterns. Trends and Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice.
Leclerc, B., Chiu, Y.-N., & Cale, J. (2015). Sexual violence and abuse against
children: a first review through the lens of environmental criminology. 
International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology. doi
 :10.1177/0306624X14564319.
Leclerc, B., Proulx, J., & McKibben, A. (2005). Modus operandi of sexual offend-
ers working or doing voluntary work with children and adolescents. 
Journal of Sexual Aggression, 11, 187–195.
Leclerc, B., & Wortley, R. (2015). Predictors of victim disclosure in child sexual
abuse: additional evidence from a sample of incarcerated adult sex
offenders. Child Abuse and Neglect. doi:[URL: "http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2015.03.003"] 10.1016/j.chiabu.2015.03.003.
Leclerc, B., Wortley, R., & Smallbone, S. (2011). Getting into the script of adult
child sex offenders and mapping out situational prevention measures. 
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 48, 209–237.
MacIntyre, D., & Carr, A. (2000). Prevention of child sexual abuse: implications
of programme evaluation research. Child Abuse Review, 9, 183–199.
Nee, C., & Meenaghan, A. (2006). Expert decision making in burglars. British
Journal of Criminology, 46, 935–949.
Parkinson, P. N., Oates, K. R., & Jayakody, A. A. (2012). Child sexual abuse in the
Anglican Church of Australia. Journal of Child Sexual Abuse, 21, 553–570.
Rengert, G., & Walsilchick, J. (2000). Suburban burglary: A tale of two suburbs 
(2nd ed.). Springfield: Charles C. Thomas.
Sullivan, J., & Beech, A. (2004). A comparative study of demographic data
relating to intra- and extra-familial child sexual abusers and professional
perpetrators. Journal of Sexual Aggression, 10, 39–50.
Sullivan, J., Beech, A., Craig, L., & Gannon, T. (2011). Comparing intra-familial
and extra-familial child sexual abusers with professionals who have
sexually abused children with whom they work. International Journal of
Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 55, 56–74.
Sutherland, E. H. (1937). The professional thief. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Terry, K., & Ackerman, A. (2008). Child sexual abuse in the Catholic church: how
situational crime prevention strategies can help create safe environ-
ments. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 35, 643–647.
van Dam, C. (2001). Identifying child molesters: Preventing child sexual abuse by
recognizing the patterns of the offender. New York: Haworth maltreatment
and Trauma Press.
Wonnacott, J. (2012). Keeping children safe in nurseries: a focus on culture and
context. Journal of Sexual Aggression, 19, 32–45.
Wortley, R. (2001). A classification of techniques for controlling situational
precipitators of crime. Security Journal, 14, 63–82.
Wortley, R., & Mazerolle, L. (2008). Environmental criminology and crime analyses.
Cullompton: Willan.
Wortley, R., & Smallbone, S. (2006). Applying situational principles to sexual
offenses against children. In R. Wortley & S. Smallbone (Eds.), Crime pre-
vention studies (Vol. 19, pp. 7–35)., Situational prevention of child sexual
abuse Monsey: Criminal Justice Press.
Wright, R., & Decker, S. (1994). Burglars on the job: Streetlife and residential break-
ins. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Wright, R., & Decker, S. (1997). Armed robbers in action: Stickups and street
culture. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Wurtele, S. K., & Kenny, M. C. (2010). Partnering with parents to prevent child-
hood sexual abuse. Child Abuse Review, 19, 130–152.
