BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Review
  Sleep in adults
  Basic chronobiology
    Endogenous and exogenous components of a rhythm
    The body clock and its adjustment by zeitgebers
  Sleep rhythms
    Laboratory-based results
    Possible cause of rhythms of the sleep-wake cycle
    Sleep stages
  Modeling sleep rhythms and the distribution of sleep stages
    The basic model
    Interpreting physiological and biochemical correlates of the sleep model
  Using the two-component model to explain altered sleep patterns in adults
    Possible causes of differences in sleep patterns
    Adults who are poor sleepers and short-sleepers
    The effect of chronotype
  Differences in sleep patterns with age
    Neonates and infants up to adolescence
    Adolescents
    Older persons
Conclusions
Author details
Authors' contributions
Competing interests
References
Page 1
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5
REVIEW
Daily rhythms of the sleep-wake cycle
Jim Waterhouse1*,  Yumi Fukuda2 and Takeshi Morita2 
Open Access
Abstract
The amount and timing of sleep and sleep architecture (sleep stages) are determined by several factors, important
among which are the environment, circadian rhythms and time awake. Separating the roles played by these
factors requires specific protocols, including the constant routine and altered sleep-wake schedules. Results from
such protocols have led to the discovery of the factors that determine the amounts and distribution of slow wave
and rapid eye movement sleep as well as to the development of models to determine the amount and timing of
sleep. One successful model postulates two processes. The first is process S, which is due to sleep pressure (and
increases with time awake) and is attributed to a ‘sleep homeostat’.  Process S reverses during slow wave sleep
(when it is called process S’). The second is process C, which shows a daily rhythm that is parallel to the rhythm of
core temperature. Processes S and C combine approximately additively to determine the times of sleep onset and
waking. The model has proved useful in describing normal sleep in adults. Current work aims to identify the
detailed nature of processes S and C. The model can also be applied to circumstances when the sleep-wake cycle
is different from the norm in some way. These circumstances include: those who are poor sleepers or short
sleepers; the role an individual’s chronotype (a measure of how the timing of the individual’s preferred sleep-wake
cycle compares with the average for a population);  and changes in the sleep-wake cycle with age, particularly in
adolescence and aging, since individuals tend to prefer to go to sleep later during adolescence and earlier in old
age. In all circumstances, the evidence that sleep times and architecture are altered and the possible causes of
these changes (including altered S, S’  and C processes) are examined.
Keywords: Adolescence, chronotype, circadian rhythm, endogenous component, exogenous component, old age,
sleep homeostat, time awake
Review
Sleep in adults
Most adults take a consolidated 7-hour sleep during the
night [1]. The reasons for sleeping at night are partly
because the environment is quiet and also it would be
unconventional to arrange meetings or meet friends at
this time. Moreover, we are diurnal creatures and after a
normal day when we have been awake and active for
some time, we feel tired in the evening and ready for
sleep. It is possible to sleep at other times, as is evident
from the lifestyle of night workers but, even in a quiet
environment, daytime sleep tends to be more fragmen-
ted and shorter than nocturnal sleep. That is, the ability
to get to sleep and sleep uninterruptedly for long
enough shows a daily rhythm. This rhythm of ease of
getting to sleep (sleep propensity) is clear if individuals
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:waterhouseathome@hotmail.com"] waterhouseathome@hotmail.com
1Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Physiology, Liverpool John Moores
University, Liverpool, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
miss a night’s sleep; they feel tired during the night but,
in spite of having had no sleep, they then feel less tired
as the new day dawns and, during the afternoon, will
feel surprisingly alert. However, by the evening, the sen-
sation of fatigue increases markedly and becomes
increasingly difficult to resist. This result indicates that
there is an increasing drive to sleep as the amount of
time awake continues to rise but that it is mixed with a
rhythmic component that varies during the course of
the 24 hours.
A good sleep is recuperative and removes the feelings
of fatigue (and also produces an improvement in cogni-
tive ability); individuals then feel ready to face the rigors
of a new day. Intuitively, the concept of increasing ‘sleep
pressure’ with increasing time awake is not difficult to
appreciate (even if the detailed nature of sleep pressure
is not understood).  However, the presence of daily
rhythms in the desire to sleep, staying asleep and waking
up might be less easy to understand. In fact, when
repeated measurements are made over the course of
© 2012 Waterhouse et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0),  which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Page 2
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 2 of 14
24 hours in subjects who are living normally (active in
the daytime and sleeping at night), all physiological and
biochemical variables show daily rhythms. Some proper-
ties of such rhythmicity need to be considered, and they
will be illustrated by the rhythm of core temperature
(which is representative of biological rhythms in
general).
Basic chronobiology
Endogenous and exogenous components of a rhythm
Figure 1 shows the 24-hour rhythm of core temperature
in a group of subjects living normally. The temperature
is higher in the daytime and lower at night. A priori, it
would be supposed that such rhythms result from the
behavioral changes that are associated with the sleep-
activity cycle. During the daytime, individuals are physi-
cally and mentally active, and eat and drink in an envir-
onment that is busy and stimulating; all of these factors
will tend to raise core temperature. By contrast, at
night, individuals fast, are inactive, sleep and choose a
quiet, dark environment.
In fact, such an explanation is only partially correct;
the standard method for demonstrating this is the ‘con-
stant routine’. In this protocol, a subject is required to
remain awake and sedentary (or lying down) and relaxed
for at least 24 hours in an environment of constant tem-
perature, humidity and lighting; to engage in similar
activities, generally reading or listening to music; and to
take identical meals at regularly-spaced intervals. Such a
protocol removes any rhythmic changes due to the indi-
vidual’s lifestyle or environment. When this protocol is
undertaken, it is observed (Figure 1) that the rhythm of
core temperature does not disappear, even though its
Figure 1 The daily rhythm of core temperature in a group of
eight young men. Full line: under normal conditions (sleep from
12 a.m. to 7 a.m.,  indicated by bar). Dashed line: undergoing a 24-
hour constant routine starting at 4 a.m. (From [2]). 
amplitude decreases. The rhythm shows a peak around
4 p.m. to 6 p.m. and a minimum around 4 a.m. to 5 a.
m. The rhythm is quite symmetrical, with the time of
most rapid rise being in the period 7 a.m. to 10 a.m.
and that of most rapid fall around 10 a.m. to 1 a.m.
By considering the two temperature profiles shown in
Figure 1, the following deductions can be made [2,3]:
(i) The rhythm observed during the constant routine
arises internally; it is the endogenous component of the
temperature rhythm and its generation is attributed to a
‘body clock’.
(ii) Since the two rhythms are not identical, effects
due to the environment and lifestyle are also present
when the participants live conventionally; the difference
between the two rhythms is the exogenous component
of the rhythm. The exogenous component of core tem-
perature is dominated by the sleep-wake cycle, activity
raising temperature and lying down and sleeping
decreasing it.
(iii) The two components are in phase. During the
daytime, body temperature is raised by the body clock
acting in synchrony with a more dynamic environment
and increased physical and mental activities; during the
night, the clock, a more restful environment and relaxed
lifestyle all act to reduce core temperature.
These deductions are general, insofar as all rhythms
show a mixture of endogenous and exogenous compo-
nents when compared under normal living conditions
and during a constant routine. However, when different
rhythms are investigated, differences do exist, as
described below.
The origin of the exogenous component For example:
the exogenous component is the sleep-wake cycle in the
cases of heart rate and blood pressure, as with the
rhythm of core temperature; it is the light-dark cycle for
melatonin secretion; it is the rhythms of posture and
fluid intake for urine flow; and it is the rhythm of food
intake for plasma insulin concentration.
The relative size of the endogenous and exogenous
components As Figure 1 indicates, these two compo-
nents are of similar size for core temperature. By con-
trast, the exogenous component is larger than the
endogenous component in the cases of heart rate, blood
pressure, urine flow and insulin secretion. For melatonin
secretion, provided light levels are low (as normally
found domestically) - the exogenous component is smal-
ler than the endogenous component. Because the rela-
tive sizes of the endogenous components of the rhythms
of core temperature and, particularly, melatonin are
small, these rhythms are often used as ‘clock markers’.
The body clock and its adjustment by zeitgebers
The body clock consists of paired suprachiasmatic
nuclei at the base of the hypothalamus; many details of
its genetics and molecular biochemistry are now known
Page 3
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 3 of 14
[4-6]. It is sited close to areas that exert widespread
effects upon the body (for example, temperature regula-
tion, hormone secretion and the feeding cycle) and
sends outflows to these areas, so producing rhythmicity
throughout the body.
When individuals are studied in time-free environ-
ments (such as an underground cave), the body clock
and rhythms produced by it continue to be manifest but
with a period closer to 25 than 24 hours. Such rhythms
are called circadian (Latin: about a day) and the timing
system is described as ‘free-running’. This period of
about 25 hours does not reflect the intrinsic period of
the body clock (tau) exactly, due to effects of light expo-
sure during waking. Current evidence (from protocols
using very dim light during waking or from blind sub-
jects) indicates that the true value of tau averages about
24.3 hours [7].
Whatever the exact value for tau in an individual, a
body clock will be of value only if it and the rhythms it
drives are synchronized to a solar (24-hour) day. This
adjustment is due to zeitgebers (German: time-giver),
rhythms in the environment and/or the individual’s
behavior which show a 24-hour period. For humans, the
most important zeitgebers are the light-dark cycle and
rhythmic secretion of pineal melatonin during the dark.
Rhythms of physical activity, social factors and food
intake appear to play comparatively minor roles [8-10].
Nevertheless, whatever the details of the components of
a ‘zeitgeber package’, all potential zeitgebers normally
act harmoniously to adjust the body clock to the 24-
hour (solar) day.
The effect of light exposure upon the body clock
depends upon the time of exposure relative to the tem-
perature minimum (normally around 4 a.m. to 5 a.m.,
see Figure 1). Light exposure in the 6 hours after this
minimum advances the body clock to an earlier time, in
the 6 hours before the minimum, delays it, and at other
times exerts no effect upon the clock [11]. Outdoor
light is more effective at adjusting the body clock than
is the dimmer light found indoors (that is, it tends to
produce larger phase shifts),  even though domestic
lighting is normally adequate to act as a zeitgeber. The
relationship between the time when a zeitgeber is pre-
sented and the shift of the body clock that is produced
is called a phase-response curve.
Melatonin ingestion also adjusts the body clock; in the
afternoon and early evening, melatonin ingestion
advances the clock and, in the second half of sleep and
during the early morning, delays it. Bright light inhibits
endogenous melatonin secretion, and the clock-shifting
effects of these two zeitgebers reinforce each other;
bright light in the hours immediately after the tempera-
ture minimum advances the body clock directly via the
phase-response curve (see above) and also indirectly (by 
suppressing melatonin secretion and so preventing the
phase-delaying effect that melatonin would have exerted
at this time) [12].
Sleep rhythms
Laboratory-based results
A laboratory environment is advantageous in that condi-
tions conducive to sleep (quiet, comfort, and so on) can
be standardized. The standardization of such factors is
equivalent to standardizing the exogenous components
of the rhythms of sleep. Studies in sleep laboratories
have systematically investigated the separate effects
upon sleep and sleep architecture (the distribution of
sleep stages) of time of day and time awake, which
together constitute the endogenous component of the
sleep rhythms. Several protocols have been used, includ-
ing the constant routine, multiple sleep latency tests and
modifying sleep-wake protocols (by changing the time
of day while maintaining time awake constant or chan-
ging the amount of time awake at the same times of
day). These protocols have been discussed in detail in
Reilly and Waterhouse [13]. Some of the main findings
from these investigations are detailed below.
Firstly, falling asleep is easiest if core temperature is
falling or low (evening and night) and most difficult if it
is high or rising (morning and afternoon). Secondly,
waking up spontaneously tends to be the opposite of
falling asleep; it is easiest if core temperature is rising or
high, and most difficult when it is falling or low. These
last results explain why, if individuals have gone to bed
earlier or later than normal, even though they will feel
less or more fatigued, respectively, than normal, they are
likely to have a longer or shorter sleeps, respectively,
than normal. Thirdly, the above two results stress that
the ability to initiate and sustain sleep shows rhythmic
changes during the course of the 24-hour day, and that
these are associated with the rhythm of core tempera-
ture. However, superimposed upon these effects is that
(if time-of-day effects are taken into account) sleep pro-
pensity - measured subjectively (fatigue, alertness) or
objectively (polysomnography) - increases in proportion
to time awake. This finding means that the endogenous
component of sleep rhythms, like those of alertness, fati-
gue and cognition, is a mixture of two main elements,
time of day and time awake. Finally, combining these
findings indicates that an unbroken sleep is most likely
to occur if it starts in the late evening and ends some-
time after 7 a.m., the individual having slept through the
trough of core temperature (see Figure 1). Sleep onset
will occur as core temperature falls, melatonin secretion
begins, fatigue increases and alertness falls, the indivi-
dual having been awake for about 16 hours; sleep will
end when core temperature rises and melatonin secre-
tion falls.
Page 4
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 4 of 14
Possible cause of rhythms of the sleep-wake cycle
The association between the sleep-wake cycle (sleep
propensity, sleep maintenance and waking up) and the
rhythm of core temperature has been interpreted as a
causal link, incorporating temperature-induced changes
in brain metabolism (see, for example, [14]). However,
this might be an oversimplification of the position since
there are many other rhythms associated with the sleep-
wake rhythm [3,15]. These rhythms include: reciprocal
activity of the sympathetic and parasympathetic
branches of the autonomic nervous system (sympathetic
activity paralleling core temperature and parasympa-
thetic activity showing a profile that is the mirror
image); levels of plasma adrenaline (parallel to core tem-
perature);  and plasma melatonin, concentrations of
which are low in daytime light, start to rise around 9 p.
m., peak during sleep in the dark, and fall on awakening
in the morning. Melatonin is known to cause cutaneous
vasodilatation (and so promote a fall of core tempera-
ture) as well as to increase fatigue. It is likely that many
factors contribute to the physiological preparations that
need to be accomplished to feel ready for sleep in the
evening, to being able to maintain unbroken sleep at
night, to making preparations for waking up in the
morning, and to being physically and mentally active in
the daytime. Core temperature is only one of these fac-
tors and should be seen as only one of the factors that
reflect the activity of the body clock and rhythmicity of
the body as a whole.
The value of the rhythms of core temperature and
melatonin secretion as convenient markers of the timing
of the body clock has already been mentioned. Alertness
and fatigue, important indicators of sleep-mediated
recuperation and the need for sleep, respectively, are
also affected by the body clock. Once again, however,
many other factors also contribute to these subjective
feelings (for example, boredom and excitement with
tasks in hand and, particularly, time awake). The effects
of boredom and interest mean that alertness and fatigue
can be misleading indicators as to the physiological
need for sleep (the build-up of sleep pressure) at any
time. Even so, the principles involved in modeling the
rhythm of sleep times (see below) have also been used
to model rhythms of alertness, fatigue and mental activ-
ity (for details of which, see [16-20]).
Sleep stages
Sleep is not homogeneous, and this has been investi-
gated by recording surface electrical activity on the scalp
using an electroencephalogram (EEG). In normal sleep,
there is an ultradian rhythm of cycling between slow
wave sleep (SWS) and rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep
stages, the REM-nonREM cycle. This cycle lasts
approximately 90 minutes, about five cycles occurring
during the course of a normal night’s sleep. The 
composition of successive cycles varies, with the amount
of SWS decreasing and the amount of REM sleep
increasing.
Modeling sleep rhythms and the distribution of sleep
stages
The basic model
One simple, and yet very effective, model of sleep
rhythms is the two-process model of sleep homeostasis
of Borbély [21] (Figure 2). In this model, it is postulated
that one of the processes, sleep pressure (S), increases
during waking as an exponential saturating function,
and then decreases exponentially during sleep (now
being termed S’). The other process, C, is rhythmic with
a period of about 24 hours and consists of two parallel
components, an upper and lower component, both
approximately in phase with core temperature.
Sleep onset occurs when the rising value of S inter-
cepts the upper C function, normally during the phase
of rapid decline and some hours before the minimum of
the upper C function. During sleep, the level of S’ falls
exponentially (but with a shorter half-time constant
than exists for S) until it meets the lower C function, at
which point waking occurs and the cycle starts again.
Waking normally occurs after about 7 hours of sleep, a
few hours after the minimum of the lower C function
when it is rising quickly. Factors S and C are assumed
to act additively (but see [22,23]).
A three-component model of sleep regulation, based
upon the two-component model but incorporating
‘sleep inertia’, has been developed. Sleep inertia is the
Sleep Wake  Sleep Wake
Upper C
Lower C
Figure 2 Times of sleep and wake (top, separated by the
double vertical lines). The C component is represented by two
curves (Upper C and Lower C). Sleep pressure increases
exponentially in the wake phase (Process S, dotted line) and
decreases at a faster exponential rate in the sleep phase (S’,  dashed
line). For more details, see text. (Based on [21]).
Page 5
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 5 of 14
phenomenon whereby, immediately after waking from
sleep, the beneficial effects of sleep upon cognitive per-
formance and mood are not immediately apparent
[24-26].
Interpreting physiological and biochemical correlates of the
sleep model
Many investigations have been performed to define
the physiological and biochemical correlates of pro-
cesses S and S’  and the rhythmic function C, and
others are in progress. As with investigations of sleep
times, studies of processes S and S’  generally consist
of measuring aspects of waking or sleep (subjective
estimates of fatigue and alertness, or objective mea-
sures of EEG during waking and sleep, for example)
after the sleep-wake schedules of volunteers have been
altered in some way.
The general view (summarized in [22,27]) is that the
amount of sleep pressure accumulated during the wake
time (process S) is reflected in the amount of SWS that
occurs during the following sleep. Such ‘deep sleep’ has
been regarded for some time as the type of sleep that
best reflects its recuperative role. The actual dissipation
of sleep pressure (process S’) is associated with the
amount of slow wave activity (SWA), assessed from the
power in the low-frequency band of the sleep EEG.
Increasing sleep pressure during the daytime when the
subject is awake can be measured by assessing sleep
propensity (the opposite of sleep latency) and the power
in the theta-alpha band of the waking EEG. Sleep pres-
sure is also related to increasing subjective fatigue and
decreasing alertness. SWS and SWA are little affected
by core temperature; by contrast, the amount of REM
sleep is inversely proportional to core temperature and
little affected by prior wake time. It is the difference
between the factors associated with SWS and REM
sleep that leads, during a normal nocturnal sleep, to the
first REM-nonREM cycles being richer in SWS (begin-
ning the process of recuperation) and the later ones,
closer to the temperature trough, richer in REM sleep.
However, the detailed nature of the links involved
remains unresolved. Comments already made about
other variables being temporally associated with core
temperature (and, therefore, the C component), and all
of them possibly being reflections of some more funda-
mental process, apply here also. The fundamental rea-
sons why increased wake time leads to an increased
need for sleep and change in sleep architecture remain
to be elucidated. One approach to this problem has
been to investigate substances that accumulate in the
brain during the waking period and the neurophysiologi-
cal changes that take place during this time [28]. How-
ever, detailed explanations of the associations between
sleep stages and time awake and core temperature are
still awaited. 
Using the two-component model to explain altered sleep
patterns in adults
Possible causes of differences in sleep patterns
With regard to adjustment of the body clock by zeitge-
bers, this process need not be precise on any particular
day. Daily differences in detailed timing of biological
rhythms will arise due to slight variations in the body
clock and timing of the zeitgebers on a particular day.
Moreover, different individuals will show biological var-
iation with regard to the exact intrinsic period of their
body clock (tau), their exposure to zeitgebers and details
of their phase-response curves to different zeitgebers.
That is, there will be both intra- and inter-individual
variation in the timing of the circadian clock and the
rhythms it drives.
Such variation will also apply when considering either
the sleep homeostat (S and S’) or rhythmic (C) compo-
nents of the two-component model of sleep (Figure 2),
all of which is predicted to lead to changes in the
detailed timing of the sleep-wake cycle. Thus if the tim-
ing of the upper or lower components is changed, this
will alter times of falling asleep or waking (times when
the S and S’  curves intercept the C curves);  curves
phased earlier will tend to cause earlier times of sleep
onset and offset, and vice versa. If the amplitude of the
C rhythms is decreased, the angle between the S and C
curves will be less, and this will result in any changes in
the curves causing increased variations in the exact tim-
ing of the points of intersection; this will in turn cause
an increased variability in sleep onset and offset times.
If process S increases less with time awake (its half-time
constant is increased), then sleep onset will be delayed.
Finally, if process S’ is less marked (its half-time con-
stant is increased), then sleep can be considered to be
less recuperative (SWS and SWA will decline) and will
tend to last longer.
These predicted changes can then form the basis of
attempts to explain some abnormalities of sleep beha-
vior, even though the understanding is incomplete in
the absence of knowledge as to the exact correlates of
the S, S’ and C components (see above).
Adults who are poor sleepers and short-sleepers
Because, like any biological variable, the S, S’  and C
components will show inter- and intra-individual varia-
tion, there is the implication that the sleep-wake cycle
will differ between individuals and between days in a
single individual. It is common for individuals to delay
their sleep-wake cycle over the weekend (generally due
to increased social activities) and to find difficulty in
readjusting it to weekday requirements on the Monday.
There is also evidence that those with less regular life-
styles have more sleep problems [29]. These are external
factors, and so contribute to the exogenous component
of sleep rhythms, and readily modified by a change in
Page 6
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 6 of 14
lifestyle. The issue is if differences in the internal factors
(S, S’ and C) are present in some cases of altered sleep.
There are differences in the amount of sleep habitually
taken by individuals because individuals choose to do
this (external factors), seem to need less sleep (’short
sleepers’), or get less sleep than they want and so feel
tired in the daytime (’poor sleepers’). Studies using bed-
rest and sleep deprivation have been used to investigate
if poor sleepers show systematic differences from ‘nor-
mal’ sleepers [30], but they have not reliably shown that
the sleep homeostat or rhythm of core temperature is
different. For example, the temperature rhythm and
responses to the multiple sleep latency tests following
these changed schedules were normal in poor sleepers.
Also, when short sleepers (< 6 hours per night) and
long sleepers (> 9 hours per night) were compared, both
responded in the same way with regard to the effect of
prior wake time upon the amount of SWS and the
kinetics of SWS during recovery sleep [31]. Therefore, it
has been suggested that short sleepers endure higher
sleep pressure, and that poor sleepers are not particu-
larly susceptible to sleep pressure.
Even though these differences from normal sleep gen-
erally produce no more than some degree of inconveni-
ence, they can be more troublesome if daytime fatigue is
marked and cognitive function impaired. In these cases,
treatment is sometimes contemplated, which generally
consists of attempts to strengthen the individual’s expo-
sure to zeitgebers (particularly bright light) or regular
ingestion of melatonin a few hours before sleep is
desired [32-34]. In this regard, treatment is very similar
to that for aged subjects (see below).
The effect of chronotype
The measurement of a person’s chronotype score is now
commonplace, the original questionnaire having been
translated into several languages (and then validated
upon local populations of subjects) and also adapted for
cultures that, for example, routinely rise early. A popula-
tion’s chronotype scores are distributed normally, with
those who tend towards the ‘morningness’ part of the
distribution choosing to perform important activities in
the morning, and those tending towards ‘eveningness’
choosing to do them in the evening. The tails of the dis-
tribution - the extreme morning types (larks) and
extreme evening types (owls) - can find normal lifestyles
difficult to participate in fully and effectively. This differ-
ence might be due to habits (and so influence the times
of exposure to zeitgebers) and/or the body clock (tau
values differing between individuals) and/or to the phase
response curves (which might differ in the size of
advances and delays in the body clock that zeitgebers
produce), but few data on this issue are available. What
can be stated is that individuals are likely to have pro-
blems if they adopt an early lifestyle (retiring and rising 
earlier than average) but have a circadian system that
tends to run later than average (for whatever reason), or
vice versa. Such disparities can be important for those
working shift systems.
The observation [35] that temperature rhythms in
morning- and evening-types during constant routines
are phased about 1 hour earlier or later than average,
respectively, implies that some endogenous component
(differences in adjustment of the body clock? differences
in tau?) is involved, but it might also be caused partly
by the phase differences (due to different lifestyles) that
were present in the days before the constant routine.
The S and C components of the two-process sleep
model have been compared in morning and evening
types, using the core temperature rhythm (a reflection
of the C component) and daytime measures of subjec-
tive sleepiness and alpha-theta activity (reflections of the
S component). The core temperature was phased earlier,
and the build-up of sleepiness and alpha-theta activity
was more rapid, in the morning types; that is, both com-
ponents of the two-component model were different
[36]. In other studies, morning-types had more SWA at
the start of a recovery sleep following a night of sleep
disruption, and also showed a more rapid decay of SWA
[37,38]. These results indicate that both processes S and
S’ might be more rapid in morning types, in addition to
an earlier phasing of the body clock (see above), and all
factors might contribute to earlier times of retiring and
rising.
There is evidence that some of the differences
between chronotypes and in processes S, S’ and C have
a genetic basis. Evidence from a large study upon adults
in which sleepiness, chronotype, quality of life and sleep
times were compared [39] indicated that associations
existed that could not be explained by common lifestyles
(those sharing the same household, for example); this
implies a genetic component. One of the clock genes,
PERIOD3, shows polymorphism and individuals homo-
zygous for one variant, the five-repeat allele, PER3(5/5),
are not only more likely to be a morning type but also
more susceptible to the effects of sleep loss. By contrast,
individuals homozygous for another variant, PER3(4/4),
are more likely to be an evening type. Subjects homozy-
gous for PER3(5/5) also showed more waking alpha-
theta activity, more SWA during sleep and a greater
decline in cognitive function when sleep-deprived [40].
A previous study [41] had also shown that individuals
could be divided into ‘resistant’ and ‘non-resistant’ on
the basis of deterioration of their brain function follow-
ing sleep loss; since this division was independent of any
difference in phasing of core temperature, it seems to
relate to the sleep homeostat rather than process C.
Two comparatively rare syndromes have been
described: delayed sleep phase syndrome and advanced
Page 7
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 7 of 14
sleep phase syndrome. In the former, the internal rela-
tionship between daily rhythms and the sleep-wake
cycle is normal, except that the whole system is delayed
with regard to external time; for example, the core tem-
perature rhythm shows a minimum around 8 a.m., and
melatonin secretion begins around midnight (both
rhythms being delayed about 4 hours compared with
normal). Subjects tend to wish to retire around 4 a.m.
and rise about noon, and this lifestyle can be very
inconvenient [42]. The opposite changes in timing of
daily rhythms and chosen sleep-wake cycle apply to
advanced sleep phase syndrome. Behaviorally, the indivi-
duals can be considered as pathologically extreme exam-
ples of evening or morning types. Whether the
syndromes result from extreme values of tau, abnormal
phase-response curves, and/or abnormalities with regard
to the sleep homeostat is unknown.
In summary, evidence is beginning to be obtained that
indicates individuals’  chronotypes partly reflect some
aspects of the timing of their body clock and sleep
homeostat, and that a genetic component contributes to
these differences.
Differences in sleep patterns with age
Neonates and infants up to adolescence
Immediately after birth, neither full-term nor premature
babies show clear circadian rhythms of the sleep-wake
cycle or any other variable [43-45]. Instead, bouts of
sleep and waking alternate several times during the
course of a 24-hour period. Therefore, the concept of
sleep pressure, accumulating with substantial periods of
waking, cannot be applied in the same way. Further,
EEG results indicate that the nature of sleep is different,
there being two types of sleep, ‘quiet’  and ‘active’
[46-48]. That is, the basic two-component model of
sleep cannot be applied to individuals in newborn
babies.
Even if the sleep-wake rhythm and other circadian
rhythms developed progressively during the first years of
life, to become firmly established when the child is five
years of age [49-52], there are no studies in which com-
ponents of the two-component model have been investi-
gated in children of this age. The reasons for this are
easy to understand - requiring infants to take part in
such studies would be unethical.
Adolescents
In practice, therefore, the earliest age at which substan-
tial amounts of data have been collected is when the
child reaches adolescence, though here also experimen-
tal sleep-deprivation experiments have not been per-
formed and no constant routine data are available. The
data that are available for this age group (10 to 17
years) are dominated by the observation that they go to
bed considerably later in the evening (particularly if they 
have access to television or live in latitudes where sum-
mer evenings can be very long) and so tend to be sleep-
deprived on school days [53-64]. At weekends, they
catch up on lost sleep by extended time spent in bed
(lie-ins). At the weekends also, the melatonin rhythm is
phase delayed compared with during the week. Adoles-
cents tend towards evening types, therefore, though this
change is more marked in some than others and occurs
at a slightly earlier age in girls, possibly due to their ear-
lier onset of puberty [65]. The sleep restriction that is
experienced during weekdays causes concern with
regard to school performance, particularly when school
starts early in the morning and the degree of evening-
ness of an individual is marked [66-71].
Some of these points are illustrated by some of our
unpublished data, which show changes in chronotype
and sleep quality in primary and secondary school stu-
dents in Japan (7 to 18 years old; 404 boys, 411 girls).
The Japanese versions of Horne and Ostberg’s Morning-
ness-Eveningness Questionnaire (MEQ) and the Pitts-
burgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) were used. Figure 3
shows the MEQ scores. Although most of the students
were neither morning type nor evening type, that is,
they were ‘intermediate type’, the scores decreased sig-
nificantly with age, indicating a change towards becom-
ing evening type (boys: r = -0.99, P < 0.001; girls: r =
-0.83, P = 0.041, Pearson’s correlation coefficients).
Female students older than 10 years tended to be more
evening types than their male counterparts, but this dif-
ference decreased with age and was reversed in students
aged18 years old. There was a clear linear relationship
between the MEQ scores and age of male students,
while this relationship was less clear in the female stu-
dents and appeared to be affected other factors,
Figure 3 Morningness-Eveningness Questionnaire (chronotype)
scores in male and female school children of different ages.
Filled bars, boys; open bars, girls. Scores indicate: range 16 to 30,
definitely evening-type; 31 to41, moderately evening-type; 42 to 58,
neither or intermediate-type; 59 to 69, moderately morning-type;
and 70 to 86, definitely morning-type.
Page 8
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 8 of 14
especially around 10 years of age. This change in female
MEQ scores at around 10 years might relate to
menarche.
Figure 4 shows that their PSQI scores tended to
increase significantly with age, indicating a deterioration
in sleep quality (boys: r = 0.96, P < 0.01; girls: r = 0.95,
P < 0.01, Pearson’s correlation coefficients), girls tending
to be worse than boys. Given that all students had to
rise at the same time in the morning to attend school,
the poorer sleep observed in the older children was con-
sistent with the tendency for the chronotype in older
children to become progressively more orientated
towards that of an evening type.
Attempts have been made to incorporate the findings
regarding lifestyle and chronotype in adolescents into
the two-component model of sleep regulation [72-74]. It
is believed that both components change. The evidence
for changes in the C component is the later phasing of
core temperature and melatonin rhythms; the evidence
for a change in the sleep homeostat (S and S’ compo-
nents) is an increase in sleep latency and a decline in
delta power density. From a circadian viewpoint, the
delayed rhythms imply that early school hours will be
too soon after the trough of the core temperature
rhythm and time of high melatonin secretion (resulting
in poorer cognitive performance), and the fall in core
temperature and onset of melatonin secretion later in
the evening will delay sleep onset. The observed changes
in the sleep homeostat appear to enable these later bed-
times to occur.
Why such changes should exist during and just after
puberty is unclear; attributing them to the marked
maturational changes, in the brain as well as the pitui-
tary-gonadal axis, is an obvious possibility, but details of
the mechanisms involved are unknown [75,76]. It is also
possible that the individual’s increasing independence at
this age means that personal interests might delay
Figure 4 Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index scores in male and
female school children of different ages. Filled bars, boys; open
bars, girls. Scores > 5 indicate some problems with sleep. 
bedtime, and this will lead to a delay in the circadian
system. If this exogenous factor were important, then
curtailing evening activities and retiring earlier would
provide a suitable remedy; but if the driving force
behind the change were neurologically or hormonally-
based (and internally-based), then advising earlier retir-
ing times would be ineffective. Whatever the cause,
recommendations that school hours and examination
times should be delayed are common [66,68,70,71].
Older persons
There has been a large amount of research upon the
sleep-wake cycle and associated rhythms in aged indivi-
duals, generally 55 years or older (for recent reviews, see
[77-79]. Volunteers for such investigations have come
from two main sources; those who come to the labora-
tory and those who live in homes for the elderly. The
type of person studied in these two cases might not be
the same. Subjects volunteering for laboratory-based
studies are likely to be healthy, active and independent;
those studied in homes are more likely to be less active
and independent, and also more likely to suffer from
some of the problems associated with old age - forms of
dementia, for example. The concepts of ‘survivor’ and
‘frailty’,  respectively, have sometimes been used to
describe these two types of volunteer [80], and differ-
ences between the results given by them might be
expected.
Nevertheless, there are the following general findings
[58,81-88]: daytime is associated with a greater number
of naps and night with greater sleep latency and more
fractionated sleep (sleep efficiency declines);  the
increased frequency of waking is associated with a need
to empty the bladder; and times of retiring and rising
tend to become slightly earlier, individuals become more
of a morning type. These changes to sleep and the
sleep-wake cycle have been observed in longitudinal
[89,90] as well as transverse studies, and made use of
measurements that have come from self-report diaries,
answering questionnaires, reports of care-givers or
objective measures of activity (by actimetry) or sleep
(EEG and polysomnography).
Other factors that might be involved with changed
sleep-wake cycles are also found in aged individuals.
Poorer thermoregulation [91] and cognitive function
[92] are present but, as in younger adults, a nap
improves cognitive performance [93]. Poorer sleep at
night and increased daytime naps will decrease the nor-
mal degree of dichotomy between daytime activity and
nocturnal rest. Associated with this decrease is likely to
be decreased regularity of lifestyle and smaller exogen-
ous components of circadian rhythms. Against this sce-
nario, however, are the results from studies that have
shown an increase in lifestyle regularity [94-96]. Also,
following a simulated time-zone transition, aged
Page 9
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 9 of 14
persons, like younger adults, suffer from sleep loss and
deterioration in cognitive performance - but older sub-
jects seem better able to pace themselves and maintain
cognitive performance at times of sleep loss and low
core temperature [97,98]. There is also other evidence
that alertness in the aged seems to be less dependent
upon core temperature than is the case in younger sub-
jects [99].  In other words, some of the behavioral
changes observed in aged subjects accord with the view
that individuals try to adopt lifestyles that oppose the
difficulties that arise with aging.
Circadian rhythms alter with aging; those of core tem-
perature and melatonin secretion having been studied
most. The amplitudes of these rhythms, when measured
in aged individuals living their normal lifestyles, nor-
mally show lower values when compared with younger
controls and phase advances in the order of 1 hour
[85,100]. There is also evidence that aged individuals
who suffer from poor sleep at night have a raised core
temperature at this time [101], but this is in contrast to
the results from an earlier study that had found that
altered sleep could not be accounted for by changed
rhythms of core temperature [102]. Such deterioration
in circadian rhythms is not observed equally in all aging
subjects [103,104] but tends to be more marked when
other problems (such as pain, failing cognitive powers
or senile dementia) are also present, and less marked if
a partner or companion is present.
Determining the cause of the observed changes is dif-
ficult because the links that exist between circadian
rhythms and the sleep-wake cycle are complex. For
example, the need for recuperation during nocturnal
sleep might be lessened if, during the daytime, an indivi-
dual is less physically and mentally active and takes
naps. Also, even though decreased activity of the supra-
chiasmatic nucleus (producing a rhythmic output that is
lower in amplitude) could account for many of the
observed changes, so too could, for example, decreased
exposure to or perception of zeitgebers, daytime activity
and exposure to the natural light-dark cycle being com-
promised by decreased mobility (not being able to ven-
ture outdoors) and/or poorer eyesight.
Poorer vision might be particularly important, causing
individuals to lack confidence and further restrict their
daytime activities, both indoors (reading, for example)
and outdoors (walking). The cornea and lens become
more opaque with age and light transmission, particu-
larly of the shorter (bluer) wavelengths, decreases [105].
This acquired tritanomaly can be assessed objectively by
a desaturated 15-hue test, in which patients are required
to distinguish between very similar shades of blue. This
partial loss of perception of blue colors can also be seen
in some paintings in which, as the artist gets older,
there is more interest in reds and yellows than greens 
or blues. These changes in the perception of blue hues
can be marked in those who suffer from cataracts.
Light of shorter wavelengths is also important in the
control of body temperature, melatonin secretion and
the sleep-wake rhythm. Melatonin secretion in the late
evening and night promotes sleep, partly due to the fall
in core temperature that it produces. This secretion is
suppressed by light, particularly light at the blue end of
the visible spectrum [106-108]. Accordingly, it seems
possible that changing transmission of blue light
through the lens in aged subjects, particularly those suf-
fering from cataracts, will change the pattern of melato-
nin secretion and times of sleep. For example, the
declining transmission of blue wavelengths in the eve-
ning might lead to an earlier rise of melatonin secretion
in the evening, contributing to earlier sleep onset in
aged individuals. In addition, it has been observed [109]
that daytime exposure to bright light in young adults
raises the secretion of melatonin at night, causes a
greater fall of core temperature at this time, and
improves sleep; such effects might be less marked if the
lens of the eye has reduced ability to transmit light at
some, or all, of the visible wavelengths.
Therefore, cataract surgery will not only improve indi-
viduals’ sight but it might also alter the quality of their
sleep. Asplund and Lindblad [110,111] found that a con-
siderable proportion of the patients who had undergone
cataract surgery reported subjective improvements in
their sleep after surgery. This has recently been re-
examined [112]. Fifteen patients were studied before and
one month after cataract surgery, in which UV light-cut-
ting intra-ocular lenses had been implanted. Vision and
color perception both improved. After recovery from
the surgery, they also demonstrated a change in noctur-
nal sleep, though this improvement varied between
patients. After surgery, patients showed a negative cor-
relation between later wake-up or retiring times and
sleep efficiency; that is, sleep efficiency of patients with
earlier wake-up and retiring times was higher than in
those with later wake-up and retiring times. It seems
that, after surgery, the patients’ retinas received more
light of shorter wavelengths and this affected sleep
efficiency.
Whilst the detailed implications of these results with
regard to the link between light perception and sleep
are still unclear, they do confirm that light, melatonin
secretion and sleep are linked. It is also noteworthy that,
in aged individuals who do not suffer visual problems,
the phase shifts produced by exposure to bright light
are the same as in younger controls [113]. Also, a 3-
hour bout of exercise at the start of normal sleep time
delayed the melatonin rhythm equally in young and old
adults [114].  That is, there is no evidence that the
increased morningness found in aged individuals can be
Page 10
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 10 of 14
attributed to altered adjustment of the body clock by
zeitgebers.
Attempts to interpret the causes of altered sleep pat-
terns in the aged in terms of the two-component model
of sleep provide some evidence that both the C and S
components are altered, but interpretation of such
results is not without problems. For example, whilst
many circadian rhythms show decreased amplitude, this
decline can be due to a fall in the endogenous or the
exogenous component of the rhythm, or both. That is,
the observed fall in amplitude of the rhythm of core
temperature (which implies a change in the C compo-
nent) might reflect decreased output from the supra-
chiasmatic nucleus (the endogenous component of the
rhythm), decreased secretion of melatonin (which causes
core temperature to fall due to cutaneous dilatation), or
a decrease in the dichotomy between daytime activity
and nocturnal inactivity (the exogenous component).
Further, the tendency for aged individuals to become
more morning-orientated might be due to an altered
body clock and/or timing of individuals’ lifestyles (fac-
tors that might reflect the C component of the two-
component model in particular),  or the more rapid
build-up of sleep pressure (the S component). A further
difficulty of interpretation arises because older indivi-
duals might go to bed earlier because their body clock is
running faster, their poorer eyesight restricts what they
can do (read or watch television), their declining mental
faculties mean they get bored more easily, sleep pressure
builds up more quickly or they fear a poor sleep at night
and so want to attempt it sooner.
It is only the endogenous component of the rhythm of
core temperature that is directly associated with compo-
nent C. Since the endogenous and exogenous compo-
nents of a circadian rhythm normally act together to
produce a measured rhythm, it is necessary to distin-
guish between them. The constant routine protocol is
believed to enable the circadian output from the body
clock to be assessed more directly. However, it must be
remembered that this protocol assumes that any effects
of the sleep-wake cycle upon the amplitude and phase
of the core temperature rhythm on normal days (when
the exogenous component is present) do not continue
into the constant routine but disappear immediately it is
undertaken. There is some evidence to support this
assumption, at least with regard to amplitude [115].
However, when aged participants undergo constant rou-
tines and their core temperature rhythm or secretion of
melatonin in dim light is investigated (two common
markers of the body clock),  there is evidence for a
reduced output from the body clock insofar as the
amplitude of these rhythms is reduced; also, the tem-
perature profile has been found to advance [116,117].
These results suggest the presence of a body clock with 
a declining output and an advanced timing. However,
when the free-running period of the body clock was
examined in aged individuals who were blind (twice in
each individual, the occasions of study being separated
by a period of 10 years), where effects of light upon tau
are absent, the period lengthened [118]. Other studies
also have failed to find a consistent phase advance of
the core temperature rhythm in sighted individuals
when using the constant routine protocol. Only an
advance of phase of the core temperature rhythm, possi-
bly due to a reduction in tau, would indicate an endo-
genous cause for the increasing tendency to
morningness with aging (rather than an exogenous
cause such as preferring to get up earlier and go to bed
earlier). Therefore, the general position with regard to
the change in the endogenous component of the tem-
perature rhythm in aged individuals is unclear. Again,
differences between survivors and the frail might be
important.
The changes in sleep with aging might be explained in
terms of altered S and S’  processes. Investigations of
responses to altered sleep-wake schedules (advancing or
delaying bedtime, for example) have shown that changes
similar to those found in younger adults under the same
circumstances are found for many sleep variables,
including sleep efficiency and time awake after sleep
onset [119]. The increase in sleep latency with age has
been taken to imply that sleep pressure decreases but,
again, contradictory results have been obtained. SWS
during the first part of a night’s sleep is normally
decreased in the aged [120,121]. The rate of dissipation
of S (S’, as assessed from SWA) does not differ from
that found in younger adults and, as in them, the
amount of SWS increases following sleep-deprivation
[122] and decreases in nocturnal sleeps taken after day-
time naps [123].  On the other hand, another study
claimed that the relationship between SWS and prior
wakefulness was different between aged participants and
younger controls [116] and that daytime naps led to a
fall in sleep efficiency and earlier waking [124]. Several
differences in the power of different frequency bands in
the EEG have been found in aged individuals compared
with younger controls [120],  though their detailed
meaning is unclear.
It has already been mentioned that those who seem to
experience fewer difficulties with sleep also seem to
have more regular lifestyles. It is stressed that this
increased regularity might reflect a relatively stronger
output from the body clock (process C) or stronger
activity of the sleep homeostat (processes S and S’) - or
it might be that increasing the exogenous components
of circadian rhythms, attempting to be active and so
promote accumulation of sleep pressure when awake,
and having regular exposure to zeitgebers, can all be
Page 11
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 11 of 14
considered as ways of combating a declining influence of
endogenous components. Whatever the exact cause of
the decreased daily variability in some aged individuals,
it becomes translated into several ways of improving the
quality of life of the aged, at least in those living in
homes for the elderly [125].
The general aim of these procedures is to increase the
dichotomy between daytime activities in the light and
nocturnal sleep in the dark [1,126-137]. Possibilities
include increasing daytime physical activity, outdoors in
natural light, if possible and increasing daytime mental
activities, by providing an interest or getting individuals
to discuss topics of interest to them (their childhood,
favorite food or films, for example). Increasing artificial
lighting levels is also used, not only to promote condi-
tions suitable for taking part in activities but also to
inhibit napping. Coupled with these courses of action
can be encouragement to individuals to stay in bed at
night, even if they cannot sleep, with restricted use of
lights (as long as requirements for safety and care are
met). In addition, some studies have indicated that the
regular use of a mild soporific is effective (melatonin,
for example), though the long-term use of any drug
requires medical advice [135,138,139].
Many of these treatments have been found to be effec-
tive; it often being stressed that individuals should be
encouraged to see some form of regular daytime activity
as a simple means of improving their quality of life. The
possible mechanisms which might cause the treatments
to be effective have been considered above; they might
act on the exogenous or endogenous component of cir-
cadian rhythms by promoting accumulation of sleep
pressure, and promote sleep pressure directly. Which
mechanism(s) are important is not yet known.
A rather different approach to the problem of improv-
ing sleep in older individuals is based upon the decline
in efficiency of thermoregulation with age [91]. Part of
the problem is that, due to impaired cutaneous thermal
sensitivity, aged individuals are less able to perceive the
temperature of their surroundings, and so are unable to
forestall falls or rises of body temperature by suitable
behavior. Additionally, sleep onset is inhibited by cold
hands and feet, and this is observed in all age groups.
Warming the feet by wearing bed-socks was found to
decrease sleep latency in aged individuals [140].
Conclusions
The two-process model of sleep has enabled the pro-
cesses that determine sleep times and some aspects of
sleep architecture to be described. Equally, the constant
routine protocol remains the standard way of distin-
guishing between endogenous and exogenous compo-
nents of circadian rhythms. Taken together, these
concepts of a sleep homeostat and endogenous and 
exogenous components of circadian rhythms have
enabled the quantity, timing and quality of sleep to be
understood better. Such understanding has been applied
successfully to understanding the timing of sleep in
healthy individuals and in the changed circumstances of
adolescence and old age. However, details of the nature
of the S, S’ and C components of the sleep model, and
unraveling the interactions between these components
and those of the circadian rhythms, are still required.
Obtaining such details will improve our knowledge of
differences between healthy individuals at different
stages of their life-span and when suffering from some
sleep disorders. Such deeper understanding will then
give a firmer rationale to advice and treatment, with the
hope that they will become more successful.
Author details
1Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Physiology, Liverpool John Moores
University, Liverpool, UK. 2Department of Living Environmental Science,
Fukuoka Women’s University, Japan.
Authors’ contributions
The preliminary draft of part of the section on adolescents was written by
YF, of part of the section on old persons by TM, and of the rest of the
review by JW. Thereafter, all authors were equally involved in the several
revisions that were undertaken. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 8 February 2012 Accepted: 13 March 2012
Published: 13 March 2012
References
1.  Ancoli-Israel S, Ayalon L, Salzman C: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18803103?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep in the elderly: normal variations
 and common sleep disorders. Harv Rev Psychiatry 2008, 16:279-286.
2.  Minors D, Waterhouse J: Circadian Rhythms and the Human Bristol, UK: John
Wright; 1981.
3.  Reilly T, Atkinson G, Waterhouse J: Biological Rhythms and Exercise Oxford:
Oxford University Press; 1997.
4.  Clayton J, Kyriacou C, Reppert S: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11237000?dopt=Abstract"] Keeping time with the human genome.
Nature 2001, 409:829-831.
5.  Reppert S, Weaver D: Molecular analysis of mammalian circadian
rhythms. Ann Rev Physiol 2001, 63:647-678.
6.  Jolma I, Laerum O, Lillo C, Ruoff P: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20836046?dopt=Abstract"] Circadian oscillators in eukaryotes.
Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 2010, 2:533-549.
7.  Shanahan T, Czeisler C: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10975436?dopt=Abstract"] Physiological effects of light on the human
 circadian pacemaker. Semin Perinatol 2000, 24:299-320.
8.  Mrosovsky N: Critical assessment of methods and concepts in nonphotic
phase shifting. Biol Rhythm Res 1999, 30:135-148.
9.  Mistlberger R, Skene D: Social influences on mammalian circadian
rhythms: animal and human studies. Biol Rhythm 2004, 79:533-556.
10. Edwards B, Reilly T, Waterhouse J: Zeitgeber effects of exercise on human
circadian rhythms: what are alternative approaches to investigating the
existence of a phase-response curve to exercise? Biol Rhythm Res 2009,
40:53-69.
11. Khalsa S, Jewett M, Cajochen C: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12717008?dopt=Abstract"] A phase response curve to single bright
 light pulses in human subjects. J Physiol 2003, 549:945-952.
12. Lewy A, Bauer V, Ahmed S: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9493716?dopt=Abstract"] The human phase response curve (PRC) to
 melatonin is about 12 hours out of phase with the PRC to light.
Chronobiol Int 1998, 15:71-83.
13. Reilly T, Waterhouse J: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19418063?dopt=Abstract"] Sports performance: is there evidence that the
 body clock plays a role? Eur J Appl Physiol 2009, 106:321-332.
14. Kleitman N: Sleep and Wakefulness Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 1963.
Page 12
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 12 of 14
15. Van Someren E: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10841209?dopt=Abstract"] More than a marker: Interaction between the circadian
 regulation of temperature and sleep, age-related changes, and
 treatment possibilities. Chronobiol Int 2000, 17:313-354.
16. Åkerstedt T, Folkard S: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9095372?dopt=Abstract"] The three-process model of alertness and its
 extension to performance, sleep latency, and sleep length. Chronobiol Int
1997, 14:115-123.
17. Åkerstedt T: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17049569?dopt=Abstract"] Altered sleep/wake patterns and mental performance. Physiol
Behav 2007, 90:209-218.
18. Beersma D, Gordij M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17055008?dopt=Abstract"] Circadian control of the sleep-wake cycle. Physiol
Behav 2007, 90:190-195.
19. McCauley P, Kalachev L, Smith A, Belenky G, Dinges D, Van Dongen H: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18938181?dopt=Abstract"] A
 new mathematical model for the homeostatic effects of sleep loss on
 neurobehavioral performance. J Theor Biol 2009, 256:227-239.
20. Van Dongen H: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15018263?dopt=Abstract"] Comparison of mathematical model predictions to
 experimental data of fatigue and performance. Aviat Space Environ Med
2004, 75(3 Suppl):A15-A36.
21. Borbély A: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7185792?dopt=Abstract"] A two process model of sleep regulation. Hum Neurobiol 1982,
1:195-204.
22. Achermann P: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10643753?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep homeostasis and models of sleep regulation. J Biol
Rhythms 1999, 14:557-568.
23. Van Dongen H, Dinges D: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12941057?dopt=Abstract"] Investigating the interaction between the
 homeostatic and circadian processes of sleep-wake regulation for the
 prediction of waking neurobehavioural performance. J Sleep Res 2003,
12:181-187.
24. Naitoh P, Kelly T, Babkoff H: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8500187?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep inertia: best time not to wake up?
Chronobiol Int 1993, 10:109-118.
25. Åkerstedt T, Billiard M, Bonnet M, Ficca G, Garma L, Mariotti M, Salzarulo P,
Schulz H: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12531132?dopt=Abstract"] Awakening from sleep. Sleep Med Rev 2002, 6:267-286.
26. Krauchi K, Knoblauch V, Wirz-Justice A, Cajochen C: Challenging the sleep
homeostat does not influence the thermoregulatory system in men:
evidence from a nap vs. sleep-deprivation study. Amer J Physiol Regul
Integr Comp Physiol 2006, 290:R1052-R1061.
27. Puente-Munoz A, Perez-Martinez D, Villalibre-Valderrey I: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12022067?dopt=Abstract"] The role of slow
 wave sleep in the homeostatic regulation of sleep. Rev Neurol 2002,
34:211-215.
28. Inoue S, Honda K, Komodo Y: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7546322?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep as neuronal detoxification and
 restitution. Behav Brain Res 1995, 69:91-96.
29. Monk T, Reynolds C, Buysse D, DeGrazia J, Kupfer D: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12638693?dopt=Abstract"] The relationship
 between lifestyle regularity and subjective sleep quality. Chronobiol Int
2003, 20:97-107.
30. Benoit O, Aguirre A: Homeostatic and circadian aspects of sleep
regulation in young poor sleepers. Clin Neurophysiol 1996, 26:40-50.
31. Aeschbach D, Postolache T, Sher L, Matthews J, Jackson M, Wehr T:
 Evidence from the waking electroencephalogram that short sleepers live
 under higher homeostatic sleep pressure than long sleepers.
Neuroscience 2001, 102:493-502.
32. Yang C, Spielman A, D’Ambrosio P, Serizawa S, Nunes J, Birnbaum J: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11322709?dopt=Abstract"] A
 single dose of melatonin prevents the phase delay associated with a
 delayed weekend sleep pattern. Sleep 2001, 24:272-281.
33. Zisapel N: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11463135?dopt=Abstract"] Circadian rhythm sleep disorders - pathophysiology and
 potential approaches to management. CNS Drugs 2001, 15:311-328.
34. Arendt J, Van Someren E, Appleton R, Skene D, Akerstedt T: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18724603?dopt=Abstract"] Clinical
 update: melatonin and sleep disorders. Clin Med 2008, 8:381-383.
35. Kerkhof G, Van Dongen H: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8945751?dopt=Abstract"] Morning-type and evening-type individuals
 differ in the phase position of their endogenous circadian oscillator.
Neurosci Lett 1996, 218:153-156.
36. Taillard J, Philip P, Coste O, Sagaspe P, Bioulac B: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14633238?dopt=Abstract"] The circadian and
 homeostatic modulation of sleep pressure during wakefulness differs
 between morning and evening chronotypes. J Sleep Res 2003, 12:275-282.
37. Mongrain V, Carrier J, Dumont M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16704571?dopt=Abstract"] Circadian and homeostatic sleep
 regulation in morningness-eveningness. J Sleep Res 2006, 15:162-168.
38. Mongrain V, Dumont M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17580599?dopt=Abstract"] Increased homeostatic response to behavioral
 sleep fragmentation in morning types compared to evening types. Sleep
2007, 30:773-780.
39. Evans D, Snitker S, Wu S, Mody A, Njajou O, Perlis M, Gehrman P,
Shuldiner A, Hsueh W: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21532960?dopt=Abstract"] Habitual sleep/wake patterns in the old order
 Amish: heritability and association with non-genetic factors. Sleep 2011,
34:661-669.
40. Dijk D-J, Archer S: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19716732?dopt=Abstract"] PERIOD3, circadian phenotypes, and sleep
 homeostasis. Sleep Med Rev 2010, 14:151-160. 
41. Vandewalle G, Archer S, Wuillaume C, Balteau E, Degueldre C, Luxen A,
Maquet P, Dijk D-J: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19553435?dopt=Abstract"] Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging-assessed
 brain responses during an executive task depend on interaction of sleep
 homeostasis, circadian phase, and PER3 genotype. J Neurosci 2009,
29:7948-7956.
42. Weitzman E, Czeisler C, Coleman R, Spielman A, Zimmerman J, Dement W,
Richardson G: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7247637?dopt=Abstract"] Delayed Sleep Phase Syndrome - a chronobiological
 disorder with sleep-onset insomnia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1981, 38:737-746.
43. Shimada M, Takahashi K, Segawa M, Higurashi M, Samejim M, Horiuchi K:
Emerging and entraining patterns of the sleep-wake rhythm in preterm
and term infants. Brain Develop 1999, 21:468-473.
44. Mirmiran M, Maas Y, Ariagno R: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14505599?dopt=Abstract"] Development of fetal and neonatal sleep
 and circadian rhythms. Sleep Med Rev 2003, 7:321-334.
45. Goessel-Symank R, Grimmer I, Korte J, Siegmund R: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15470961?dopt=Abstract"] Actigraphic monitoring
 of the activity-rest behavior of preterm and full-term infants at 20
 months of age. Chronobiol Int 2004, 21:661-671.
46. Peirano P, Algarin C, Uauy R: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14597916?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep-wake states and their regulatory
 mechanisms throughout early human development. J Pediatr 2003, 143:
S70-S79.
47. Biagioni E, Boldrini A, Giganti F, Guzzetta A, Salzarulo P, Cioni G:
Distribution of sleep and wakefulness EEG patterns in 24-h recordings of
preterm and full-term newborns. Early Hum Develop 2005, 81:333-339.
48. McLaughlin Crabtree V, Williams NA: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19836688?dopt=Abstract"] A normal sleep in children and
 adolescents. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am 2009, 18:799-809.
49. Rivkees S: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12897290?dopt=Abstract"] A developing circadian rhythmicity in infants. Pediatrics 2003,
112:373-381.
50. Mirmiran M, Baldwin R, Ariagno R: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12621096?dopt=Abstract"] Circadian and sleep development in
 preterm infants occurs independently from the influences of
 environmental lighting. Pediatr Res 2003, 53:933-938.
51. Pringuey D, Tible O, Cherikh F: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19268170?dopt=Abstract"] [Ontogenesis of circadian rhythms in
 humans]. Encephale 2009, 35:S46-S52.
52. Zornoza-Moreno M, Fuentes-Hernandez S, Sanchez-Solis M, Rol M, Larque E,
Madrid J: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21539424?dopt=Abstract"] Assessment of circadian rhythms of both skin temperature and
 motor activity in infants during the first 6 months of life. Chronobiol Int
2011, 28:330-337.
53. Mantz J, Muzet A, Winter A: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10761601?dopt=Abstract"] The characteristics of sleep-wake rhythm in
 adolescents aged 15-20 years: a survey made at school during ten
 consecutive days. Arch Pediatr 2000, 7:256-262.
54. Takeuchi H, Inoue M, Watanabe N, Yamashita Y, Hamada M, Kadota G,
Harada T: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11763989?dopt=Abstract"] Parental enforcement of bedtime during childhood modulates
 preference of Japanese junior high school students for eveningness
 chronotype. Chronobiol Int 2001, 18:823-829.
55. Aronen E, Fjallberg M, Paavonen E, Soininen M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11893171?dopt=Abstract"] Day length associates with
 activity level in children living at 60 degrees north. Child Psychiatry Hum
Dev 2002, 32:217-226.
56. Vinha D, Cavalcante J, Andrade M: Sleep-wake patterns of student
workers and non-workers. Biol Rhythm Res 2002, 33:417-426.
57. Louzada F, Menna-Barreto LL: Sleep-wake cycle in rural populations. Biol
Rhythm Res 2004, 35:153-157.
58. Ohayon M, Carskadon M, Guilleminault C, Vitiello M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15586779?dopt=Abstract"] Meta-analysis of
 quantitative sleep parameters from childhood to old age in healthy
 individuals: developing normative sleep values across the human
 lifespan. Sleep 2004, 27:1255-1273.
59. Chung K, Cheung M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18274265?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep-wake patterns and sleep disturbance among
 Hong Kong Chinese adolescents. Sleep 2008, 31:185-194.
60. Hagenauer M, Perryman J, Lee T, Carskadon M: Adolescent changes in the
homeostatic and circadian regulation of sleep. Develop Neurosci 2009,
31:276-284.
61. Peixoto C, da Silva A, Carskadon M, Louzada F: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19330580?dopt=Abstract"] Adolescents living in
 homes without electric lighting have earlier sleep times. Behav Sleep Med
2009, 7:73-80.
62. Randler C, Frech D: Young people’s time-of-day preferences affect their
school performance. J Youth Stud 2009, 12:653-667.
63. Crowley S, Carskadon M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20795887?dopt=Abstract"] Modifications to weekend recovery sleep delay
 circadian phase in older adolescents. Chronobiol Int 2010, 27:1469-1492.
64. Figueiro M, Rea M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20653452?dopt=Abstract"] Evening daylight may cause adolescents to sleep less
 in spring than in winter. Chronobiol Int 2010, 27:1242-1258.
65. Figueiro M, Rea M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20150866?dopt=Abstract"] Lack of short-wavelength light during the school day
 delays dim light melatonin onset (DLMO) in middle school students.
Neuroendocrinol Lett 2010, 31:92-96.
Page 13
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 13 of 14
66. Fischer F, Radosevic-Vidacek B, Koscec A, Teixeira L, Moreno C, Lowden A:
Internal and external time conflicts in adolescents: sleep characteristics
and interventions. Mind Brain Educ 2008, 2:17-23.
67. Fischer F, Nagai R, Teixeira L: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18533330?dopt=Abstract"] Explaining sleep duration in adolescents:
 The impact of socio-demographic and lifestyle factors and working
 status. Chronobiol Int 2008, 25:359-372.
68. Koscec A, Radosevic-Vidacek B, Bakotic M: Regulation of wakefulness and
sleep in adolescence: biological and social aspects. Suvremena Psiholgija
2008, 11:223-239.
69. Natal C, Lourenco T, Silva L, Boscolo R, Silva A, Tufik S, de Mello M: Gender
differences in the sleep habits of 11-13 year olds. Revista Brasileira
Psiquiatria 2009, 31:358-361.
70. Besoluk S, Onder I, Deveci I: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21231873?dopt=Abstract"] Morningness-eveningness preferences and
 academic achievement of University students. Chronobiol Int 2011,
28:118-125.
71. Kirby M, Maggi S, D’Angiulli A: School start times and the sleep-wake
cycle of adolescents: a review and critical evaluation of available
evidence. Educ Res 2011, 40:56-61.
72. Carskadon M, Acebo C, Jenni O: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15251897?dopt=Abstract"] Regulation of adolescent sleep:
 implications for behavior. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004, 1021:276-291.
73. Campbell I, Higgins L, Trinidad J, Richardson P, Feinberg I: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18246977?dopt=Abstract"] The increase in
 longitudinally measured sleepiness across adolescence is related to the
 maturational decline in low-frequency EEG power. Sleep 2007,
30:1677-1687.
74. Crowley S, Acebo C, Carskadon M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17383934?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep, circadian rhythms, and delayed
 phase in adolescence. Sleep Med 2007, 8:602-612.
75. Laberge L, Petit D, Simard C, Vitaro F, Tremblay R, Montplaisir J:
 Development of sleep patterns in early adolescence. J Sleep Res 2001,
10:59-67.
76. Taylor D, Jenni O, Acebo C, Carskadon M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16120098?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep tendency during
 extended wakefulness: insights into adolescent sleep regulation and
 behavior. J Sleep Res 2005, 14:239-244.
77. Pandi-Perumal S, Seils L, Kayumov L, Ralph M, Lowe A, Moller H, Swaab D:
Senescence, sleep, and circadian rhythms. Age Res Rev 2002, 1:559-604.
78. Arbus C, Cochen V: Sleep changes with aging. Psychol Neuropsychiat Vieil
2010, 8:7-14.
79. Roepke S, Ancoli-Israel S: Sleep disorders in the elderly. Ind J Med Res
2010, 131:302-310.
80. Cochen V, Arbus C, Soto M, Villars H, Tiberge M, Montemayor T, Hein C,
Veccherini M, Onen S, Ghorayeb I, Verny M, Fitten L, Savage J, Dauvilliers Y,
Vellas B: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19300867?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep disorders and their impacts on healthy, dependent, and
 frail older adults. J Nutr Health Aging 2009, 13:322-329.
81. De La Calzada M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10863732?dopt=Abstract"] Modifications in sleep with aging. Rev Neurol 2000,
30:577-580.
82. Fetveit A, Bjorvatn B: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12112156?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep disturbances among nursing home residents.
Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2002, 17:604-609.
83. Huang Y, Liu R, Wang Q, Van Someren E, Xu H, Zhou J: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12126998?dopt=Abstract"] Age-associated
 difference in circadian sleep-wake and rest-activity rhythms. Physiol
Behav 2002, 76:597-603.
84. Park Y, Matsumoto K, Seo Y, Kang M, Nagashima H: Effects of age and
gender on sleep habits and sleep trouble for aged people. Biol Rhythm
Res 2002, 33:39-51.
85. Münch M, Cajochen C, Wirz-Justice A: Sleep and circadian rhythms in
ageing. Z Gerontol Geriatr 2005, 38:21-23.
86. Hoekert M, Riemersma-van der Lek R, Swaab D, Kaufer D, Van Someren E:
 Comparison between informant-observed and actigraphic assessments
 of sleep-wake rhythm disturbances in demented residents of homes for
 the elderly. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2006, 14:104-111.
87. Martin J, Webber A, Alam T, Harker J, Josephson K, Alessi C: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16473976?dopt=Abstract"] Daytime
 sleeping, sleep disturbance, and circadian rhythms in the nursing home.
Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2006, 14:121-129.
88. Monk T, Thompson W, Buysse D, Hall M, Nofzinger E, Reynolds C: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16911027?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep in
 healthy seniors: a diary study of the relation between bedtime and the
[URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16911027?dopt=Abstract"] amount of sleep obtained. J Sleep Res 2006, 15:256-260.
89. Bliwise D, Ansari F, Straight L, Parker K: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16319300?dopt=Abstract"] Age changes in timing and 24-
 hour distribution of self-reported sleep. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2005,
13:1077-1082.
90. Loerbroks A, Debling D, Amelang M, Sturmer T: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19548221?dopt=Abstract"] Nocturnal sleep duration
 and cognitive impairment in a population-based study of older adults.
Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2010, 25:100-109. 
91. Raymann R, Van Someren E: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18788655?dopt=Abstract"] Diminished capability to recognize the
 optimal temperature for sleep initiation may contribute to poor sleep in
 elderly people. Sleep 2008, 31:1301-1309.
92. Oosterman J, Van Someren E, Vogels R, Van Harten B, Scherder E:
 Fragmentation of the rest-activity rhythm correlates with age-related
 cognitive deficits. J Sleep Res 2009, 18:129-135.
93. Campbell S, Murphy P, Stauble T: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15667375?dopt=Abstract"] Effects of a nap on nighttime sleep and
 waking function in older subjects. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005, 53:48-53.
94. Minors D, Atkinson G, Bent N, Rabbitt P, Waterhouse J: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9504369?dopt=Abstract"] The effects of age
 upon some aspects of lifestyle and implications for studies on circadian
 rhythmicity. Age Ageing 1998, 27:67-72.
95. Minors D, Rabbitt P, Worthington H, Waterhouse J: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2743466?dopt=Abstract"] Variation in meals and
 sleep-activity patterns in aged subjects; its relevance to circadian
 studies. . Chronobiol Int 1989, 6:139-146.
96. Monk T, Buysse D, Hall M, Nofzinger E, Thompson W, Mazumdar S,
Reynolds C: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16887751?dopt=Abstract"] Age-related differences in the lifestyle regularity of seniors
 experiencing bereavement, care-giving, insomnia, and advancement
 into old-old age. Chronobiol Int 2006, 23:831-841.
97. Monk T, Kupfer D: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10841210?dopt=Abstract"] Circadian rhythms in healthy aging - effects
 downstream from the pacemaker. Chronobiol Int 2000, 17:355-368.
98. Monk T: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16077155?dopt=Abstract"] Aging human circadian rhythms: conventional wisdom may not
 always be right. J Biol Rhythms 2005, 20:366-374.
99. Monk T, Buysse D, Carrier J, Kupfer D: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10849237?dopt=Abstract"] Inducing jet-lag in older people:
 directional asymmetry. J Sleep Res 2000, 9:101-116.
100. Pandi-Perumal S, Zisapel N, Srinivasan V, Cardinali D: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16183237?dopt=Abstract"] Melatonin and sleep
 in aging population. Exp Gerontol 2005, 40:911-925.
101. Lushington K, Dawson D, Lack L: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10875557?dopt=Abstract"] Core body temperature is elevated
[URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10875557?dopt=Abstract"] during constant wakefulness in elderly poor sleepers. Sleep 2000,
23:504-510.
102. Carrier J, Monk T, Reynolds C, Buysse D, Kupfer D: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10023578?dopt=Abstract"] Are age differences in
 sleep due to phase differences in the output of the circadian timing
 system? Chronobiol Int 1999, 16:79-91.
103. Fetveit A, Bjorvatn B: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16927407?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep duration during the 24-hour day is associated
 with the severity of dementia in nursing home patients. Int J Geriatr
Psychiatry 2006, 21:945-950.
104. Crowley K: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21225347?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep and sleep disorders in older adults. Neuropsychol Rev
2011, 21:41-53.
105. Brainard G, Rollag M, Hanifin J: Photic regulation of melatonin in humans:
ocular and neural signal transduction. J Biol Rhythms 1997, 2:537-546.
106. Brainard G, Hanifin J, Greeson J, Byrne B, Glickman G, Gerner E, Rollag M:
 Action spectrum for melatonin regulation in humans: Evidence for a
 novel circadian photoreceptor. J Neurosci 2001, 21:6405-6412.
107. Thapan K, Arendt J, Skene D: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11507175?dopt=Abstract"] An action spectrum for melatonin
 suppression: evidence for a novel non-rod, non-cone photoreceptor
 system in humans. J Physiol 2001, 535:261-267.
108. Herjevic M, Middleton B, Thapan K, Skene D: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15763401?dopt=Abstract"] Light-induced melatonin
 suppression: age-related reduction in response to short wavelength
 light. Exp Gerontol 2005, 40:237-242.
109. Tokura H, Rutkowska D, Kim H, Aizawa S, Park S-J, Zhang P, Teramoto Y:
Physiological significance of light for behavioral and autonomic
temperature regulation in humans in terms of circadian rhythm. In
Biological Clocks. Mechanisms and Applications. Edited by: Touitou Y.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science; 1998:209-216.
110. Asplund R, Lindblad B: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14764356?dopt=Abstract"] The development of sleep in persons undergoing
 cataract surgery. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2002, 35:179-187.
111. Asplund R, Lindblad B: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14599706?dopt=Abstract"] Sleep and sleepiness 1 and 9 months after
 cataract surgery. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2004, 38:69-75.
112. Tanaka M, Hosoe K, Hamada T, Morita T: Change in sleep state of the
elderly before and after cataract surgery. J Physiol Anthropol 2011,
29:219-224.
113. Benloucif S, Green K, L’Hermite-Baleriaux M, Weintraub S, Wolfe L, Zee P:
 Responsiveness of the aging circadian clock to light. Neurobiol Aging
2006, 27:1870-1879.
114. Baehr E, Eastman C, Revelle W, Olson S, Wolfe L, Zee P: Circadian phase-
shifting effects of nocturnal exercise in older compared with young
adults. Am J Physiol 2003, 284:R1542-R1550.
115. Waterhouse J, Minors D, Folkard S, Owen D, Atkinson G, MacDonald I,
Nevill A, Reilly T, Sytnik N, Turner P, Weinert D: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10023579?dopt=Abstract"] Lack of evidence that
 feedback from lifestyle alters the amplitude of the circadian pacemaker
 in humans. Chronobiol Int 1999, 16:93-107.
Page 14
Waterhouse et al. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012, 31:5
http://www.jphysiolanthropol.com/content/31/1/5 
Page 14 of 14
116. Dijk D, Duffy J, Czeisler C: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10841208?dopt=Abstract"] Contribution of circadian physiology and sleep
 homeostasis to age-related changes in human sleep. Chronobiol Int 2000,
17:285-311.
117. Harper D, Volicer L, Stopa E, McKee A, Nitta M, Satlin A: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15879584?dopt=Abstract"] Disturbance of
 endogenous circadian rhythm in aging and Alzheimer disease. Am J
Geriatr Psychiatry 2005, 13:359-368.
118. Kendall A, Lewy A, Sack R: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11220783?dopt=Abstract"] Effects of aging on the intrinsic circadian
 period of totally blind humans. J Biol Rhythms 2001, 16:87-95.
119. Monk T, Buysse D, Begley A, Billy B, Fletcher M: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19360494?dopt=Abstract"] Effects of a two-hour change in
 bedtime on the sleep of healthy seniors. Chronobiol Int 2009, 26:526-543.
120. Dijk D, Duffy J, Riel E, Shanahan T, Czeisler C: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10087357?dopt=Abstract"] Ageing and the circadian
 and homeostatic regulation of human sleep during forced desynchrony
 of rest, melatonin and temperature rhythms. J Physiol 1999, 516:611-627.
121. Niggemyer K, Begley A, Monk T, Buysse D: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15683145?dopt=Abstract"] Circadian and homeostatic
 modulation of sleep in older adults during a 90-minute day study. Sleep
2004, 27:1535-1541.
122. Cajochen C, Münch M, Knoblauch V, Blatter K, Wirz-Justice A: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16687319?dopt=Abstract"] Age-related
 changes in the circadian and homeostatic regulation of human sleep.
Chronobiol Int 2006, 23:461-474.
123. Campbell I, Feinberg I: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15585353?dopt=Abstract"] Homeostatic sleep response to naps is similar in
 normal elderly and young adults. Neurobiol Aging 2005, 26:135-144.
124. Monk T, Buysse D, Carrier J, Billy B, Rose L: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11560181?dopt=Abstract"] Effects of afternoon “siesta”
 naps on sleep, alertness, performance, and circadian rhythms in the
 elderly. Sleep 2001, 24:680-687.
125. Vinzio S, Ruellan A, Perrin A, Schlienger J, Goichot B: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12519455?dopt=Abstract"] Actigraphic
 assessment of the circadian rest-activity rhythm in elderly patients
 hospitalized in an acute care unit. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2003, 57:53-58.
126. Gasio P, Krauchi K, Cajochen C, Van Someren E, Amrhein I, Pache M,
Savaskan E, Wirz-Justice A: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12543279?dopt=Abstract"] Dawn-dusk simulation light therapy of
 disturbed circadian rest-activity cycles in demented elderly. Exp Gerontol
2003, 38:207-216.
127. Benloucif S, Orbeta L, Ortiz R, Janssen I, Finkel S, Bleiberg J, Zee P: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15683146?dopt=Abstract"] Morning
 or evening activity improves neuropsychological performance and
[URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15683146?dopt=Abstract"] subjective sleep quality in older adults. Sleep 2004, 27:1542-1551.
128. Fetveit A, Bjorvatn B: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15175095?dopt=Abstract"] The effects of bright-light therapy on actigraphical
 measured sleep last for several weeks post-treatment. A study in a
 nursing home population. J Sleep Res 2004, 13:153-158.
129. Valtonen M, Niskanen L, Kangas A, Koskinen T: Effect of melatonin-rich
night-time milk on sleep and activity in elderly institutionalized subjects.
Nordic J Psychiatry 2005, 59:217-221.
130. Conn D, Madan R: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16732687?dopt=Abstract"] Use of sleep-promoting medications in nursing home
 residents - risks versus benefits. Drugs Aging 2006, 23:271-287.
131. Grandner M, Kripke D, Langer R: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16725207?dopt=Abstract"] Light exposure is related to social and
 emotional functioning and to quality of life in older women. Psychiatry
Res 2006, 143:35-42.
132. Martin J, Marler M, Harker J, Josephson K, Alessi C: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17301040?dopt=Abstract"] A multicomponent
 nonpharmacological intervention improves activity rhythms among
 nursing home residents with disrupted sleep/wake patterns. J Gerontol A
Biol Sci Med Sci 2007, 62:67-72.
133. Fetveit A: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19702931?dopt=Abstract"] Late-life insomnia: a review. Geriatr Gerontol Int 2009, 9:220-234.
134. Friedman L, Zeitzer J, Kushida C, Zhdanova I, Noda A, Lee T, Schneider B,
Guilleminault C, Sheikh J, Yesavage J: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19187411?dopt=Abstract"] Scheduled bright light for treatment
 of insomnia in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2009, 57:441-452.
135. Wade A, Ford I, Crawford G, McConnachie A, Nir T, Laudon M, Zisapel N:
 Nightly treatment of primary insomnia with prolonged release
 melatonin for 6 months: a randomized placebo controlled trial on age
 and endogenous melatonin as predictors of efficacy and safety. BMC
Med 2010, 8:51.
136. Zisberg A, Gur-Yaish N, Shochat T: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20394320?dopt=Abstract"] Contribution of routine to sleep quality
 in community elderly. Sleep 2010, 33:509-514.
137. Lieverse R, Van Someren E, Nielen M, Uitdehaag B, Smit J, Hoogendijk W:
 Bright light treatment in elderly patients with nonseasonal major
 depressive disorder: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 2011, 68:61-70.
138. Mishima K, Okawa M, Shimizu T, Hishikawa Y: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11231989?dopt=Abstract"] Diminished melatonin
 secretion in the elderly caused by insufficient environmental
 illumination. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001, 86:129-134.
139. Rikkert M, Rigaud A: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11828891?dopt=Abstract"] Melatonin in elderly patients with insomnia - a
 systematic review. Z Gerontol Geriatr 2001, 34:491-497.
140. Raymann R, Swaab D, Van Someren E: [URL: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17070562?dopt=Abstract"] Skin temperature and sleep-onset
 latency: changes with age and insomnia. Physiol Behav 2007, 90:257-266. 
doi:10.1186/1880-6805-31-5
Cite this article as: Waterhouse et al.: Daily rhythms of the sleep-wake
cycle. Journal of Physiological Anthropology 2012 31:5.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
