3 
I
Ce. uen reakh
of M= Chwetts 
Form CPF M 102: Campaign Finance
Municipal Form
Office of Campaign and 
Political Finance 
Reporf010 MAY 13 q II: 
TOWN CI- ERK
F R`,  t. 9lN" 
IH 
AM 
03 ,
File with:
City or Town Clerk or Election Commission Please print or type all information, except signatures.  7
Fill in dates: 
Reporting Period Beginning 
Month  Date
3Z-? 
Year
Q
Type of report: (  Check one)
El 8th day preceding preliminary 8th day preceding election 
Ending 
Month
r 
Date
3 
Year
30 day after election year-end report dissolution
Full Name of Candidate( if applicable) 
fA tI.J6NAM 
SEL EGfAr. U, I
Office Sought and District
5  EA a / 2D• Fie AM•
Residential Address 
Tel. No.(  optional) 
fZ 
Committee Name
rye 
L• S I11 Ti
Name of Committee Tr asurer
A+ .-  v.  ar n .  D! 7i! 
Committee Mailing Address
Tel. No.( optional)
SUMMARY BALANCE INFORMATION:
Line 1: Ending balance from previous report
Line 2: Total receipts this period ( page 2, line 11) 
Line 3: Subtotal (line 1  plus line 2) 
Line 4: Total expenditures this period ( page 3, line 14) $
Line 5; Ending balance (line 3 minus line 4) 
23 92• A
VX3• z/
rS. yo
3 AV• /
zk—o•
Line 6: Total in-kind contributions this period ( page 4) $  —
LineLine 7: Total ( all) outstanding liabilities (page 4) 
Line 8: Name of bank( s) used  rv• eretp) r v-0/ 
0—U`
i/oi/• 6/
Affidavit of Committee Treasurer:
I certify that I have examined this report includi attached schedules and it is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, a true and complete statement of all
campaign finance activity, including all contributio s, loans, receipts, expenditures, disbursements, in-kind contributions and liabilities for this reporting period
and represents camp ign finance activity 11  rsons acting under the authority or on behalf of this committee in accordance with the requirements of
M. G. L. c. 5 .,  Igoe nder the penalties of perjury: 
S o  0
Treasurers signature( in ink) 
Date
FOR CANDIDATE FILINGS ONLY: (CANDIDATE MUST SIGN BELOW)
Affidavit of Candidate: ( check 1 box only)
Candidate with Committee and no activity independent of the committee
I certify that I have examined this report including attached schedules and it.is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, a true and complete statement of all
campaign finance activity, ofall persons acting under the authority or on behalfof this committee in accordance with the requirements ofM.G.L. c. 55. I
have not received any contrib tions, incurred any liabilities nor made any expenditures on my behalf during this reporting period.
Candidate without Comm tee( R Candidate with independent activity filing separate report
I certify that I have examined s report including attached schedules and it is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, a true and complete statement of all
campaign finance activity, inclu '  ng contributions, loans, receipts, expenditures, disbursements, in-kind contributions and liabilities for this reporting period
and represents the campaign finan a activity of all persons acting under the authority or on behalf of this committee in accordance with the requirements of
M. G. L. c. 55.  Signed under the penalties of perjury:
Candid guaturen ink) 
ZAAW
Date 
i
Page 2
SCHEDULE A: RECEIPTS
M.G.L. c. 55 requires that the name and residential address be reported, in alphabetical order, for all receipts over$ 50 in a calendar
year. Committees must keep detailed accounts andrecords ofallreceipts, butneedonly itemize those receipts over$ 50. In addition,
the occupation and employer must be reportedfor all persons who contribute$ 200 or more in a calendar year.
This page may be copied if additional pages are required to report all receipts. 
number on each page. 
Please include your committee name and a page
Date
Received 
Name and Residential Address
alphabetical listing required) 
Amount Occupation & Employer
for contributions of$ 200 or more)
JoNa kaI N
2W yvvj>A4cae Aga, 
fIZANN' 
6070
1027  7MW00A> R411-
2  f" í2a  rr, 
PhP2 & W  àa
1, 
0Z* 
1JA. 
W)0019- 
i
Line9: Total receipts in excess of$ 50 ( or listed above)
Line 10: Total receipts $ 50 and under* ( not listed above) 
300 CV
j3 ZJ 
A 1., e/ 
- 
I
lcc / 
21 ttewhe
Line 11: TOTAL RECEIPTS INTHE PERIOD  3 1  ZI Enter onpage 1, line2
Ifyouhave itemized receipts of$ 50andunderinclude them inline9. Line 10should include onlythosereceipts notitemized above.
Page 2
Page 3
SCHEDULE B: EXPENDITURES
M.G.L. c. 55 requires committees to list, in alphabetical order, all expenditures over$ 50 in a reporting period. Committees must keep
detailed accounts and records of all expenditures, but need only itemize those over$ 50. Expenditures $ 50 and under may be added
together, from committee records, andreported online13.
Thispagemaybecopiedifadditionalpagesarerequiredtoreportallexpenditures. Pleaseincludeyourcommitteenameandapage
number on each page.
Date Paid To Whom Paid  Address Purpose of Expenditure Amount
alphabetical listing)
f-4Ltrfó 
f 5i^^. )
o  / 
u a,  Mp G SEnv. 
r.  frr ,& v, e 
F;  A+ n- 
A4j9 000
w sk bfor+ •
0. 30
4jt4 . Afj o 7tl 
1
r  c!, 
SC LU1
terse, 
2,J—D  IV
33 3
V/ f  3Y 
I
I
Line 12: Expenditures over$ 50
Line 13: Expenditures $ 50 and under* d ÒD
Enter on page 1, line 4  Line 14: TOTAL EXPENDITURES 3 
I
If you haveitemized expenditures of $ 50 and under, include them inline 12. Line 13 should include only those expenditures not
itemized above. 
Page 3
Page 4
SCHEDULE C: "  IN- KIND" CONTRIBUTIONS
Pleaseitemizecontributorswhohavemadein-kindcontributionsofmorethan$ 50. In-kindcontributions$ 50andundermaybeadded
together from the committee' s records and included in line 16.
Date
Received 
From Whom Received* Residential Address Description of
Contribution 
Value
Enter on page 1, line 6 
Line15: In- kindover$ 50
Line16: In-kind$ 50 and under
Line 17: Total In- kind
If an in-kind contribution is received from a person who contributes more than$ 50 in a calendar year, you must report the name and
address of the contributor; in addition, if the contribution is $ 200 or more, you must also report the contributor's occupation and
employer. 
SCHEDULE D: LIABILITIES
M.G.L. c. 55 requires committees to report ALL liabilities which have been reported previously andare still outstanding, as well as
those liabilities incurred during this reporting period.
Date
Incurred 
To Whom Du  Address  Purpose Amount
Enter on page 1, line 7 
fee- /0/ uylow
t Line 18: OUTSTANDING LIABILITIES (  ALL) J/ yi) y• 6
Thispagemaybecopiedifadditionalpagesarerequiredtoreportallactivity. Pleaseincludeyourcommitteenameandapagenumber
on each page.  Page 4
