t, -= t1_ t.
Commonwealth
of Massachusetts 
Form CPF M 102: Campaign Finance Report
Municipal Form
Office of Campaign and Political Finance
File with:
City or Town Clerk or Election Commission Please print or type all information, except signatures. 
2011 JAN I  I  2t  q
TOWN CLERK
Fill in dates:
Reporting Period Beginning 
Month
Or 
Date
0 3 
Year
0  Ending 
Month
2. 
Date
3/ 
Year
0
Type ofreport: (Check one)
8th day preceding preliminary 8th day preceding election 030 day after election year -end report dissolution
C »4,JUf SY.slzky
Full Name of Candidate ( if applicable)
2Art/04i>A4/jyt. 
S t Le&TMAN
Office Sought and District
SZ 6XJ / 0aoo
Residential Address 
e rE  4, - //. Ivr
Committee Name
VGtdt r.+ ,
L . .3
Name of Committee Treasurer
Committee Mailing Address
Tel. No. (optional)  Tel. No. (optional)
SUMMARY BALANCE INFORMATION:
Line 1: Ending balance from previous report
Line 2: Total receipts this period (page 2, line 11)
Line 3: Subtotal ( line 1  plus line 2)
Line 4: Total expenditures this period (page 3, line 14) 
Line 5: Ending balance (line 3 minus line 4) 
CYD. Y7
wd -00
0 9 0 -VI'
IV 9. 3d.'
3/.  //
Line 6: Total in -kind contributions this period (page 4) 
Line 7: Total (all) outstanding liabilities (page 4)
Line 8: Name of bank(s) used 
0
1/,yeq. 6/
Affidavit of Committee Treasurer:
I certify that I have examined this report including attached schedules and it is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, a true and complete statement of all
campaign finance activity, including all contributions, oans, receipts, expenditures, disbursements, in -kind contributions and liabilities for this reporting period
and represents the campaign finance tivity o  per ns acting under the authority or on behalf of this committee in accordance with the requirements of
M.L. G. c. 55.E  ignecj der the penalties of perjury:
Treasurer' s signature ( in ink)  Date
FOR CANDIDATE FILINGS ONLY: (CANDIDATE MUST SIGN BELOW)
Affidavit ofCandidate: (check 1 box only)
Candidate with Committee and no activity independent of the committee
I certify that I have e  mined this report including attached schedules and it is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, a true and complete statement of all
campaign finance acti 'ty, of all persons acting under the authority or on behalf of this committee in accordance with the requirements of M.L.G.c. 55, I
have not received any co itributions, incurred any liabilities nor made any expenditures on my behalf during this reporting period.
0 Candidate without Committee OR Candidate with independent activity filing separate report
I certify that I have examined this report including attached schedules and it is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, a true and complete statement of all
campaign finance activity, , cluding contributions, loans, receipts, expenditures, disbursements, in -kind contributions and liabilities for this reporting period
and represents the campaign`,finance activity of all persons acting under the authority or on behalf of this committee in accordance with the requirements of
M.L. G. c. 55.  Signed under the penalties of perjury:
i  date si 
i  mk)  Date
i
Page 2
SCHEDULE A: RECEIPTS
M.L,G.c, 55 requires that the name and residential address be reported, in alphabetical order, for all receipts over $50 in a calendar
year. Committees must keep detailed accounts and records of all receipts, but need only itemize those receipts over $50. In addition,
the occupation and employer must be reported for all persons who contribute $200 or more in a calendar year.
Thispagemaybecopied ifadditional pagesarerequiredtoreportallreceipts. Pleaseincludeyourcommittee nameandapage
number on each page.
Date  Name and Residential Address Amount Occupation & Employer
Received alphabetical listing required) for contributions of $200 or more)
Line 9: Total receipts in excess of $50 (or listed above)
Line 10: Total receipts $50 and under* (not listed above) YOU 00
Line 11: TOTAL RECEIPTS IN THE PERIOD Swo eo) Enter on page 1, line 2
If you have itemized receipts of $50 and under include them in line 9. Line 10 should include only those receipts not itemized above.
Page 2
Page 3
SCHEDULE B: EXPENDITURES
M.L. G. c. 55 requires committees to list, in alphabetical order, all expenditures over $50 in a reporting period. Committees must keep
detailed accounts and records of all expenditures, but need only itemize those over $50. Expenditures $50 and under may be added
together, from committee records, and reported on line 13.
Thispagemaybecopiedifadditional pagesarerequiredtoreportallexpenditures. Pleaseincludeyourcommitteenameandapage
number on each page.
Date Paid To Whom Paid  Address Purpose of Expenditure Amount
alphabetical listing)
OVA 5312- S4te-4 "%La.%f 7 /'  / I"2 ,1,vti Ni/1 
l  40-
Line 12: Expenditures over $50  A Dy
Line 13: Expenditures $50 and under* 0a
Enter on page 1, line 4  Line 14:TOTAL EXPENDITURES /  del .•  3
If you have itemized expenditures of $50 and under, include them in line 12. Line 13 should include only those expenditures not
itemized above.  Page 3
Page 4
SCHEDULE C: "IN- KIND" CONTRIBUTIONS
Please itemize contributors who have made in -kind contributions of more than $50. In -kind contributions $50 and under may be added
together from the committee's records and included in line 16.
Date
Received 
From Whom Received* Residential Address Description of
Contribution 
Value
Enter on page 1, line 6 
Line 15: In -kind over $
50
Line 16: In -kind $50 and under
Line 17: Total In -kind 
0
2) —
If an in -kind contribution is received from a person who contributes more than $50 in a calendar year, you must report the name and
address of the contributor; in addition, if the contribution is $200 or more, you must also report the contributor's occupation and
employer. 
SCHEDULE D: LIABILITIES
M.L. G. c. 55 requires committees to report ALL liabilities which have been reported previously and are still outstanding, as well as
those liabilities incurred during this reporting period.
Date
Incurred 
To Whom Due  Address  Purpose Amount
Enter on page 1, line 7 
f p ev / ; W k '
Line 18: OUTSTANDING LIABILITIES ( ALL) 6 74* 6
Thispage may becopied ifadditional pages arerequired toreport allactivity. Please include your committee name and apagenumber
on 
each page.  Page 4
