Y
LIEn  r
s 
Form CPF M 102: Campaign Finance Report
Municipal Form
Office of Campaign and Political Finance
Commonwealth
of Wssachusetts
File w
City or Town Clerk or Election Commission Please print or type all information, except signatures. 
0 1  MAR 8  A 1D" 2 q
4 _
0 V/ il-]C  F R K
Fill in dates  Month
Reporting Period Beginning ,- 
Date  Year 
61  Ending . 
Month  Date
p 
Year
t
Type of report: (Check one)
8th day preceding preliminary PRfth day preceding election 030 day after election year -end report dissolution
A\)I  r - 
F C'
Full Name of Candidate (if applicable)
Sow 00 t-.. :o 
P--01 4  or.
Office Sought and District
ly 
W) 
Residential Address
2q 
Tel, No. (optional) 
00MrV\r-C-1-1L- 
Committee Name
i 
p
Name of Committee Treasurer
Lb Z) 45 U)A  N (IO W P( 
ivk 0
Committee Mailing Address
Tel, No. (optional)
SUMMARY BALANCE INFORMATION:
Line 1: Ending balance from previous report
Line Z: Total receipts this period (page 2, line 1 i)
Line 3: Subtotal (line l plus line 2)
Line 4: Total expenditures this period Gage 3, tine ia)
Line 5 ;Ending balance (line 3 minus line 4)
Line 6: Total in -kind contributions this period (page 4)
Line 7: Total (all) outstanding liabilities Gage a)
Line $:  Name of bank(s) used N M  C.r  6if"io0r/ 
lI P °i 4S
Affidavit of Committee Treasurer:
I certify that I have examined this report including attached schedules and it is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, a true and complete statement of all
campaign finance activity, including all contributions, loans, receipts, expenditures, disbursements, in -kind contributions and liabilities for this reporting period
and represents the ca  n finance activity of all persons acting under the authority or on behalf of this committee in accordance with the requirements of
M.L. G. c. 55
Trees er0s signature (in ink) * 
Signed under the penalties of perjury: 
at r
FOR CANDIDATE FILINGS ONLY: (CANDIDATE MUST SIGN ]BELOW)
Affidavit of Candidate: (check I box only)
Candidate with Committee and no activity independent of the committee
I certify that I have examined this report including attached schedules and it. is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, a true and complete statement of all
campaign finance activity, ofall persons acting under the authority or on behalf of this committee in accordance with the requirements of M.L. G.c. 55. I
have not received any contributions, incurred any liabilities nor made any expenditures on my behalf during this reporting period.
Candidate without Committee OR Candidate with independent activity filing separate report
I certify that I have examined this report including attached schedules and it is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, a true and complete statement of all
campaign finance activity, including contributions, loans, receipts, expenditures, disbursements, in -kind contributions and liabilities far this reporting period
and represents the campaign finance activity of all persons acting under the authority or on behalf of this committee in accordance with the requirements of
1GM; L; --,55,  Signed under the penalties of perjury:
Candidate signature ( in ink)  Date
Page 2
SCHEDULE A: RECEIPTS
M. G.L. c. 55 re that the name and residential address be reported, in alphabetical order, for all receipts over $
50 in a calendar
year. 
Committees must keep detailed accounts and records of allreceipts, butneed onl itemi those receipts over $50. In addition,
the occupation and emplo must be reportedfor allpersons who contribute $200 or more in a calendar year.
This pa ma be copied ifadditional pa areretoreportallreceipts. Please include yourcommittee nameand apa
number on each pa
Date  Name and Residential Address Amount Occupation & Emplo
Received (  alphabeticallistinre (  for contributions of $200 or more)
jAM 000`- Lt;-
13  K4 10 1AX) tiery 0, RAM-. 1moom lob IN
Line 9--
0 
Total receipts in excess of $50 (or lis above) 1000 lob
Line 10 :Total receipts $50 and under* (not listed above) a
Line 11: TOTAL RECEIPTS 'IN THE PERIOD  Enter on pa 1, Im"e 2
If you have itemized receipts of $50 and under include them in line 9. Line 10 should include onl those receipts not itemized above.
Pa 2
Page 3
SCHEDULE B: EXPENDITURES
M G.L. c. 55 requires committees to list, in alphabetical order, all expenditures over a$50 in areportingperiod. Committees mustkeep
detailed accounts and records ofall expenditures, but need only itemize those overx$50. Expenditures $50 and under may be added
together, from committee records, and reported on line 13.
Thispagemaybecopiedifadditionalpagesarerequiredtoreportallexpenditures. Pleaseincludeyourcommitteenameandapage
number on each page.
Date Paid To Whom Paid
alphabetical listing) 
Address Purpose of Expenditure Amount
AT
ap 0 c" 0
l 
f 
1
0 go I  IV, t  11 AVM
Buq1V P Pq 06to I 
1 / 
i Z
c —, Wzs, 
I 
6pi 
7q 9
1 
r 
po Gve 
0 C #  C
A 
i
I 
SA Odv-E  70
t 
yo c l  i-r G 
1)0
r
Line 12: Expenditures over $50
Line 13: Expenditures $50 and under* 0
Enter on page 1, line 4  Line 14: TOTAL EXPENDITURES 
f
If you have itemized expenditures of $50 and under, include them in line .12. Line 13 should include only those expenditures not
itemized above.  Page 3
Page 4
SCHEDULE C: "IN -KIND" CONTRIBUTIONS
Please itemize contributors who have made in -kind contributions of more than $50. In -kind contributions $50 and under may be added
tnaptt, x fMm the committee' s records and included in line 16.
If an in-kind contribution is received from a person who contributes more than $50 in a calendar year, you must report the name and
address ofthe contributor; in addition, ifthe contribution is $200 or more, you must also report the contributor's occupation and
employer. 
SCHEDULED: LIABILITIES
M.G. L. c. 55 requires committees to report ALL liabilities which have been reported previously and' are still outstanding, as well as
those liabilities incurred during this reporting period.
Date
Incurred 
To whom Due
C A-041 
Address  Purpose
Fep- 
Amount
Enter on page 1, line 7  Line 18: OUTSTANDING LIABILITIES ( ALL)
This page may be copied if additional pages arerequired toreport allactivity. Please include your committee name and a page number
on each page.  Page 4
