Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
Title: Revitalization of integrated disease surveillance and response in Sierra Leone post Ebola virus disease outbreak
Keywords: Surveillance,Public health,Health information systems,Disease outbreak,Ebola virus disease
ModDate: 2019/04/02 10:05:18+02'00'
Subject: BMC Public Health, 2019, doi:10.1186/s12889-019-6636-1
Author: Charles Njuguna
CreationDate: 2019/03/30 01:05:48+08'00'
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Surveillance,Public health,Health information systems,Disease outbreak,Ebola virus disease
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s12889-019-6636-1
xmp:dc:publisher: BMC Public Health
xmp:dc:description: BMC Public Health, 2019, doi:10.1186/s12889-019-6636-1
xmp:dc:subject: Surveillance; Public health; Health information systems; Disease outbreak; Ebola virus disease
xmp:dc:title: Revitalization of integrated disease surveillance and response in Sierra Leone post Ebola virus disease outbreak
xmp:dc:creator: Charles Njuguna; Amara Jambai; Alexander Chimbaru; Anders Nordstrom; Roland Conteh; Anderson Latt; Shikanga O-tipo; Robert Musoke; Jane Githuku; Zablon Yoti; Ali Yahaya; Ambrose Talisuna; Soatiana Rajatonirina; Ibrahima Socé Fall
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2019-04-02T10:05:18+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2019-03-30T01:05:48+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2019-04-02T10:05:18+02:00
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:461581d8-66f5-4f8d-98e5-011c3e6ccb1f
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:ad28b641-06b1-48c4-92fd-28ff28f653c4
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:e538e00d-3f25-4ee3-92b9-2c279f4a0bf1
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2019-03-30T01:16:50+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A reference to the original document from which this one is derived. It is a minimal reference; missing components can be assumed to be unchanged. For example, a new version might only need to specify the instance ID and version number of the previous version, or a rendition might only need to specify the instance ID and rendition class of the original.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DerivedFrom
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: ResourceRef
xmp:pdfaType:description: Identifies a portion of a document. This can be a position at which the document has been changed since the most recent event history (stEvt:changed). For a resource within an xmpMM:Ingredients list, the ResourceRef uses this type to identify both the portion of the containing document that refers to the resource, and the portion of the referenced resource that is referenced.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Part#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stPart
xmp:pdfaType:type: Part
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/t/pg/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpTPg
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Paged-Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Fonts
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag Font
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: XMP08 Spec: An ordered array of plate names that are needed to print the document (including any in contained documents).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: PlateNames
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaType:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Font#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stFnt
xmp:pdfaType:type: Font
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://www.aiim.orBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods
  Results
  Conclusion
Background
Methods
  Adaptation of WHO African region -IDSR (2010) technical guidelines
  Defining flow of surveillance data in IDSR system, Sierra Leone
  IDSR roll- out trainings
  Supporting IDSR contributes to a strengthened healthcare system
  Shifting to electronic transmission of data
  Monitoring implementation of IDR through regular support supervision and data quality assessments
  Improving emergency preparedness and response capacity
Results
  Capacity building
  Shift from the paper based reporting to electronic surveillance system (e-IDSR)
  Use of weekly epidemiological bulletins as a feedback mechanism
  Outbreak detection, notification and response to suspected outbreaks and other important public health events
  Measles and rubella outbreak 2016–2017
  Use of malaria surveillance to monitor trends in acute febrile illnesses
  Enhanced surveillance for Ebola virus disease
  Addressing maternal mortality through IDSR
  The role of rapid response teams in outbreak investigation
  Preparedness to respond to outbreaks and other public health events
  Monitoring implementation of IDSR
Discussion
  A functional IDSR system “from Ebola to Health”
Conclusions
Additional file
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Authors’ contributions
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Publisher’s Note
Author details
References
Page 1
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-6636-1
RESEARCH ARTICLE  Open Access
Revitalization of integrated disease
surveillance and response in Sierra Leone
post Ebola virus disease outbreak
Charles Njuguna1*, Amara Jambai2, Alexander Chimbaru1, Anders Nordstrom4, Roland Conteh2, Anderson Latt1,
Shikanga O-tipo1, Robert Musoke1, Jane Githuku1, Zablon Yoti3, Ali Yahaya3, Ambrose Talisuna3,
Soatiana Rajatonirina3 and Ibrahima Socé Fall3
Abstract
Background: The Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MOHS) in Sierra Leone partially rolled out the implementation
of Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR) in 2003. After the Ebola virus disease outbreak in 2014–2015,
there was need to strengthen IDSR to ensure prompt detection and response to epidemic-prone diseases. We
describe the processes, successes and challenges of revitalizing public health surveillance in a country recovering
from a protracted Ebola virus disease outbreak.
Methods: The revitalization process began with adaptation of the revised IDSR guidelines and development of
customized guidelines to suit the health care systems in Sierra Leone. Public health experts defined data flow,
system operations, case definitions, frequency and channels of reporting and dissemination. Next, phased training
of IDSR focal persons in each health facility and the distribution of data collection and reporting tools was done.
Monitoring activities included periodic supportive supervision and data quality assessments. Rapid response teams
were formed to investigate and respond to disease outbreak alerts in all districts.
Results: Submission of reports through the IDSR system began in mid-2015 and by the 35th epidemiologic week,
all district health teams were submitting reports. The key performance indicators measuring the functionality of the
IDSR system in 2016 and 2017 were achieved (WHO Africa Region target ≥80%); the annual average proportion of
timely weekly health facility reports submitted to the next level was 93% in 2016 and 97% in 2017; the proportion
of suspected outbreaks and public health events detected through the IDSR system was 96% (n = 87) in 2016 and
100% (n = 85) in 2017.
Conclusion: With proper planning, phased implementation and adequate investment of resources, it is possible to
establish a functional IDSR system in a country recovering from a public health crisis. A functional IDSR system
requires well trained workforce, provision of the necessary tools and guidelines, information, communication and
technology infrastructure to support data transmission, provision of timely feedback as well as logistical support.
Keywords: Surveillance, Public health, Health information systems, Disease outbreak, Ebola virus disease
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:njugunach@who.int"] njugunach@who.int
1World Health Organization, Freetown, Sierra Leone
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2019 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364  Page 2 of 11
Background
Public health surveillance generates information needed
to assess health status of populations, track events of
public health importance such as outbreaks, identify
priorities and evaluate the effectiveness of programs [1].
Integration of disease surveillance systems is recom-
mended to increase cost effectiveness, efficiency and
effectiveness of surveillance system [2, 3].  In 1998, the
WHO-Africa region countries adopted the IDSR for the
timely detection and response to epidemic prone
diseases [4].  The strategy proposed efficient use of
resources to develop an integrated surveillance and
response system for major communicable diseases as
prioritized by individual countries. The IDSR strategy
focused on surveillance at the district level but also
defined core and support functions for other levels of
the public health system. Technical guidelines for the
implementation of IDSR strategy were developed in
2001 and adopted by various African countries including
Sierra Leone in 2008 [5].
Prompted by the severe acute respiratory syndrome
pandemic at the beginning of the twenty-first century,
the re-emergence of infectious diseases and threat of the
misuse of infectious agents such as smallpox virus as
biological weapons, WHO member states adopted the
revised International Health Regulations in 2005 which
came into force in June 2007 [6]. These new regulations
widened the scope of reportable events by defining pub-
lic health events of international concern, core surveil-
lance and response capacities, that countries would need
to focus on in order to increase their ability to detect,
respond and contain public health emergencies. Full
implementation of international health regulations 2005
would ensure containment of public health threats with
minimal interference [7] with international trade and
travel.
In order to comply with the new regulations, WHO
African member states with technical support from
United States Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC) revised guidelines for implementation of
IDSR in 2010 [7]. Systematic reviews of the implementa-
tion of IDSR strategy shows that most African countries
adopted the IDSR strategy albeit partially. However,
most countries have poor performance in IDSR core
functions which is closely linked to suboptimal supervi-
sion, training, resources and coordination [8].
The Ministry of Health and Sanitation (MOHS) in
Sierra Leone partially rolled out the implementation of
IDSR in 2003. Before the Ebola virus disease outbreak
that occurred in 2014, the country had not yet adopted
or implemented the revised IDSR guidelines (2010).
Thus, public health surveillance was weak in Sierra
Leone and may have contributed to the delayed case
detection of the first Ebola cases [9]. The situation was 
aggravated by the infection of 328 health care workers
with Ebola virus disease and the death of at least 152
[10].  Many volunteer health care workers, who consti-
tute a considerable proportion of health workforce in
Sierra Leone, resigned during the outbreak further wors-
ening the shortage of health care workers. This led to
the closure of health facilities thus interfering with
collection and transmission of surveillance data. A rapid
assessment conducted in 2015 showed that less than half
of the health facilities were submitting weekly reports of
priority diseases and often, the reports were submitted
late. Thus, the surveillance system was in need of
revitalization to ensure rapid detection of outbreaks and
tracking of the progress of health events such as the
Ebola virus disease outbreak. This paper describes the
processes, successes and challenges of revitalizing public
health surveillance in a country recovering from a pro-
tracted Ebola virus disease outbreak. It aims to provide
insight on strategies and requirements for successful
implementation of IDSR. By demonstrating the useful-
ness of IDSR as an early warning system for epidemic
prone diseases such as Ebola Virus disease, this work
hopes to trigger more investment in public health sur-
veillance. It can provide a reference for countries/regions
seeking to strengthen weak disease surveillance and
response systems.
Methods
Adaptation of WHO African region -IDSR (2010) technical
guidelines
The first step towards revitalization of IDSR in Sierra
Leone involved the adaptation of the WHO AFRO IDSR
guidelines of 2010 to suit the organizational structure
and needs of the Sierra Leone healthcare system [11].
The Ministry of Health and Sanitation organized a five
day workshop that brought together 50 experts from
MOHS, WHO, CDC and other stakeholders to develop
the first IDSR technical guidelines for Sierra Leone.
Working in small groups, the experts discussed each
chapter customizing it to suit the local context of Sierra
Leone. The team identified priority diseases, conditions
and public health events for inclusion in the surveillance
system, and also aligned the guidelines to the inter-
national health regulations requirements.
There are eight core functions of IDSR that are
performed by various levels in the health system. The
first is case and event identification using standard case
definitions. This is followed by case reporting to the next
level, either immediately or at predefined intervals.
These two functions usually occur in health facilities.
Next data is collated, analyzed and interpreted at the
health facility, district and national levels. Suspected
cases, events and outbreaks are investigated and where
possible confirmed in the laboratory. Investigations also
Page 3
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364  Page 3 of 11
identify the source and modes of transmission to in-
form control and prevention measures. Another core
function at levels is preparedness to respond to future
outbreaks. A high level of preparedness facilitates a
well-coordinated and effective response, in case of an
outbreak. District health teams and national surveil-
lance offices provide regular feedback to data
providers and other stakeholders on outcome of in-
vestigations and response activities. Periodic assess-
ment of the effectiveness of the IDSR, including
timeliness, data quality and overall performance is
done with the aim of identifying and correcting gaps.
For each IDSR core function, detailed procedures,
tools and guides were developed (Table 1).  During
discussions in a subsequent meeting, the same group of
experts validated the updated guidelines. Finally, the
guidelines were peer reviewed by a WHO IDSR expert
and adopted for use in Sierra Leone. The guidelines
provided a blueprint for implementation of the IDSR
strategy in Sierra Leone by outlining the roles of the
community, peripheral health units, district health
management teams and the national surveillance pro-
gram in IDSR.
Defining flow of surveillance data in IDSR system,
Sierra Leone
Most public health surveillance systems combine event
based surveillance at the community level and indicator
based surveillance in the health facilities. In the indicator
based surveillance systems, clinical and socio-demographic
information collected from patients seeking treatment in
health facilities is collated and transmitted to regional
health departments and finally to the national international
health regulations focal point who then communicates
with the WHO international health regulations focal point
according to international health regulations (2005) regula-
tions [11].  Data flow in the revised IDSR guidelines for
Sierra Leone was adapted to fit this outline (Fig. 1). In the
proposed indicator based surveillance system, healthcare
workers in peripheral health unit record patient informa-
tion into registers routinely. Priority diseases would be re-
ported every week, with the epidemiologic week starting
on Monday and ending on Sunday of every week. At the
end of each epidemiologic week, a surveillance focal
person summarized data on priority diseases into weekly
reports and forwarded them to a designated surveillance
focal person in the district health office. For diseases that
required immediate notification to the next level, case
based forms were used for reporting. At the district health
office, data from multiple peripheral health units was
cleaned, checked for inconsistencies, aggregated and en-
tered into the district health information software database
which was accessed real time at the national level. 
If there was a condition that warranted notification,
the international health regulations focal point in the
Ministry of Health and Sanitation was responsible for
communicating with the WHO international health
regulations focal point. Data analysis and use was en-
couraged at all levels, and varied from simple descriptive
analysis to in-depth analysis at the national level. For ex-
ample, it was expected that all health facilities would
maintain a list of common diseases in their catchment
populations, districts generate trends from the merged
data from reporting peripheral health units and at the
national level, in-depth analysis of weekly data was done
with feedback given through the weekly epidemiological
bulletin. Surveillance data was discussed on weekly basis
in the Emergency Preparedness, Resilience and Response
Group meetings at National level and in monthly
meetings for all the health facility in-charges organized
by the District Medical Officer in all districts.
IDSR roll- out trainings
A training curriculum was developed based on the
adopted IDSR technical guidelines for Sierra Leone
(2015).  Next, the IDSR trainings were conducted in
phases, beginning with training of district level trainers,
then health care workers from the peripheral health
units. In order to ensure full participation in all districts,
healthcare workers from districts with interrupted trans-
mission of Ebola virus disease for more than 60 days
were trained first (Fig. 2). This also allowed the trainers
to use the health care workers experiences from the
Ebola outbreak to enhance training. Four advanced level
trainings, lasting five days, were held for 144 trainers
Trainer of Trainees. For each district, the trainer of
trainees comprised of the district medical officer,
Medical Superintendent, two district surveillance offi-
cers) and the hospital nursing officer in-charge were
trained as trainer of trainees.
The IDSR trainings were organized into modules
through which, participants were introduced to the con-
cept of disease surveillance. The modules included: 1)
early detection of priority diseases and other health
events; 2) reporting of public health events; 3) analysis
and interpretation of data generated through the surveil-
lance system; 4) early detection of unusual changes in
disease occurrence; 5) investigation and control of out-
breaks, 6) response to outbreaks and other public health
events; 7) communication and 8) monitoring and evalu-
ation to improve surveillance and response. Training
materials included; IDSR facilitators guide, participant’s
manual, Sierra Leone IDSR Technical guidelines (2015)
as well as the IDSR reporting tools. Participants were
taught how to identify cases of priority diseases using
standard case definitions, reporting requirements for
priority diseases, data quality and data analysis and use.
Page 4
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364  Page 4 of 11
Table 1 Summary of tools provided in adopted IDSR guidelines, Sierra Leone, 2015
IDSR Function  Tool/Template
Identify Cases of Priority Diseases and Events  1. Sierra Leone standard case definitions for reporting suspected priority diseases
conditions and events from the health facility to the district
2. Key signs and symptoms for case definitions for use at community level
3. Template for identifying district reporting sites
4. Laboratory functions by health system level
5. List of national laboratories for confirming priority diseases and conditions
Report Priority Diseases, Conditions and Events  1. IDSR case-based reporting form (immediate reporting)
2. IDSR health facility line listing form
3. IDSR case-based laboratory reporting form
4. IHR (2005) decision instrument
5. IDSR weekly summary reporting form
6. Report completeness (to be filled only by District & National Level)
7. IDSR weekly/monthly summary reporting form
8. Sierra Leone IDSR Reports and Data Sharing Log book
Analyse Data  1. Data Analysis Plan Template
2. Guide on how to generate a line graph manually
Investigate Suspected Outbreaks and other public health events 1. District log of suspected outbreaks and rumours
2. Checklist of laboratory supplies for use in an outbreak investigation
3. Recommended list of personal protective equipment
4. Guide for records review
5. Contacts recording sheet
6. Contact tracing form (follow-up)
Prepare to Respond to Outbreaks  1. Essential stock items for responding to outbreaks
2. Stock situation report
3. IDSR stock item transaction and balance sheet
Respond to Outbreaks  1. Case management guidelines
2. Infection prevention and control guidelines
3. Planning guide for supplemental vaccination activities and recommended
immunization practices guides
4. Guide for communication during an outbreak
Communicate Information  1. Sample district outbreak report
2. Sample public health bulletin
Monitor, evaluate surveillance and response  1. List of core indicators for the health facility level
2. Chart for monitoring performance of IDSR indicators at health facility level
3. List of core indicators for the district level
Presentations were used to introduce the participants to
each module, then they would work through case studies
in group discussions which included exercises on using
data collection and reporting tools.
After each trainer of trainees training, the district
trainers would be supported both financially and tech-
nically to conduct trainings for health care workers
working in peripheral health units in their districts. The
training for healthcare workers were less intense than
the trainer of trainee trainings and focused on three
modules, namely detection and reporting of priority 
diseases and public health events and data analysis.
Health care workers in peripheral health units per-
formed less IDSR core functions compared to those at
the district level. Hence, there training was less intense.
Supporting IDSR contributes to a strengthened
healthcare system
To support IDSR, the MOHS distributed IDSR patient
registers, data reporting tools, IDSR guidelines and
standard case definitions posters to all district health
offices and peripheral health units All district health
Page 5
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364  Page 5 of 11
Fig. 1 Flow chart showing data flow in IDSR system, Sierra Leone
offices were supplied with computers connected to the
internet through modems.
A closed user group was created whereby IDSR focal
persons, health facility in-charges and members of the
District Health Management teams were connected to
each other using toll free mobile phone lines. In this
system, two mobile network service providers were
identified and allocated districts in which to provide the
service on the basis of their network coverage. One mo-
bile line was connected in each peripheral health unit 
and 10 mobile phone lines for each district health man-
agement team. Similar arrangements were made for offi-
cials working at the national level in the directorate of
Disease Prevention and Control and the Central Public
Health Reference Laboratory. Members of the closed
user group could make unlimited calls to any member of
the group free of charge. This enhanced notification of
disease outbreaks and also improved referrals. Each dis-
trict health office had a dedicated vehicle for surveillance
while a motorcycle was available in each chiefdom.
Fig. 2 Phased roll out of IDSR trainings in Sierra Leone, 2015
Page 6
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364  Page 6 of 11
To increase human resource capacity, MOHS with
support from partners also hired data clerks to assist the
district surveillance officer in data management in each
district health office.
Shifting to electronic transmission of data
The IDSR data reporting system was paper based from
the health facility up to the national level. Through
MOHS partnership with WHO, CDC and e-Health
Africa, an electronic platform was designed and rolled
out in all districts in phase one. The migration was
achieved through a collaborative, phased approach, led
by a multidisciplinary steering committee. First, system
requirements and the roles of different actors were
defined. The system was anchored onto the existing
District Health Information Software platform. Migra-
tion began with IDSR data at the district health office in
three pilot districts, namely Port Loko, Western Area
Rural and Western Area Urban and later on was imple-
mented in all district health offices. The criteria for
selecting the three districts to pilot the e-IDSR were
internet connectivity and accessibility. The functioning
of e-IDSR was dependent on strong internet connectivity
thus the three districts with the best connectivity were
selected. Additionally, there was a need for intense
supervision during the initial stages. Thus, the most
ideal pilot sites had to be easily accessible to allow for
frequent monitoring visits. In the second phase,
electronic data transmission in health facilities was
tested in Port Loko district.
Monitoring implementation of IDR through regular
support supervision and data quality assessments
Starting February 2016, teams from MOHS, WHO and
other partners conducted supervision visits in randomly
selected peripheral health units in all districts. To im-
prove management of data collected during the visits, a
structured electronic checklist, uploaded onto the Open
Data Kit (ODK) platform was used for data collection.
The visits sought to assess the adequacy of staff,
infrastructure, and supplies to support implementation
of IDSR as well as the performance of selected IDSR
indicators as per existing guidelines. The reliability of
information generated through a surveillance system de-
pends on the quality of the data collected and transmitted
through the system. Cognizant of the need to ensure high
quality of IDSR data, MOHS with technical support from
WHO and other partners conducted periodic data quality
assessments in randomly selected PHUs in the districts. A
structured checklist developed using the open data kit
platform and loaded onto hand held devices was used for
data collection. We calculated verification factors (VF)
from recounted values of malaria positive cases recorded
in health facility registers and compared them to values 
abstracted from health facility weekly reports and the
DHIS 2 database. A VF < 100 was over reporting while a
VF > 100 was underreporting.
Improving emergency preparedness and response capacity
Rapid response teams, comprising of health officials
from the district health office, and WHO officials were
formed in each district, to investigate and respond to
suspected outbreaks. To improve emergency prepared-
ness and response a national emergency preparedness
plan was developed. Implementation of this plan re-
sulted in the formation of multidisciplinary emergency
preparedness and response teams in each district.
Results
Capacity building
From March 2015 to March 2016, 2300 health care
workers from 14 districts were trained in IDSR, most of
whom were health workers in-charges of peripheral health
units. This ensured that all health facilities had at least
one person trained on IDSR. Weekly reporting of priority
diseases commenced immediately after each training with
more health facilities submitting reports over time.
Additionally, a separate training was conducted for 418
clinicians drawn from hospitals (pubic, private and faith
based) all over the country. This training introduced the
clinicians to the concept of disease surveillance and the
role they played in generating quality surveillance data.
Shift from the paper based reporting to electronic
surveillance system (e-IDSR)
Submission of paper based reports through the IDSR
system began in Mid-2015 as more surveillance focal
persons were trained. By the 35th epidemiologic week,
the MOHs was receiving weekly reports from all
districts in the country.
Starting July 2016, IDSR data was entered into an elec-
tronic database directly from each district. Full integra-
tion of e-IDSR into the district health information
software platform was completed on the fifth epidemio-
logic week in 2017 and this system has since been used
to transmit and store IDSR data effectively. In the
e-IDSR system, health facilities submit weekly reports
through phone calls, mobile phone text messages,
delivery of hard copies or by email to the district health
office by 12 noon every Monday. After receiving the
weekly reports (hard copies, text messages, phone call
data), the district surveillance officer enters the data into
the e-IDSR platform through the computer desktop
application. The district surveillance officer reviews the
data entered into the district health information software
database for completeness, timeliness and validity. Real
time data is accessed by the national level after the valid-
ation by the district health office. The proportion of
Page 7
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364  Page 7 of 11
districts with complete health facility weekly reports in-
creased from 78% before introduction of e-IDSR to 96%
after migration to e-IDSR. In 2017, Sierra Leone
embarked on roll out of e-IDSR to the health facility
level (phase 2) using tablets.
Use of weekly epidemiological bulletins as a feedback
mechanism
In order to provide structured feedback and disseminate
the data from the surveillance system, the MOHS with
technical expertise from WHO developed a weekly
epidemiological bulletin (Additional file 1). The bulletin
provided a summary of data on the key notifiable dis-
eases from the weekly reports submitted by the districts.
It also included analysis on the proportion of health fa-
cilities submitting weekly reports to the district and as
well as timeliness of submitted reports. Completeness of
reporting was measured by the proportion of health fa-
cilities that submitted weekly reports compared to the
total number of health facilities expected to submit re-
ports in a particular district. Reporting rates below 80%
were considered sub-optimal as per WHO standards.
This provided a measure of representativeness of the
surveillance data and helped identify silent health
facilities or districts for immediate follow up.
The epidemiological bulletin was circulated to all rele-
vant district and national MOHS staff, partners includ-
ing WHO. Besides serving as an effective feedback
mechanism, the method of using bulletins also improved
completeness and timeliness of reporting as districts
with low reporting rates and late submissions were
followed up to resolve challenges that contributed to
poor performance. Overall, the proportion of peripheral
health unit submitting weekly reports to the districts in-
creased from 68.2% in 2015, 92.4% in 2016 and 97.3% in
2017. With time, the method became so acceptable to
the district teams that several of them adopted the
bulletin to provide feedback to the peripheral health
units on trends of common diseases, data quality and
updates on outbreaks occurring within the districts.
Outbreak detection, notification and response to suspected
outbreaks and other important public health events
The proportion of outbreaks detected through the IDSR
system increased from 96% in 2016 to 100% in 2017. 
Laboratory confirmation of outbreaks also improved
with 72% of laboratory results received within a week in
2017 compared to 17% in 2016. Timeliness in notifica-
tion of and response to outbreaks declined from 92% in
2016 to 81% in 2017 (Table 2). The likely reasons for the
decline were reduced WHO logistical support and
staffing levels providing support to the district health
management teams in 2017. Starting 2015, through
2017, WHO scaled down its presence in all districts as
part of the post Ebola recovery plan.
Measles and rubella outbreak 2016–2017
A suspected measles outbreak affecting 11/14 districts
was promptly detected in the first quarter of 2016 when
suspected cases increased tenfold over four months
(Fig. 3). Descriptive analysis of data from suspected cases
at the national level generated district and age specific
attack rates which directed the response team to focus
the vaccination campaign to children aged < five years
beginning in the most affected districts. The measures
taken were effective and led to a rapid decline in the
number of reported cases. Laboratory confirmation,
done on a small subset of the cases, helped confirm the
causative agent during the outbreak. In February 2017,
incorporating laboratory results of suspected measles
cases helped differentiate an outbreak of rubella that
may have otherwise been confused for measles based on
the clinical presentation of the cases.
Use of malaria surveillance to monitor trends in acute
febrile illnesses
Malaria is endemic in all districts in Sierra Leone and is
easily diagnosed using rapid diagnostic kits. In the
revitalized surveillance system, each district submitted
weekly summaries of the number of suspect malaria
cases and the number of confirmed malaria cases. The
MOHS used this data is used to generate trends in the
malaria positivity rates for each district and to indirectly
monitor the occurrence of febrile illness. Over time, the
average malaria positivity rates and seasonality of
malaria in Sierra Leone were established. Changes in
malaria positivity were monitored as they were consid-
ered as a proxy for changes in occurrence of other
febrile illness. Thus a reduction in malaria positivity be-
yond a given threshold in a given point in time, would
Table 2 Detection, notification, and response performance indicators, Sierra Leone 2016–2017
Indicator  2016
Number of suspected outbreaks & public health (PH) events reported from all sources  87
Proportion of suspected outbreaks or public health events detected through IDSR system  96%
Proportion of suspected outbreaks or public health events notified within 24 h  92%
Proportion of suspected outbreaks or public health events with rapid response within 48 h  90%
Proportion of investigated outbreaks or public health events with lab results within 7 days  17% (n = 58) 
2017
85
100%
81%
87%
72% (n = 46)
Page 8
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364  Page 8 of 11
Fig. 3 Epidemic Curve Showing Measles and Rubella Outbreaks in Sierra Leone 2016–2017
indicate a possible increase in the occurrence of other
acute febrile illnesses thus raising an alert that would
then be investigated. Generating accurate malaria posi-
tivity trends was possible due to the high reporting rates
in the revitalized IDSR system.
Enhanced surveillance for Ebola virus disease
To improve case detection of suspected Ebola virus dis-
ease cases, the MOHS integrated enhanced Ebola virus
disease surveillance into the routine IDSR. Thus, Ebola
virus disease surveillance system was anchored within
the IDSR system, utilizing the same healthcare workers,
laboratory network, district surveillance officers and na-
tional officers as the IDSR system. Enhanced Ebola virus
disease surveillance, was a form of syndromic surveil-
lance system in which MOHS was alerted about cases of
febrile illness that suspected to be due to Ebola virus dis-
ease. Samples are collected from suspected acute viral
haemorrhagic fever cases, alive or dead and tested for
Ebola virus disease. Enhanced Ebola virus disease sur-
veillance, prompt reporting and control of suspected
Ebola virus disease cases enabled the country to inter-
rupt the transmission of Ebola virus since the outbreak
was declared over in November 2015.
Addressing maternal mortality through IDSR
During the Ebola virus disease outbreak in 2014–2015,
the focus of the healthcare system shifted to control of
the outbreak, at the expense of other service delivery
areas, including reproductive health services. In the post
Ebola recovery phase, the MOHS prioritized maternal
and child health and thus sought to monitor the trends
in maternal mortality by integrating reporting of 
maternal deaths through IDSR. In 2016, there were
218,818 live births reported through the health informa-
tion system in Sierra Leone. Given the maternal mortal-
ity rate of 1165, the projected number of maternal
deaths was 2549. The number of maternal deaths re-
ported to the MOHS increased from 456 in 2015 to 706
in 2016, but was still 73% lower than the projected num-
ber. Almost all the reported deaths were audited and ac-
tionable recommendations provided. Whereas data
incompleteness affected the validity of the mortality esti-
mates, the system was useful in identification of weak-
nesses in antenatal and maternity care. This allowed the
MOHS to identify health facilities with high burden of
maternal deaths, the specific causes of death and pre-
scribe specific interventions for reduction of maternal
deaths in each health facility. The roll out of emergency
obstetric care was a third element in ensuring an appro-
priate response to maternal deaths.
The role of rapid response teams in outbreak
investigation
Each district health team identified designated health
care workers who were trained in rapid response. The
teams consisted of clinicians, an epidemiologist/ district
surveillance officer, laboratory technician, environmental
health scientist and a health educator. Veterinary officers
were incorporated during zoonotic outbreaks and indus-
trial poisoning experts during suspected chemical event.
Reported outbreaks of notifiable diseases, unusual
changes in surveillance data, reports of severe illness
among healthcare workers, rumours of death or cases of
illness in the community and unexplained death among
animals were among the events that prompted an
Page 9
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364  Page 9 of 11
investigation by the rapid response team. Few exceptions
included cases of viral haemorrhagic fever, unusual and
emerging infections, or protracted outbreaks which
required deployment of the national rapid response team
to complement the response by the district rapid re-
sponse team. In such instances, the emergency
operations centre was activated to coordinate the
response at the national level of the MOHS. In addition
to investigation, national and district teams identified
appropriate strategies to control the outbreaks, led the
implementation of the strategies and wrote outbreak
investigation reports.
Preparedness to respond to outbreaks and other public
health events
Response to outbreaks is more likely to be prompt and
effective when the health system is prepared. The
national preparedness plan for Sierra Leone outlined the
roles and responsibilities for the Public Health
Emergency Management Committees at the national
and district levels. The membership of this committee
was diverse, incorporating both technical and
non-technical members including officials from relevant
ministries.
The district public health emergency management
committees developed and implemented district pre-
paredness plans. They identified and planned for all pos-
sible emergencies in the district, mobilized resources,
developed communication strategies and coordinated
procurement of emergency material stockpiles. The
emergency operations centre, located in the directorate
of disease prevention and control, was tasked with the
coordination of public health response activities during
outbreaks and other public health emergencies. The
emergency operations centre was also involved in
continuous planning to ensure that the country was
prepared to respond to emergencies.
Monitoring implementation of IDSR
Close monitoring of IDSR activities was necessary as
challenges in implementation of IDSR were expected.
Supervisory visits in all districts began in February 2016,
soon after the last district teams had been trained on
IDSR. By July 2017, three countrywide visits were con-
ducted. Improvement in IDSR reporting completeness
and timeliness rates was partly attributed to the support
supervision.
Two data quality assessments were conducted between
August 2016 and July 2017. Overall, data collected
through the surveillance system was of good quality and
there was a modest improvement in accuracy from
95.3% in the first assessment to 97% in the second
assessment. Over reporting was more common in large
volume health facilities and most discrepancies were 
between the number of records in the health facility reg-
isters and the number of records entered in the monthly
summaries. The findings of the data quality assessments
were discussed in national surveillance quarterly meet-
ings convened by the directorate of disease prevention
and control and attended by all district medical officers
and district surveillance officers. It was noted that the
accuracy and completeness of data improved with time,
most likely due to the periodic assessments and
feedback.
Discussion
A functional IDSR system “from Ebola to Health”
As part of health systems recovery which was commonly
referred to as the shift from “Ebola to Health”, a revital-
ized IDSR system with key performance indicator above
the WHO AFRO targets was achieved. Recruitment and
deployment of WHO international epidemiologists and
public health experts to support MOHS at national and
district level (2015–2017) helped in strengthening health
systems through mentorship, knowledge & skill transfer.
Starting 2016, these efforts were complimented by the
US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
supported Field Epidemiology Training Programme that
equipped the frontline health workers with basic epi-
demiological skills. Partnership between WHO and
CDC, department for international development, African
development bank, multi partners trust fund and other
partners made significant investments in IDSR during
the recovery phase after the protracted Ebola virus
disease outbreak. In the long term, there is a need for
the MOHS to mobilize domestic financing for sustain-
ability of the IDSR system.
Successful implementation of IDSR required proper
planning, prioritized phased implementation, and polit-
ical goodwill that provided additional impetus. Availabil-
ity of the IDSR tools and guidelines, ICT infrastructure
for data transmission, well trained workforce, and
logistical support aided implementation. Lack of support
functions for IDSR decreases the capacity of a country
to perform IDSR core functions optimally [8].
The integration of enhanced Ebola virus disease syn-
dromic surveillance into the IDSR increased efficiency
while allowing for prompt detection and investigation of
suspected Ebola virus disease cases. This contributed to
interrupted transmission of Ebola Virus with the
outbreak declared over in November 2015. Syndromic
surveillance is an effective means of augmenting routine
indicator based surveillance and meeting the Inter-
national Health regulations on timely reporting of public
health events of international concern [12].  Given that
outbreaks of Ebola Virus disease occur frequently [13],
strengthening public health surveillance should be
Page 10
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364  Page 10 of 11
prioritized especially in countries prone to Ebola virus
disease outbreaks.
Inclusion of non-infectious conditions such as mater-
nal death in the IDSR system, improved the utilization
of surveillance personnel and systems thus increasing
efficiency. The maternal mortality ratio in Sierra Leone
is estimated to be 1165 maternal deaths/ 100,000 births
and is among the highest in the world [14].  Overall
deterioration of health services during the Ebola out-
break may have increased the maternal mortality ratio
and thus there was a need to monitor the trends during
the recovering period.
Measures of the usefulness of a surveillance system in-
clude the proportion of outbreaks that are detected
through the surveillance system, the promptness of the
response to suspected outbreaks and the duration taken
to provide laboratory confirmation on the causative
agent [7]. Based on the high proportion of outbreaks de-
tected through the Sierra Leone IDSR system it appears
to be highly sensitive. However, a reduction in the pro-
portion of outbreaks detected through the IDSR system
was observed over time and the reduction was attributed
to a reduced number of WHO personnel in the districts.
This fluctuation in performance indicates a potential
threat in the sustainability of IDSR in Sierra Leone and
calls for increased ownership by MOHS.
There was an apparent improvement in completeness
and timeliness of IDSR reporting after shifting to elec-
tronic data transmission, that is likely due to ease of data
collection and transmission at the district level. This is
contrary to a study of performance of IDSR in Kenya,
where 41% of sampled health facilities had not submitted
weekly IDSR reports in the preceding 12 weeks and
where health care workers preferred electronic transmis-
sion of reports. The shift to e-IDSR was hampered by
poor internet connectivity, especially in the remote dis-
tricts. The improvement in IDSR indicators attributed to
the shift to e-IDSR can justify the use of resources to
extend electronic data collection and transmission up-to
the health facility level. Data quality assessments
revealed over reporting of cases in the IDSR system
although data accuracy improved with time. The most
likely contributor to poor data quality was the paper
based reporting that required transcription of data from
various sources. This is corroborated by the improve-
ment in data quality with the shift to e-IDSR. Weekly
epidemiological bulletins and regular national surveil-
lance meetings are mechanisms that can be used to pro-
vide feedback to all relevant stakeholders and ultimately
improve quality of surveillance data. Lack of feedback
from the higher reporting levels and lack of supportive
supervision have been identified as gaps in the imple-
mentation of IDSR in India and Ghana [15, 16]. Regular
supportive supervision and data quality assessments may 
have improved IDSR data accuracy and completeness
over time.
Conclusions
The MOHS, Sierra Leone, supported by various partners
successfully revitalized IDSR, as part of a wider health
sector recovery plan. Capacity building of health care
workers, availability of materials, and infrastructure to
support implementation, frequent supervision and
feedback contributed to the successful implementation
of IDSR. Subsequently, an early warning system was
established that facilitated interrupted transmission of
the Ebola virus disease outbreak in November 2015. The
usefulness of IDSR in outbreak detection and control
builds the case for global investment in IDSR activities
as it ultimately leads to increased global health security.
In Sierra Leone, MOHS needs to focus on improving la-
boratory diagnosis, increasing domestic financing of
surveillance activities and institutionalization of data
quality assessments at the district level.
Additional file
 Additional file 1: Weekly Epidemiologic Bulletin, Ministry of Health and
Sanitation, Sierra Leone, 2017. A weekly summary of cases of priority
diseases reported through the public health surveillance system in Sierra
Leone during epidemiologic week 52, 2017. The summary also shows the
intra-district reporting rates and timeliness in reporting for all the districts
in Sierra Leone. (PDF 892 kb)
Abbreviations
CDC: United States Centers for Disease Prevention and Control; e-
IDSR: Electronic Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response system;
IDSR: Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response; WHO: World Health
Organization
Acknowledgements
Ministry of Health and Sanitation, Sierra Leone.
Funding
The following organizations provided financial support for IDSR activities in
Sierra Leone
 World Health Organization
The world Health organization Sierra Leone country office with technical
support from the African regional office was involved in the design and
operationalization of the IDSR strategy in Sierra Leone. They led the
conceptualization of the manuscript, data analysis, interpretation,
development of the manuscript and submission for publication.
 US Centers for Disease Prevention and Control (CDC)
The US Centers for Disease Prevention and Control provided financial and
technical support for the implementation of IDSR strategy in Sierra Leone.
 UK-Department for International Development provided financial
support for IDSR implementation
 Africa Development Bank supported activities and logistics for IDSR
implementation.
Page 11
Njuguna et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:364  Page 11 of 11
 Multi Partners Trust Fund provided financial support for IDSR
implementation
Availability of data and materials
The datasets analyzed during this assessment are available from the
corresponding author on reasonable request.
Authors’ contributions
CN, AJ, AC, AN, RC, AL, SO, RM, JG, ZY, AY, AT, SR and SF contributed to the
conceptualization, editing, and approval of the final version of the
manuscript. CN wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. All authors have
read and approved the manuscript for publication.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Ethical approval was not obtained as the manuscript was based on
aggregated data from the surveillance system and did not report any
individual human subject information. However, the authors sought
concurrence for publication of this work from the Sierra Leone Ministry of
health and Sanitation.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Author details
1World Health Organization, Freetown, Sierra Leone. 2Ministry of Health and
Sanitation, Freetown, Sierra Leone. 3World Health Organization Regional
Office for Africa, Brazzaville, Congo. 4Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Stockholm,
Sweden.
Received: 28 August 2018 Accepted: 8 March 2019 
12. Ziemann A, Rosenkötter N, Riesgo LG-C, Fischer M, Krämer A, Lippert FK, et
al. Meeting the international health regulations (2005) surveillance core
capacity requirements at the subnational level in Europe: the added value
of syndromic surveillance. BMC Public Health. 2015;15:107.
13. Coltart CEM, Lindsey B, Ghinai I, Johnson AM, Heymann DL. The Ebola
outbreak, 2013–2016: old lessons for new epidemics. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci. 2017;372:2013–6.
14. Republic of Sierra Leone. Sierra Leone demographic and health survey 2013;
2013. p. 193. Available from: [URL: "https://www.dhsprogram.com/publications/publication-FR297-DHS-Final-Reports.cfm"] https://www.dhsprogram.com/publications/
 publication-FR297-DHS-Final-Reports.cfm
15. Phalkey RK, Shukla S, Shardul S, Ashtekar N, Valsa S, Awate P, et al.
Assessment of the core and support functions of the integrated disease
surveillance system in Maharashtra , India. BMC Public Health BMC Public
Health. 2013;13:1.
16. Adokiya MN, Awoonor-Williams JK, Barau IY, Beiersmann C, Mueller O.
Evaluation of the integrated disease surveillance and response system for
infectious diseases control in northern Ghana. BMC Public Health.
2015;15:1–11.
References
1.  Choi BCK. The past, Present, and future of PH surveillance. Scientifica (Cairo).
2012;2012:1–26.
2.  Mcnabb SJN. Comprehensive effective and efficient global public health
surveillance. BMC Public Health. 2010;10:1–7.
3.  Sheikhali SA, Abdallat M, Mabdalla S, Qaseer A, Khorma R, Malik M. Design
and implementation of a national public health surveillance system in
Jordan. Int J Med Inform. 2016;88:58–61.
4.  Perry HN, Mcdonnell SM, Alemu W, Nsubuga P, Chungong S, Jr MWO, et al.
Planning an integrated disease surveillance and response system: a matrix
of skills and activities. BMC Med. 2007;8:1–8.
5.  Ministry of Health and Sanitation Sierra Leone. Technical Guidelines for
Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response in Sierra Leone. 2008.
6.  Baker MG, Fidler DP. Global public health surveillance under new
international health regulations. Emerg Infect Dis. 2006;12:1058–65.
7.  World Health Organization. In: Kasolo F, Roungou JB, editors. Technical
guidelines for integrated disease Surveillannce and response in the African
region. 2nd Editio ed; 2010. p. 1–416. Available from: [URL: "http://www.cdc.gov/globalhealth/healthprotection/idsr/pdf/technicalguidelines/idsr-technical-guidelines-2nd-edition_2010_english.pdf"] http://www.cdc.gov/
 globalhealth/healthprotection/idsr/pdf/technicalguidelines/idsr-technical-
 guidelines-2nd-edition_2010_english.pdf.
8.  Phalkey RK, Yamamoto S, Awate P, Marx M. Challenges with the
implementation of an integrated disease surveillance and response (IDSR)
system: systematic review of the lessons learned. Health Policy Plan.
2015;30:131–43.
9.  World Health Organization West Africa Ebola Response Team. Ebola virus
disease in West Africa — the first 9 months of the epidemic and forward
projections. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1481–95.
10. World Health Organization. Health worker Ebola infections in Guinea. Liberia
and Sierra Leone: World Health Organization; 2015.
11. Ministry of Health and Sanitation Sierra Leone. Technical Guidelines for
Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response; 2015. p. 1–456. Available
from: [URL: "https://www.who.int/countries/sle/en/"] https://www.who.int/countries/sle/en/ [cited 21 Nov 2017]
