Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
Title: Lessons learned from engaging communities for Ebola vaccine trials in Sierra Leone: reciprocity, relatability, relationships and respect (the four R’s)
Keywords: Community engagement,Vaccine trials,Ebola,Sierra Leone,Disease preparedness
ModDate: 2019/12/11 16:04:47+01'00'
Subject: BMC Public Health, 2019, doi:10.1186/s12889-019-7978-4
Author: Sara Dada
CreationDate: 2019/12/06 02:48:45+08'00'
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Community engagement,Vaccine trials,Ebola,Sierra Leone,Disease preparedness
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s12889-019-7978-4
xmp:dc:publisher: BMC Public Health
xmp:dc:description: BMC Public Health, 2019, doi:10.1186/s12889-019-7978-4
xmp:dc:subject: Community engagement; Vaccine trials; Ebola; Sierra Leone; Disease preparedness
xmp:dc:title: Lessons learned from engaging communities for Ebola vaccine trials in Sierra Leone: reciprocity, relatability, relationships and respect (the four R’s)
xmp:dc:creator: Sara Dada; Gillian McKay; Ana Mateus; Shelley Lees
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2019-12-11T16:04:47+01:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2019-12-11T16:04:47+01:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2019-12-06T02:48:45+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:b67aad50-3e26-4c58-b289-48b288d03944
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:6771743c-519a-4a16-877c-444e35248ea5
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:b67aad50-3e26-4c58-b289-48b288d03944
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2019-12-06T03:00:04+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Sara Dada
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3910-1856
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A reference to the original document from which this one is derived. It is a minimal reference; missing components can be assumed to be unchanged. For example, a new version might only need to specify the instance ID and version number of the previous version, or a rendition might only need to specify the instance ID and rendition class of the original.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DerivedFrom
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: ResourceRef
xmp:pdfaType:description: Identifies a portion of a document. This can be a position at which the document has been changed since the most recent event history (stEvt:changed). For a resource within an xmpMM:Ingredients list, the ResourceRef uses this type to identify both the portion of the containing document that refers to the resource, and the portion of the referenced resource that is referenced.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Part#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stPart
xmp:pdfaType:type: Part
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/t/pg/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpTPg
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Paged-Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Fonts
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag Font
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: XMP08 Spec: An ordered array of plate names that are needed to print the document (including any in contained documents).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: PlateNames
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaType:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Font#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stFnt
xmp:pdfaType:type: Font
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://www.aiim.org/pdfa/ns/id/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfaid
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDFBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods
  Results
  Conclusion
Background
  Community engagement in biomedical research
  Community engagement in practice
  Ebola in West Africa
  Ebola vaccine trials in Sierra Leone
Methods
  Data analysis
  Ethical considerations
Results
  The Four R’s
  Reciprocity
  Relatability
  Relationships
  Respect
Discussion
  Limitations
Conclusion
Supplementary information
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Authors’ contribution
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-7978-4
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Lessons learned from engaging
communities for Ebola vaccine trials in
Sierra Leone: reciprocity, relatability,
relationships and respect (the four R’s)
Sara Dada1,2* [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3910-1856"] , Gillian McKay1, Ana Mateus2 and Shelley Lees1 
Open Access
Abstract
Background: Building trust and engaging the community are important for biomedical trials. This was core to the
set up and delivery of the EBOVAC-Salone and PREVAC Ebola vaccine trials in Sierra Leone during and following the
2014–2016 West African Ebola epidemic. Local community liaison teams (CLT) engaged with the community
through public meetings, radio chat shows, and other activities, while a social science team (SST) assessed
community members’ and participants’ perceptions and regularly updated the clinical team to adapt procedures to
improve the acceptability and compliance of the trial. The objective of this study was to examine the community
engagement (CE) program in these trials and to identify potential barriers and facilitators.
Methods: Fifteen CLT and SST members participated in in-depth interviews and 23 community members attended
three focus groups to discuss the Ebola vaccine trials and their experiences and perspectives of the CE activities.
Results: A key aim of the CE program was to build trust between the community and the trial. Four main
principles (the “four R’s”) evolved from the discussions with team members and the community that influenced this
trust: reciprocity, relatability, relationships and respect. The CLT and SST ensured reciprocal communication
between the trial team and the community. The CLT delivered key messages from the trial, whilst the SST
completed ethnographic research in the field to uncover rumors and perceptions of the trial in the community.
These ethnographic findings were shared with the CLT and addressed in targeted messaging to the community.
Both the CLT and SST approached the communities in an egalitarian manner, by dressing modestly, speaking local
dialects, and using relatable examples. Appreciation and understanding of the importance of interpersonal
relationships and respect for the people, their customs, and traditions also played a large role in the CE program.
Conclusion: These findings provide an in-depth understanding of how interdisciplinary community liaison and
social science teams can work with a clinical team to strengthen trust. The four R’s suggest the ways in which trust
relations are central to CE and confidence in vaccine trials, and could offer an approach to CE in vaccine trials.
Keywords: Community engagement, Vaccine trials, Ebola, Sierra Leone, Disease preparedness
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:sara.dada1@lshtm.ac.uk"] sara.dada1@lshtm.ac.uk
1London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London
WC1E 7HT, UK
2The Royal Veterinary College, Royal College Street, London NW1 0TU, UK
© The Author(s). 2019 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 2 of 13
Background
Community engagement (CE) is an important dimension
of disease control and preparedness interventions. Re-
sponses to the Ebola outbreak in West Africa between
2013 and 2016 understandably necessitated methods to
engage the community in interventions to achieve effect-
ive disease control [1]. Amongst these response programs
were the numerous Ebola vaccine trials implemented to
prove an effective vaccine for Ebola virus disease (EVD).
The EBOVAC-Salone and PREVAC vaccine trials’  CE
programs were developed and delivered as a collaboration
between the Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI)-funded
Ebola Vaccine Deployment, Acceptance and Compliance
(EBODAC) and the Ebola vaccine (EBOVAC1) projects in
Sierra Leone. This paper examines the relationships be-
tween trust, CE, and acceptance of a clinical trial.
Community engagement in biomedical research
CE is used for a variety of capacities in biomedical re-
search including participatory research and research eval-
uations [2]. Dicket et al. (2005) have proposed four main
goals of CE: “enhanced protection, enhanced benefits, le-
gitimacy, and shared responsibility” [ [3],  p.1124].  How
the public engages with biomedical research can influence
the design, implementation strategy, level of uptake, and
impact of disease control and prevention programs. As re-
search in low and middle income countries (LMICs) in-
creases, CE has become an increasingly important part of
biomedical research methods and procedures, especially
in programs involving vulnerable populations [4–6].
CE is important in biomedical research because it pro-
vides an opportunity for the researchers to understand
the community’s needs and priorities [2].  CE may also
help mitigate challenges faced by biomedical research.
For example, CE activities can address public mistrust
towards biomedical research by demonstrating respect
for the communities involved in the research program
[7, 8]. In addition to the potential benefits of CE, a re-
view of evidence conducted by Attree et al. highlighted
the potential for unintended negative impacts [9]; these
include physical and mental exhaustion from the re-
quirements of engagement that may not always outweigh
the expected benefits [9] as well as further entrenching
existing inequalities influenced by power and resource
prioritization [10].  Furthermore, CE requires not only
time and resources, but also researchers that are compe-
tent and capable of taking on the challenges of establish-
ing this engagement with the community [11].
Some barriers to CE can arise from challenges in es-
tablishing equal relationships with the community. Bio-
medical research programs come with an imbalance in
power between the researchers and the community,
which could hinder CE if it is not acknowledged in a
transparent and productive way [12].  This relationship 
can be particularly strained in marginalized communities
where citizens may not have regular access to health
care and the resulting benefits of biomedical research
[12]. Additionally, existing relationship structures within
a community may pose challenges in CE as participation
can reflect existing “social hierarchies and economic or
political divisions” [ [10], p.457].
To be successful many CE activities rely on mutu-
ally beneficial relationships and high levels of trust
between the research program and the community
[13–15].  In order to develop trust with the commu-
nity, a study on the informed consent practices of a
vaccine trial in Kenya used both external technical
experts and local field assistants who were known to
the community to convey information about a trial
before it began [15].  Relationships are important to
CE and biomedical research because they provide an
avenue for researchers to understand the priorities,
needs and context of a community [12]. The relation-
ships between the community and the research pro-
gram can also influence the community members’
perception of the research study and their willingness
to participate [15].
Community engagement in practice
MacQueen et al. (2015) have noted there were few
guidelines available for the implementation and
evaluation of CE programs in the context of global
health [5].  Amongst existing guidelines, the Good
Participatory Practice (GPP) Guidelines, developed
by AIDS Vaccine Advocacy Coalition (AVAC) and
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS),  provide guidance on engaging stake-
holders in the design and implementation of clinical
trials [16].  This document outlines six guiding prin-
ciples (respect, mutual understanding, integrity,
transparency, accountability, and community stake-
holder autonomy) and various practices that could
be used to develop beneficial relationships and en-
gagement between trials and stakeholders [16].  Since
being developed for HIV prevention trials in 2011,
the GPP guidelines have been adapted and applied
to engage stakeholders in various other research
areas including tuberculosis and emerging pathogens
[16–19].  While stakeholder engagement has become
acknowledged as key to improving uptake and effi-
cacy of trials, there has been limited documented
evaluation on the actual implementation of the
framework outlined by the GPP [17, 20–24].
Further to this limitation, Lavery et al. (2010) argue
that there is little evidence on what makes CE effective
in different contexts [14].  This highlights the gap in
current discourse around CE and health interventions.
Existing research on effective CE has revolved around
Page 3
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 3 of 13
participation in biomedical research such as vaccine tri-
als. Much of this research centered on the social rela-
tionships influencing individual involvement [25] and
the ethical implications of CE in biomedical research.
For example, a study in Kenya found that CE enabled re-
searchers to take opinions and concerns of participants
into account at an early stage to adapt messages and
identify effective methods to address any ethical issues
that might emerge [26]. There is an opportunity to build
on such work to use CE in the development of health in-
terventions or clinical trials.
Ebola in West Africa
Between 2013 and 2016, multiple countries in West Africa
experienced outbreaks of EVD [27]. Beginning in Guinea,
the virus spread to Sierra Leone in May 2014 through
human-to-human transmission and continued for a sus-
tained period [28]. Three months into the EVD outbreak,
the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the EVD
outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Con-
cern [27]. As of March 27th 2016, Sierra Leone experienced
14,124 confirmed, probable, and suspected cases and 3955
deaths due to EVD [29]. Interventions responding to the
outbreak focused on containment strategies such as case
isolation, contact-tracing and quarantine, and the training
and implementation of sanitary funeral practices [30].
These non-pharmaceutical methods were emphasized be-
cause of the lack of experimental vaccines and treatment
options at the beginning of the epidemic [31]. Two add-
itional preventive interventions were also relevant in the
2014 Ebola response: infection control in health care set-
tings and avoiding contact with bush meat and bats [32].
What was notable about the Ebola response in West
Africa was the delayed response in effectively addressing
the outbreak. Initial responses were lacking and may have
been impeded by political or structural factors [33]. Other
factors that served as barriers in controlling the outbreak
and implementing interventions, included: mobile popula-
tions, lack of trust in governments, weak health systems
and poor coordination [34]. These challenges were exacer-
bated by “inadequate communication strategy, misconcep-
tions around the disease, ignorance of local culture and
customs, and lack of involvement of local communities in
the control strategies” which led to further distrust and re-
luctance from the communities [ [35], p.1]. For example,
the association between some funeral rites and risk of EVD
transmission [36] was poorly addressed until responders
considered the cultural and social norms behind these be-
haviors and consulted local community members to imple-
ment safe and culturally respectful burial practices [1, 37].
In the early months of responding to the Ebola out-
break, the focus of many communication strategies was
“sensitization, emphasizing that local populations lacked
knowledge on Ebola and that ‘traditional practices’ 
spread disease” [ [38], p.2]. This focus on correcting mis-
information did not engage the community in the
process as an equal party. Other critics, explained that
health messages failed to include practical information
communities needed answered in real time such as
“How do I manage a family of children, including infants
and toddlers, in quarantine?” [39]. Hence, involving local
communities and empowering community-based man-
agement were pivotal to containing EVD [39]. Laverack
and Manoncourt emphasized this importance and found
that intergovernmental agencies and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) learned from earlier mistakes and
made an effort to increase CE later on in the response.
These authors also argued for a reciprocal engagement
approach that utilized bottom up communication strat-
egies and incorporated local involvement [40].
One aspect of the West Africa Ebola response saw the
fast-tracked implementation of trials to test candidate
vaccines. Amongst these, the EBOVAC-Salone trial was
set up with a CE approach, during the ongoing outbreak
response, raising many challenges around conducting re-
search in an emergency setting [41]. This paper will ex-
plore the CE approach implemented in two vaccine
trials during and post the West Africa Ebola epidemic.
The perspective taken will focus not on the ethical im-
plications of CE, but rather on how it has been imple-
mented in two case settings.
Ebola vaccine trials in Sierra Leone
The EBOVAC-Salone vaccine trial was implemented to
test a candidate Ebola vaccine in 2015, whilst the Ebola
outbreak was still ongoing in West Africa. The trial was
led by EBOVAC1 and supported by EBODAC. This trial
studied a two-dose prime-boost vaccine developed by
Janssen Pharmaceuticals and Bavarian Nordic in the
Kambia District, one of the last districts in Sierra Leone
reporting Ebola cases [42]. When setting up the trial, re-
searchers considered the importance of understanding the
socio-cultural context to build trust and engage with com-
munity members [38].  Because the Ebola outbreak was
ongoing while these trials were developed, the climate,
fear, and stigma around the disease and potential vaccine
were a significant concern. Acceptance of the vaccine,
which would be necessary for the clinical trials’ operation,
could be influenced by multiple factors including: the so-
cial and cultural context of the population, perceptions of
vaccine efficacy or safety, and trust or distrust in national
and international authorities [43–45]. In the setting of the
West Africa Ebola outbreak, resistance to outbreak re-
sponse was not uncommon with reported cases of vio-
lence against health care workers [46, 47] and resistance
to the ring vaccination trial in the area of Macenta in
Guinea [48]. The two-dose nature of the prime-boost vac-
cine being studied added another layer of complexity to
Page 4
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 4 of 13
the challenges behind vaccine acceptance and compliance
by necessitating every participant to receive the right vac-
cine at the right time. To address these challenges, the
EBODAC project focused on communications, technology
and community engagement to support the EBOVAC-
Salone and later PREVAC clinical trials in Sierra Leone.
The subsequent community engagement program
implemented in the EBOVAC-Salone trials was
shaped by the importance of understanding and tai-
loring communications to the local context [49] as
well as previous participatory research techniques
used in HIV prevention trials in Tanzania [50].  The
use of a “community liaison system” [50] that con-
nected the trial to the community was integral to the
EBODAC/EBOVAC community engagement structure
as demonstrated by Fig. 1.
In this structure, the trial recruited two local teams: a
community liaison team (CLT) and a social science team
(SST). The CLT, comprised of nine locally recruited staff
employed by the University of Sierra Leone’s College of
Medicine and Allied Health Sciences (CoHMAS) and
two LSHTM supervisors. The team received background
training on clinical trials and were responsible for imple-
menting the CE strategy, monitoring rumors and con-
cerns circulating in the community, and providing
information about the trial at national and international
levels. The SST was comprised of four locally recruited
research assistants, a data analyst, a transcriptionist, and
an LSHTM social scientist. This team explored commu-
nity and participant perceptions and experiences of the
study and the socio-cultural context. For example, in in-
vestigating trial participants’ reasons for joining the trial,
the SST found community members were motivated by 
altruism, curiosity, access to health and the vaccine, and
expectations of some benefit [51].  The SST conducted
this ethnographic work independently from the recruit-
ment efforts of the CLT, but these two teams informed
each other as well as the clinical team to address ru-
mours and misconceptions circulating in the community
[38, 51]. The CLT was specifically trained as a connect-
ing mechanism between the community and the trial.
Notably, the SST was trained to be independent from
the trial. The reality of how this was perceived will be
discussed further.
The same CLT/SST approach was adopted in the PRE-
VAC trial in Mambolo, Sierra Leone which started
approximately two and a half years after the EBOVAC-
Salone trial in May 2018. The PREVAC trial examines
three different experimental vaccines which are com-
pared with a placebo [52].
Methods
We conducted a qualitative study to explore the experi-
ences of conducting CE for the two vaccine trials that
were set up during and after the 2014–2016 Ebola out-
break in Sierra Leone. This research used two case stud-
ies (i.e.,  the EBOVAC-Salone trial in Kambia and the
PREVAC trial in Mambolo) to compare strategies and
identify barriers and facilitators related to CE. Data were
collected in Sierra Leone in May 2018. This was towards
the end of the EBOVAC-Salone trial and in the first few
weeks of the PREVAC trial.
One researcher (SD) conducted in depth, semi-
structured interviews (IDIs) with EBOVAC-Salone and
PREVAC CLT and SST members (15 participants). Par-
ticipants were recruited using convenience sampling,
Fig. 1 Community Engagement Structure . The trial’s community engagement structure, highlighting the interactions between the different
parties. Source: EBOVAC trial community engagement diagram – Tom Mooney
Page 5
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 5 of 13
based on team members’  availability. Interviews were
conducted in English as all CLT and SST members were
English-speakers. IDIs focused on the individual’s role in
the trial and/or Ebola epidemic as well as their under-
standing of the CE model being used. Specific interview
questions included: “What is your role on the trial?
What are the key issues that arise during engagement?
How do you think the community engagement you do
addresses these concerns? Describe your experience
working with the other trial teams.” Some of the inter-
viewees were involved in both trials and were therefore
able to compare their experiences of the two.
In parallel to the IDIs, one researcher (SD) conducted
focus groups discussions (FGD) with community mem-
bers living near to each trial site (2 FGDs) and with local
leaders in Kambia (1 FGD). An FGD for local leaders in
Mambolo was not conducted because of the unavailability
of potential participants. FGDs were conducted with com-
munity members and local leaders due to time constraints
and based on the advice from the SST that FGDs would
be more conducive to free-flowing conversations in the
community, especially when approached by a foreigner.
FGD participants were recruited through a purposive sam-
pling method; a local research assistant reached out to po-
tential volunteers based on conversations and referrals
from the SST. The local research assistant supported
FGDs when language translation was necessary. These
FGDs focused on participants’ experiences with the Ebola
epidemic and with information activities around the trials.
Specific questions included: “How did you receive infor-
mation about the trial? Tell me about your experiences
with the people delivering this information? What sugges-
tions would you make to improve the community engage-
ment around the trial?” Discussions and interviews were
audio recorded with the permission of the participants
and notes were taken by the interviewer. Interviews were
transcribed (and translated where necessary).  All inter-
views were anonymized to ensure confidentiality. After
the first few interviews, themes emerging through initial
thematic analysis were incorporated into the interview
guide and explored in subsequent interviews. For example,
when multiple interviews described the importance of ‘re-
spect’ in the community engagement activities, the inter-
viewer incorporated questions about how the trial teams
demonstrated respect to the community in subsequent in-
terviews and focus groups. IDI and FGD interview guides
are provided in Additional file 1.
Data analysis
Interview transcripts were imported into NVivo 12 Soft-
ware. Another researcher conducted an overall thematic
analysis of the data. As the data were analyzed, a work-
ing analytical framework emerged (the Four R’s) and was
then used to identify similarities and differences as well 
as possible relationships in the entire data set [53]. Given
staff time constraints, double coding of all interviews
was not possible. However, one interview was double
coded by another researcher with experience in qualita-
tive research in Sierra Leone for validation of identified
themes. This is an acknowledged limitation of this study.
While a comparative analysis was not formally used,
similar findings that align or do not align have been pre-
sented in the results. The results from this study are pre-
sented in two parts: how the community engagement
program functioned (the roles of the teams) and why it
functioned well (the Four R’s).
Ethical considerations
Ethics approvals were obtained from the Sierra Leone
Ethics and Scientific Review Committee and the London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM). All
study participants were volunteers, received participant
project information sheets, provided written consent and
agreed to have their anonymized quotations included in
publication. FGD participants received a small travel al-
lowance of 20,000 Sierra Leonean Leones (approximately
£2) and light refreshments. This was in line with ethical
approaches within the trials and the Sierra Leone re-
search community.
Findings are presented as quotes or paraphrased de-
scriptions using the following notation: CLTxxx and
SSTxxx refer to IDI participants with an anonymized
identification number while FGDxxx is attributed to a
particular focus group but not a specific participant.
Results
The findings of this study provide insight on the delivery
of a community engagement programme primarily from
the perspective of the individuals delivering it. The CLT
felt their role was to explain the trial and its importance
to the community, recruit participants and to address
any rumours or misconceptions the community had
about the trial (CLT004). They did this through a variety
of activities including one-to-one stakeholder meetings,
group area meetings, public performances and radio jin-
gles (CLT002, CLT009, CLT010).  The SST served two
functions. The first was to support the trial through
power mapping to understand the community’s leader-
ship structure, community household mapping to collate
geographic locations, and ethnographic research to ex-
plore rumours and concerns circulating in the commu-
nity of interest (SST001, SST002, SST004). The second
was to produce independent research on the social as-
pects of the trial to understand what factors led people
to participate in the trial and their experiences as partici-
pants (SST001). Finally, the Participant Advisory Group
(PAG) was a group of trial participants that served in an
auxiliary capacity to the trial. They held their own
Page 6
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 6 of 13
meetings to discuss grievances and concerns and re-
ported their priorities for action back to the trial
(CLT004).
SST and CLT members that were interviewed brought
up a number of challenges faced in recruiting partici-
pants for the trial. It was often difficult to locate people
because they did not know their addresses or because
they had businesses or farms that kept them out of the
house all day. Due to the community members’  busy
schedules, the CLT would conduct their house-to-house
visits early in the morning or late in the evenings and
would ask organization leaders to book times that
worked best for their members for area meetings
(CLT002, CLT003, CLT004, CLT007).  From the per-
spective of the CLT, many in the community were un-
willing to listen to anything relating to Ebola because of
residual fear of the disease based on their community’s
recent experiences with it (CLT001) or could be unwill-
ing to attend meetings or discuss the trial because “peo-
ple’s minds are very fixed from what they told them
[during the outbreak]” (CLT008). This perception of an
unwillingness to learn about the experimental vaccine
was verified during FGDs in Mambolo and Kambia
(FGD001, FGD002). Local community leaders in Kambia
explained that they did not trust this experimental vac-
cine when they first heard of it because of the experi-
ences they had during the outbreak where they were
also told there was no medicine to cure Ebola (FGD002).
These were some of the sources behind the hesitancies
that the SST and CLT would need to address.
Interestingly, both teams described themselves as a
bridge between the trial and the community. This could
be because both teams felt they were a mechanism that
ensured that the voices of the community were raised
and heard by the clinical trial team. While both teams
viewed themselves in this similar capacity, they carried
out this role in different ways. While the CE program
structure had a few mechanisms for feedback (Fig. 1),
CLT and SST members typically described a flow of in-
formation that is represented in Fig. 2. 
This section describes four characteristics of the CE
program and the dynamic presented above that were un-
covered throughout the interviews.
The Four R’s
Trial team members expressed positive impressions of
their work in the community, citing the high number of
trial participants as evidence of their success. When
asked about how the CE work of the trial had been suc-
cessful, both individual team members and FGD partici-
pants pointed to the importance of trust. As one CLT
member said:
If people do not have confidence in you, […] you will
not succeed. Yes, the first thing is confidence building –
trust. People need to have trust in you that presented
the message. If they do not have trust in you, even
when you present the message, they will sit down and
listen to you, [but] these people do not accept the
messaging.. . (CLT008).
Throughout the interviews, four concepts emerged re-
lating to the activities of both the CLT and SST: reci-
procity, relatability, relationships, and respect. These
were not formal principles that staff were trained on, but
they helped establish the trust between the community
and the trial staff through their delivery and influenced
the success of the CE.
Reciprocity
There were several ways through which this CE model
established a reciprocity that created effective engage-
ment. The first was the CLT-SST feedback loop that
allowed for any issues in the community to be both
heard and addressed. Another avenue that created this
reciprocal relationship was the exit interviews conducted
by SST members at the clinic. These conversations, that
occurred at the end of a participants’ visit to the clinic,
allowed the SST to bring information from the trial par-
ticipants back to the trial – both the CLT and clinic
Fig. 2 “Bridges of Information”. The flow of information in the community engagement program of the vaccine trial based on descriptions from
interview participants
Page 7
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 7 of 13
staff. This forum was also appreciated by the community
members:
One thing I love about them whenever you go there for
the marklate [vaccine] immediately after taking the
marklate [vaccine] they have an interview room where
they will take you and whatever you say there is secret.
They give you confidence to ask questions …
(FGD002).
This opportunity to provide confidential feedback, in-
cluding potentially negative feedback or criticism, on
their experience built trust among the community mem-
bers towards the trial. This sentiment also echoed an
SST member’s comments on how their team provided
an aspect of care – an opportunity for feedback and fol-
low up – typically missing from the hospitals and health
care system in Sierra Leone (SST001). Trial participants
were also able to discuss and provide feedback on the
trial through the established PAG. This group contrib-
uted to the trial by bringing participants together to dis-
cuss with each other their grievances. This group was
completely independent of the trial, with the ability to
bring certain issues to the trial team’s attention.
Reciprocity could also be seen in the format of area
meetings held by the CLT. At these meetings, commu-
nity members had an opportunity to ask their own ques-
tions after the trial staff presented their information. In
addition to answering questions, CLT members would
interact with meeting attendees to keep them engaged
and interested. A CLT member explained:
We ask them questions – how are they getting the
message. We tell them ‘ask us questions.’ If they don’t
ask us we say okay we will ask you. We interact.. . We
will ask them the questions.. . How many marklates
[vaccines] are they giving you? They tell us. If they
make a mistake we correct them. (CLT003).
By consulting local authorities, the trial teams were
able to improve the trial procedures to make them more
acceptable to participants. One challenge they faced in
May 2018 was how the holy fasting month of Ramadan
would affect trial participation. A CLT member ex-
plained that they approached this challenge by reaching
out to the religious leaders for advice on what they
thought the appropriate response to questions about
what the religion says about observing the month of
Ramadan and participating in a trial that involves injec-
tions or drawing blood (CLT010). This inclusion demon-
strated both a respect (another one of the four
principles) for local leaders and beliefs as well as reci-
procity as the community contributed directly to the
functioning of the trial. The overlap between reciprocity 
and respect was also clear in the practice of providing
refreshments during meetings. An SST member that ob-
served area meetings in both trials described the import-
ance of these:
This model of providing the refreshment for people
plays a very big role because we have this type of
reciprocity. If I give you, you should be able to give me
in return. Whichever way - I am sacrificing my time, I
am sacrificing my business, I am sacrificing my other
economic activities to come and listen to you to help to
promote your agenda. What do I stand to gain in
return? (SST001).
This concept of exchange is not unusual or unex-
pected [51], but it could be a delicate matter to apply in
a way that does not coerce or bribe research partici-
pants. This CE approach could be adopted in future tri-
als to support finding the balance between these issues.
Relatability
Another theme that became apparent in interviews was
the relatability of the trial team members with the com-
munity members. Most of the EBOVAC-Salone and
PREVAC CLT and SST members were recruited locally.
The CLT and SST staff could relate to their target audi-
ences as they shared the same cultural and social norms,
appearance, language, and terminology. The first impres-
sion from appearance was agreed to be an important
first step in being able to engage with the community. A
CLT member explained the importance in dressing
modestly because:
If you dress as if you are the president of this country,
some of these stakeholders will not even talk to you.
They will say that these are the people that are eating
the country’s money so we see no reason for us to listen
to them. .. That’s why you need to put yourself in that
moderate manner so that maybe when you go there
they will think that all of us, we are equal. (CLT004).
Another form of relatability comes from using local in-
stitutions and infrastructures for the project. For ex-
ample, the use of a local town crier demonstrated
respect for that institution while reaching community
members in a way to which they were accustomed. In
using these existing systems of communication, it was
vital to consider language. A common language (Krio,
Temne, Susu or Fula depending on the setting) not only
allowed for conversations to take place, but also facili-
tated a better understanding, comfort, and trust between
the two parties (CLT004).
In addition to speaking the same language, CLT and
SST members needed to account for some of the scientific
Page 8
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 8 of 13
terminology used to explain the trial. An SST member
highlighted the need to break down complicated or scien-
tific terminology into relatable terms (SST001). One ex-
ample of this that was observed throughout the interviews
was the use of the word “marklate” instead of “vaccine” or
“injection.” Between 1988 and 1990, there was a national
campaign to eradicate polio from the country [54]. This
large-scale campaign and the “polio marklate” were relat-
able experiences for the community members. Because
the people were more familiar with that word, it became a
term frequently used by both trial staff and community
members to refer to the experimental Ebola vaccines. An-
other example was that there was no local term for men-
ingitis. Instead, a CLT member said they would explain
the condition and its symptoms without calling it ‘menin-
gitis’ as this was not a familiar word (CLT003). Employing
appropriate language and terminology could be a consid-
erable challenge when discussing nuances in a ‘naïve com-
munity’ with no experience in biomedical research.
Relevant examples and simple metaphors were another
way the CLT members related to community members
in order to convey their message. When community
members questioned the extensive screenings required
before administering the vaccine, CLT members ex-
plained how a doctor in a hospital would run tests to
confirm diagnosis if they were ill because this was an ex-
perience with which they were familiar (CLT005). A vac-
cine trial was a new experience in the community and so
the CLT needed to explain that they were testing the
vaccine being administered. A CLT member said they
would mention existing vaccines that the community
knew and would explain that these vaccines went
through similar processes around the world before they
could be dispensed in their own communities (CLT010).
Focus group participants confirmed that the CLT mem-
bers gave clear information with a relatable football meta-
phor that they could understand (FGD002).  One SST
member described the value of this strategy to justify why
staff members were not taking the experimental vaccine:
People want to hear not just explanations, but
practical examples. That will force them to believe. For
example, you set up the scenario of a footballer and a
referee. In a football match, you cannot be referee and
at the same time, play the match. What will happen if
you play a foul that leads to a penalty kick – would
you blow that whistle? Any time this kind of example
is made, you will see people laugh. You will see them
nodding their heads, nodding their heads in
acknowledgement. (SST001).
Finally, this relatable demeanor and language was
complimented with visual aids. To respond to the con-
cerns over blood sampling, the CLT brought the test 
tubes used at the clinic to the area meetings. They filled
a test tube with water and poured the tube’s contents
into their hands to demonstrate the small volume that
would be collected. In each FGD, participants recalled
this display when asked about the type of information
they received at area meetings.
Relationships
The next principle highlighted throughout the interviews
was the emphasis on relationships in these communities.
Both staff and community members expressed the value
of family and friend relationships in Sierra Leone. Two
CLT members explained their roles would not have been
as effective had they been strangers to the local commu-
nity because the fact that the people knew and trusted
them was important in delivering their messages about
the trial (CLT005, CLT003). This high value on relation-
ships was why it was important for trial staff to be re-
cruited locally. Local residents hired for CE work had
already established both relationships and reputations
within the community that primed them for effective
trial message delivery. Multiple SST members agreed
that local staff was important for the trial to succeed
(SST001, SST004).
An additional benefit of local staff was the connections
they brought. A CLT member explained that their “rela-
tionship between we the community liaison and the para-
mount chief, the heads of different areas, is very cordial
because most of the stakeholders, they are our parents”
(CLT008). This was acknowledged by community mem-
bers as well and given as one of the reasons they trusted
them. In Mambolo, an FGD participant explained:
Some of them are related to stakeholders here, some
came from ruling houses, so as a matter of fact, there
is that trust […] that confidence in them and like the
previous speakers said, some of them are our former
school pupils and some of them have attained higher
education. So, with all of that, there is that confidence
and trust to accept whatever information they brought
us. (FGD001).
This speaker mentioned the value of not only the CLT
members’  relatives’  reputations but also their own.
Growing up and interacting with the community
throughout their lives gave them the credibility to
approach their neighbors for the purpose of the trial.
This idea was echoed in a Kambia FGD as well:
We trust them because they are native born of Kambia
and we know them. We know that they cannot take us
somewhere where we will lose our lives... Everyone is
related to each other and they cannot contribute to
trouble for each other. Brothers and sisters always
Page 9
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 9 of 13
bring good thing for each other. So, that is why once I
see them, I am always ready to listen to them.
(FGD002).
This agreement featured another example of the
strong sense of family and relationships in these com-
munities that was apparent in observing community area
meetings and FGD dynamics. This attitude and regard
for others as “uncle, auntie, son, daughter” demonstrated
both respect and a high regard for interpersonal rela-
tionships. For example, community members referred to
elders or local authorities as “ma” or “pa” and to younger
people as their own children. As one CLT member said,
“When the people see me, they build up confidence be-
cause I am their son” (CLT008).
Respect
Respect is interwoven throughout the activities and exam-
ples of the other three principles and is an underlying fac-
tor in any engagement. The CLT and SST members
needed to trust and respect the work of their colleagues.
This was a common challenge in the beginning of the trial,
with some SST members describing an initial tension be-
tween the CLT, SST, and clinical teams. One SST member
explained this tension as a result of providing feedback on
aspects of the trial that could include the behaviors of trial
staff such as an error made in the clinic or a confusing
statement described at a community meeting (SST005).
These comments on actions trial staff did or did not take
could then be perceived as a personal attack (SST001,
SST002).  Addressing this issue took time and patience;
another SST member explained that more frequent train-
ing sessions and checkpoints between the different teams
mitigated the tension (SST003). The mutual respect that
eventually developed at these meetings allowed the teams
to move forward together.
Trial team members stressed the importance of demon-
strating respect to the community members in the areas they
worked. A CLT member provided this scenario to illustrate
the overlap between relationships, reputations, and respect:
First of all, one thing about community people, if you
are indigene of this place, make sure you have respect
for people. You need to have respect… Now when you
have respect, here is a village area, so when you greet
somebody you do not call them by names, you call
them my uncles, my auntie, my grandmother. With
that respect, when they see you my son, my daughter,
have this bucket go and find water for me. My son,
please come and help me pound this rice. My son,
today I have work in my farm, please go and help me.
From that, people build up confidence in you. That
you are a son or a daughter that have respect for
them. (CLT008). 
The CLT members believed they were respectful by
answering the questions of community members and
through greeting people in the typical custom with
handshakes instead of handwaving from a distance
(CLT009, CLT010).  Community members and local
leaders agreed that these behaviors and how the staff
carried themselves showed that the trial teams respected
them. In one FGD, community members explained that
a disrespectful person would not be accommodating and
approachable, but the CLT and SST staff were always
polite and encouraging (FGD002).  Another participant
expressed an appreciation for the way trial team mem-
bers were receptive to any comments they wanted to
share and would respond in a respectful tone and man-
ner (FGD002).
In addition to this behavior at the area group meetings,
community members felt the time trial team members
would take to visit them at their own homes to answer
questions demonstrated their respect (FGD003). Ensuring
confidentiality in these one-on-one conversations became
another way to show respect for the community members.
When an SST member heard a rumor or concern that
needed to be corrected, they only reported the area where
the rumor was circulating rather than the individual who
conveyed it (SST003). This respect for privacy encouraged
community members and trial participants to continue to
be open with their feedback or criticism of the trial when
speaking with the SST.
When asked if the community members respected the
trial team members in return, there was a resounding
unanimous agreement. When questioned why they
respected the trial team members, one participant aptly
reported:
Because this is just like if you don’t want yourself to be
slapped by someone, don’t slap anyone [laughing …].
So if you respect somebody, somebody will respect you
in return. They have already given us our own respect,
why don’t we give them the same respect? (FGD002).
Respecting the existing power hierarchies and struc-
tures of the community was imperative for the program
because of the high respect community members had
for their local authorities and leaders. The CLT under-
stood that it was crucial for important stakeholders to
be actively involved in order for the rest of the commu-
nity to be willing to listen (CLT008).  An SST member
further explained that “the local authorities must not be
seen to be sidelined. They must be seen to be taking the
center stage, because our people impose high trust on
these local authorities” (SST001).  This respect for local
leaders also aided the trial when a key leader of Kambia
became a trial participant. Community members in both
Kambia and Mambolo cited this example as one of the
Page 10
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 10 of 13
reasons they believed that the trial was not malicious.
Seeing an individual of such high status and regard tak-
ing the experimental vaccine had a noticeable influence
on the perceptions of the trial.
The trial team members exhibited their respect for the
local leaders not only by reaching out to them first, but
also by having them set the times and terms of their meet-
ings. They also made sure to acknowledge the relevant
customs and traditions in the community. One CLT
member gave the example of bringing a small token to the
chief as a sign of respect to him and to the local customs
(CLT010). While this custom would be a sign of respect
in this community, in some settings, it could also be mis-
construed as a bribe. This is one example of a challenge in
maintaining a balance between respecting customs and
practicing appropriate research ethics.
Discussion
This research explored the application of a CE program
in two Ebola vaccine trials in Sierra Leone, primarily
through the perspectives of the people implementing it.
While this study set out to find barriers and facilitators
to such CE, it mainly found patterns in qualities that
served as facilitators in this specific CE program. Similar
to other biomedical research programs with CE compo-
nents, this collaborative model delivered by the EBO-
DAC/EBOVAC partnership allowed the trial to consider
community perceptions and adapt its practices accord-
ingly [4, 8, 15, 26, 50, 55].  While the EBOVAC-Salone
and PREVAC trials were implemented in different time
periods and geographic settings, participants felt the dis-
tinguishing factor was that EBOVAC-Salone was one of
the first clinical trials of its kind in the country, not that
it was initiated during an ongoing outbreak.
If CE is as pivotal to epidemic recovery, preparedness,
and response as Wilkinson et al. [1] argue, it is useful
that this study reveals four characteristics (reciprocity,
relatability, relationships, and respect) that address com-
plex social relations between trialists and community
members. These findings are in line with the literature
that point to relationships and respect as key aspects
of a successful CE program. Analyzing the EBODAC/
EBOVAC CE approach used in the EBOVAC-Salone
and PREVAC trials in Sierra Leone has shown that
these two principles, along with relatability and reci-
procity, could influence the success of a CE program.
Whilst these characteristics have been identified as
important in other literature [7, 10, 12, 15, 16, 26,
50],  this study has revealed the importance of using
all four in conjunction. Additionally, this study con-
sidered the implementation of the CE model in an
outbreak and post-outbreak setting and found that
both drew on the same four principles. 
From the narrative of the participants, the inclusion of
the independent SST and CLT served in different capacities
as a bridge between the trial and the community. While this
overlap in the perceived role of the two teams was uninten-
tional, this bidirectional flow of information and conversa-
tion was integral to reciprocity. The idea of a reciprocal link
between a trial and a community is not a new one. Com-
munity advisory boards as well as other participatory re-
search models are common in biomedical research [26, 50]
and are predicated on a principle of reciprocity by requiring
a form of direct involvement from the community. For the
trials examined in this study, the separation of the SST and
CLT is what fostered an equal and reciprocal relationship;
for example, by allowing for independent and confidential
exit interviews conducted by the SST.
To communicate effectively with the community, these
teams used local languages, terminology, knowledge of so-
cial norms, and examples to be relatable and easily under-
stood by the community. This quality of relatability builds
off of the principle of mutual understanding outlined by
the GPP [16]. Additionally, the recruitment of staff from
the local communities where the trial would be imple-
mented influenced their work during the trial but was also
influenced by existing power dynamics and structure.
Some studies have described the challenges of avoiding an
asymmetrical relationship of power between the commu-
nity and the trial [7] or of understanding the distribution
of power and the social hierarchical structure of a com-
munity itself [10, 12]. Previous research has shown the im-
portance of positive relationships on a community’s
perception of biomedical research programs and how CE
can be used to demonstrate respect and address public
mistrust of biomedical research [7, 12, 15]. The relevance
of power was also clear in the emphasis on respect. The
SST and CLT had to respect such power structures, for
example by communicating via local leaders, in order to
be heard by or have access to the community. Previous lit-
erature has found that demonstrating respect through CE
has not only an ethical importance but also aids in the de-
velopment of trust and encourages participation [7]. This
is in line with the GPP highlighting respect as one of the
guiding principles in stakeholder engagement [16].
While these four concepts could aid in applying CE in
biomedical research naïve communities, they also raise
important considerations to be addressed. Though it was
not explicit in the findings of this study, the high value
of relationships in this CE program could be problem-
atic. For example, understanding community ‘leadership’
and power dynamics can pose challenges in the identifi-
cation of and respect given to key ‘stakeholders’  in the
community [38]. In the community of Kambia in Sierra
Leone, it is notable that these power structures were not
necessarily straightforward and it was imperative to
understand these nuances in order to effectively engage
Page 11
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 11 of 13
with the community [38]. There is some indication from
this study that connections to family or previous rela-
tionships with local leaders were influential to the teams’
work and rapport with the community. It may be useful
in the future to consider how this could then influence
the dynamics of power, representation, and privileged
access to staff or resources.
These considerations can be further expanded to the use
of CE in general. There is a great deal of momentum be-
hind supporting CE in biomedical research, and in outbreak
response settings as well. However, the unusual circum-
stances and challenges of emergency settings must not be
overlooked or generalized in attempting to fit a CE program
to the response. Many in the field have already pondered
questions such as: at what point do trialists engage the
community and to what degree? How do we balance what
may seem to be conflicting priorities of clinical care, bio-
medical research, and open communication? How do we
manage power and fairness in an emergency health setting
that is inherently unfair? How does CE interact with exist-
ing power imbalances or resource inequities? [16, 23, 56,
57] These questions and challenges cannot be addressed
with a ‘one size fits all’ model; further research is needed to
look at the impact of CE that incorporates the Four R’s on
the process, priorities and power of engagement.
Limitations
The scope, both in time and resources, of this study
served as a limitation affecting both sample size and data
collection. While data saturation was achieved among
IDI participants (demonstrated by the repetition among
responses), it could have been useful to speak to a wider
audience of community members and trial participants
to gain a better understanding of their perceptions of
the trial and its CE activities. Additionally, it is possible
that participant bias may have been present in some of
this study’s participants’  responses given their roles as
staff on the EBOVAC-Salone and PREVAC trials. Be-
cause of their positions, participants may have been in-
clined to answer questions in a more positive light.
Another limitation not foreseen was the delay of the
PREVAC trial. The trial launch was originally planned for
early 2018 but did not actually roll out until just a few
weeks before data collection began. This delay meant that
CLT members and Mambolo community members did
not have as much experience with the trial or messaging
as was expected. Additionally, because individual inter-
views were conducted in English, some nuance in re-
sponses may have been lost that would have been
differently expressed in a native tongue. Another limitation
came from the phrasing of certain questions. Interview
topic guides were reviewed with the assistance of the SST
in Sierra Leone to check for technical words or phrases
that would not be clear for interview participants. Despite 
this, some interviews still had the occasional misunder-
standing. In some instances, rephrasing a question or pro-
viding examples of potential answers may have biased the
response through unintentional leading of the participant.
Future studies would benefit from testing the questions a
priori and using local languages during interviews.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the CE approach delivered through the
EBODAC/EBOVAC partnership depended on trust
established between the teams and community members
that was reciprocal, relatable, relational, and respectful.
These are qualities that have been mentioned in the
existing literature on CE, but not as one comprehensive
framework that could foster trust and therefore effective
engagement. Furthermore, the ‘Four Rs’  could also be
further developed as a tool to benchmark effective com-
munity engagement; to do so would require additional
work to ensure the creation or adaptation of appropriate
indicators for monitoring. While some of these findings
may be significant to the setting in Sierra Leone and the
Ebola vaccine trials or may be influenced by some of the
limitations in this study, it is hoped that these Four R’s
could facilitate CE in other settings and strengthen dis-
ease preparedness activities. Furthermore, gaps in the lit-
erature also call for more in-depth research to be
conducted on effective models of CE for both global
health emergency and disease preparedness settings.
Supplementary information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-7978-4"] https://doi.org/10.
 1186/s12889-019-7978-4.
Additional file 1. IDI and FGD interview guides.
Abbreviations
CE: Community engagement; CLT: Community liaison team; EBODAC: Ebola
Vaccine Deployment, Acceptance and Compliance; EVD: Ebola virus disease;
FGD: Focus group discussion; IDI: In-depth interview; IMI: Innovative
Medicines Initiative; PAG: Participant advisory group; SST: Social science team
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the critical translation and
transcription assistance of Maseray Fofanah and Gibril Gottor. Additionally,
the authors would like to thank Thomas Mooney for his instrumental help
and guidance as well as Richard Barke and Samantha Vanderslott for their
helpful review and comments on the manuscript. Finally, this study would
not have been possible without the collaboration and support of the
EBOVAC-Salone and PREVAC trial teams and staff as well as the community
members in Kambia and Mambolo, Sierra Leone. The authors would also like
to acknowledge the partners of the EBOVAC/EBODAC collaboration: Heidi
Larson, Deborah Watson-Jones, Brian Greenwood, and David Ishola. This pro-
ject was conducted to contribute to Objective 6 of the African Coalition for
Epidemic Research, Response, and Training (ALERRT) consortium by generat-
ing evidence on engagement processes in different communities in Sierra
Leone.
Authors’ contribution
All authors (SD, GM, AM, SL) were involved in the development and
conception of this paper. SD was responsible for collecting and analyzing
Page 12
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 12 of 13
data and drafting this manuscript. All authors (SD, GM, AM, SL) were involved
in revising and editing the draft manuscript. All authors (SD, GM, AM, SL)
read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This project was funded by the Royal Veterinary College Student Research
Project fund and the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
Travel Grant scheme. This project has also received funding for publication
from the ALERRT consortium. ALERRT is part of the EDCTP2 programme
supported by the European Union under grant agreement RIA2016E-1612.
ALERRT is also supported by the United Kingdom National Institute for
Health Research.
The EBOVAC and EBODAC projects have received funding from the
Innovative Medicines Initiative 2 Joint Undertaking under grant agreement
No 115854. This Joint Undertaking receives support from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme and the
European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Association.
The aforementioned funders had no role in study design, data collection,
analysis, interpretation, or writing of this study.
Availability of data and materials
In order to protect the privacy of research participants, the raw qualitative
data for this project will not be publicly available.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
This study protocol obtained ethics approval from the local Office of the
Sierra Leone Ethics and Scientific Review Committee as well as of the
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. All participants for the
study were volunteers and received participant project information sheets.
Participants provided written consent or their thumb-print along with an im-
partial witness’s signature. All interviews have been anonymized.
Consent for publication
Participants gave consent for quotes to be included in this report.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 2 July 2019 Accepted: 20 November 2019
References
1.  Wilkinson A, Parker M, Martineau F, Leach M. Engaging ‘communities’:
anthropological insights from the west African Ebola epidemic. Philos Trans
R Soc B. 2017;372(1721):20160305.
2.  Ahmed SM, Palermo A-GS. Community engagement in research: frameworks
for education and peer review. Am J Public Health. 2010;100(8):1380–7.
3.  Dickert N, Sugarman J. Ethical goals of community consultation in research.
Am J Public Health. 2005;95(7):1123–7.
4.  Aggett S. Turning the gaze: challenges of involving biomedical researchers
in community engagement with research in Patan, Nepal. Crit Public Health.
2018;28(3):306–17.
5.  MacQueen KM, Bhan A, Frohlich J, Holzer J. Sugarman J, the ethics working
group of the HIVPTN. Eval Community Engage Global Health Res. 2015;16:44.
6.  Tindana PO, Singh JA, Tracy CS, Upshur REG, Daar AS, Singer PA, et al.
Grand challenges in Global Health: community engagement in research in
developing countries. PLoS Med. 2007;4(9):e273.
7.  Holzer JK, Ellis L, Merritt MW. Why we need community engagement in
medical research. J Investig Med. 2014;62(6):851–5.
8.  Moreno-John G, Gachie A, Fleming CM, Napoles-Springer A, Mutran E,
Manson SM, et al. Ethnic minority older adults participating in clinical
research: developing trust. J Aging Health. 2004;16(5 Suppl):93s–123s.
9.  Attree P, French B, Milton B, Povall S, Whitehead M, Popay J. The experience
of community engagement for individuals: a rapid review of evidence.
Health Soc Care Community. 2011;19(3):250–60.
10. McCoy DC, Hall JA, Ridge M. A systematic review of the literature for
evidence on health facility committees in low- and middle-income
countries. Health Policy Plan. 2012;27(6):449–66.
11. Fregonese F. Community involvement in biomedical research conducted in
the global health context; what can be done to make it really matter? BMC
Med Ethics. 2018;19(Suppl 1):44. 
12. Yarborough M, Edwards K, Espinoza P, Geller G, Sarwal A, Sharp R, et al.
Relationships hold the key to trustworthy and productive translational
science: recommendations for expanding community engagement in
biomedical research. Clin Trans Sci. 2013;6(4):310–3.
13. Marsh V, Kamuya D, Rowa Y, Gikonyo C, Molyneux S. Beginning community
engagement at a busy biomedical research programme: Experiences from
the KEMRI CGMRC-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Kilifi, Kenya. Soc
Sci Med (1982). 2008;67(5):721–33.
14. Lavery JV, Tinadana PO, Scott TW, Harrington LC, Ramsey JM, Ytuarte-Nuñez
C, et al. Towards a framework for community engagement in global health
research. Trends Parasitol. 2010;26(6):279–83.
15. Gikonyo C, Bejon P, Marsh V, Molyneux S. Taking social relationships
seriously: Lessons learned from the informed consent practices of a vaccine
trial on the Kenyan Coast. Soc Sci Med (1982). 2008;67(5):708–20.
16. UNAIDS/AVAC. Good participatory practice: Guidelines for biomedical HIV
prevention trials 2011. 2011.
17. Kutywayo A, Yah CS, Naidoo NP, Malotana M, Dyani S, Mullick S. Implementing
the good participatory practice guidelines in the girls achieve power trial in
South Africa. SAGE Open. 2018;8(4):2158244018809149.
18. CPTR. Good Participatory Practice Guidelines for TB Drug Trials. Critical Path
to TB Drug Regimens 2012. [URL: "https://www.cptrinitiative.org/resources/gpp-tb-resource-document/"] https://www.cptrinitiative.org/resources/gpp-tb-
 resource-document/.
19. Hankins C. Good participatory practice guidelines for trials of emerging (and
re-emerging) pathogens that are likely to cause severe outbreaks in the
near future and for which few or no medical countermeasures exist (GPP-
EP). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016.
20. Hannah S, Warren M, Bass E. Global implementation of good participatory
practice guidelines for biomedical HIV prevention research: charting
progress and setting milestones. Retrovirology. 2012;9(2):P240.
21. Baron D, Essien T, Pato S, Magongo M, Mbandazayo N, Scorgie F, et al.
Collateral benefits: how the practical application of Good Participatory
Practice can strengthen HIV research in sub-Saharan Africa. J Int AIDS Soc.
2018;21(Suppl Suppl 7):e25175.
22. Day S, Blumberg M, Vu T, Zhao Y, Rennie S, Tucker JD. Stakeholder
engagement to inform HIV clinical trials: a systematic review of the
evidence. J Int AIDS Soc. 2018;21 Suppl 7(Suppl Suppl 7):e25174.
23. Newman PA, Rubincam C, Slack C, Essack Z, Chakrapani V, Chuang D-M,
et al. Towards a science of community stakeholder engagement in
biomedical HIV prevention trials: an embedded four-country case study.
PLoS One. 2015;10(8):e0135937.
24. Mack N, Kirkendale S, Omullo P, Odhiambo J, Ratlhagana M, Masaki M, et al.
Implementing good participatory practice guidelines in the FEM-PrEP
Preexposure Prophylaxis Trial for HIV Prevention among African Women: A
focus on local stakeholder involvement. Open Access J Clin Trials. 2013;5:127.
25. Fairhead J, Leach M, Small M. Public engagement with science? Local
understandings of a vaccine trial in the GAMBIA. J Biosoc Sci. 2006;38(1):103–16.
26. Marsh VM, Kamuya DM, Mlamba AM, Williams TN, Molyneux SS. Experiences
with community engagement and informed consent in a genetic cohort
study of severe childhood diseases in Kenya. BMC Med Ethics. 2010;11(1):13.
27. Statement on the 1st meeting of the IHR Emergency Committee on the 2014
Ebola outbreak in West Africa: World Health Organization; 2014 [Available from:
[URL: "http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2014/ebola-20140808/en/"] http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2014/ebola-20140808/en/.
28. Gire SK, Goba A, Andersen KG, Sealfon RSG, Park DJ, Kanneh L, et al.
Genomic surveillance elucidates Ebola virus origin and transmission during
the 2014 outbreak. Science. 2014;345(6202):1369–72.
29. Ebola Situation Report - 30 March 2016: World Health Organization; 2016
[Available from: [URL: "http://apps.who.int/ebola/current-situation/ebola-situation-report-30-march-2016"] http://apps.who.int/ebola/current-situation/ebola-situation-
 report-30-march-2016.
30. Pandey A, Atkins KE, Medlock J, Wenzel N, Townsend JP, Childs JE, et al.
Strategies for containing Ebola in West Africa. Science. 2014;346(6212):991.
31. Galvani AP, Ndeffo-Mbah ML, Wenzel N, Childs JE. Ebola vaccination: if not
now, when? Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(10):749–50.
32. Frieden TR, Damon I, Bell BP, Kenyon T, Nichol S. Ebola 2014 — new challenges,
new global response and responsibility. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(13):1177–80.
33. Kamradt-Scott A. WHO’s to blame? The World Health Organization and the
2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Third World Q. 2016;37(3):401–18.
34. Coltart CEM, Lindsey B, Ghinai I, Johnson AM, Heymann DL. The Ebola outbreak,
2013–2016: old lessons for new epidemics. Philos Trans R Soc B. 2017;372:1721.
35. Thiam S, Delamou A, Camara S, Carter J, Lama EK, Ndiaye B, et al. Challenges in
controlling the Ebola outbreak in two prefectures in Guinea: why did
communities continue to resist? Pan Afr Med J. 2015;22(Suppl 1):22.
Page 13
Dada et al. BMC Public Health (2019) 19:1665  Page 13 of 13
36. Tiffany A, Dalziel BD, Kagume Njenge H, Johnson G, Nugba Ballah R, James
D, et al. Estimating the number of secondary Ebola cases resulting from an
unsafe burial and risk factors for transmission during the West Africa Ebola
epidemic. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2017;11(6):e0005491.
37. Fang LQ, Yang Y, Jiang JF, Yao HW, Kargbo D, Li XL, et al. Transmission
dynamics of Ebola virus disease and intervention effectiveness in Sierra
Leone. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016;113(16):4488–93.
38. Enria L, Lees S, Smout E, Mooney T, Tengbeh AF, Leigh B, et al. Power,
fairness and trust: understanding and engaging with vaccine trial
participants and communities in the setting up the EBOVAC-Salone vaccine
trial in Sierra Leone. BMC Public Health. 2016;16:1140.
39. Abramowitz SA, McLean KE, McKune SL, Bardosh KL, Fallah M, Monger J,
et al. Community-centered responses to Ebola in urban Liberia: the view
from below. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015;9(4):e0003706.
40. Laverack G, Manoncourt E. Key experiences of community engagement
and social mobilization in the Ebola response. Glob Health Promot.
2015;23(1):79–82.
41. Mooney T, Smout E, Leigh B, Greenwood B, Enria L, Ishola D, et al. EBOVAC-
Salone: Lessons learned from implementing an Ebola vaccine trial in an
Ebola-affected country. Clin Trials (London, England). 2018;15(5):436
1740774518780678.
42. Shukarev G, Callendret B, Luhn K, Douoguih M. A two-dose heterologous
prime-boost vaccine regimen eliciting sustained immune responses to
Ebola Zaire could support a preventive strategy for future outbreaks.
Human Vaccin Immun. 2017;13(2):266–70.
43. Larson HJ, Cooper LZ, Eskola J, Katz SL, Ratzan S. Addressing the vaccine
confidence gap. Lancet. 2011;378(9790):526–35.
44. Larson HJ, Jarrett C, Eckersberger E, Smith DMD, Paterson P. Understanding vaccine
hesitancy around vaccines and vaccination from a global perspective: a systematic
review of published literature, 2007–2012. Vaccine. 2014;32(19):2150–9.
45. Larson HJ. Negotiating vaccine acceptance in an era of reluctance. Human
Vaccin Immun. 2013;9(8):1779–81.
46. Lancet T. Ebola in West Africa: gaining community trust and confidence.
Lancet. 2014;383(9933):1946.
47. Karamouzian M, Hategekimana C. Ebola treatment and prevention are not
the only battles: understanding Ebola-related fear and stigma. Int J Health
Policy Manag. 2014;4(1):55–6.
48. Gsell P-S, Camacho A, Kucharski AJ, Watson CH, Bagayoko A, Nadlaou SD,
et al. Ring vaccination with rVSV-ZEBOV under expanded access in response
to an outbreak of Ebola virus disease in Guinea, 2016: an operational and
vaccine safety report. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017;17(12):1276–84.
49. Larson HJ, Ghinai I. Lessons from polio eradication. Nature. 2011;473:446.
50. Shagi C, Vallely A, Kasindi S, Chiduo B, Desmond N, Soteli S, et al. A model for
community representation and participation in HIV prevention trials among
women who engage in transactional sex in Africa. AIDS Care. 2008;20(9):1039–49.
51. Tengbeh AF, Enria L, Smout E, Mooney T, Callaghan M, Ishola D, et al. “We
are the heroes because we are ready to die for this country”: Participants’
decision-making and grounded ethics in an Ebola vaccine clinical trial. Soc
Sci Med. 2018;203:35–42.
52. NIAID. Ebola: New Trial Launched in West Africa to Evaluate Three
Vaccination Strategies: NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases; 2017 [Available from: [URL: "https://www.niaid.nih.gov/news-events/ebola-new-trial-launched-west-africa-evaluate-three-vaccination-strategies"] https://www.niaid.nih.gov/news-events/
 ebola-new-trial-launched-west-africa-evaluate-three-vaccination-strategies.
53. Gale NK, Heath G, Cameron E, Rashid S, Redwood S. Using the framework
method for the analysis of qualitative data in multi-disciplinary health
research. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2013;13(1):117.
54. Jalloh M, Graeff J, Jalloh S. Marklate (‘Vaccinate’): The Communication Initiative Network.;
2004 [Available from: [URL: "http://comminit.com/polio/content/marklate-vaccinate"] http://comminit.com/polio/content/marklate-vaccinate.
55. MacQueen KM, Eley NT, Frick M, Hamilton C. Using theory of change
frameworks to develop evaluation strategies for research engagement:
results of a pre-pilot study. J Int AIDS Soc. 2018;21(Suppl 7):e25181.
56. Okello G, Jones C, Bonareri M, Ndegwa SN, Mcharo C, Kengo J, et al.
Challenges for consent and community engagement in the conduct of
cluster randomized trial among school children in low income settings:
experiences from Kenya. Trials. 2013;14(1):142.
57. Molyneux S, Bull S. Consent and community engagement in diverse
research contexts: reviewing and developing research and practice:
participants in the community engagement and consent workshop, Kilifi,
Kenya, march 2011. J Empir Res Human Res Ethics. 2013;8(4):1–18. 
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
