Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
Title: Health workforce development and retention in Guinea: a policy analysis post-Ebola
Keywords: Ebola virus disease,Health systems reform,Health workforce retention,Human Resources for Health Governance,Decentralization,Health workforce finance
ModDate: 2019/08/05 15:02:13+02'00'
Subject: Human Resources for Health, 2019, doi:10.1186/s12960-019-0400-6
Author: Remco Pas
CreationDate: 2019/08/05 13:22:31+08'00'
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Ebola virus disease,Health systems reform,Health workforce retention,Human Resources for Health Governance,Decentralization,Health workforce finance
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s12960-019-0400-6
xmp:dc:publisher: Human Resources for Health
xmp:dc:description: Human Resources for Health, 2019, doi:10.1186/s12960-019-0400-6
xmp:dc:subject: Ebola virus disease; Health systems reform; Health workforce retention; Human Resources for Health Governance; Decentralization; Health workforce finance
xmp:dc:title: Health workforce development and retention in Guinea: a policy analysis post-Ebola
xmp:dc:creator: Remco Pas; Delphin Kolie; Alexandre Delamou; Wim Van Damme
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2019-08-05T15:02:13+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2019-08-05T13:22:31+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2019-08-05T15:02:13+02:00
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:dcf7b5ff-986d-4c49-8af8-325287500538
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:c3445114-589a-416a-a2fd-348b06cc60a8
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:57246ea4-cddf-48e3-8f89-2a955cfbfa77
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2019-08-05T13:35:36+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Remco Pas
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6098-334X
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A reference to the original document from which this one is derived. It is a minimal reference; missing components can be assumed to be unchanged. For example, a new version might only need to specify the instance ID and version number of the previous version, or a rendition might only need to specify the instance ID and rendition class of the original.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DerivedFrom
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: ResourceRef
xmp:pdfaType:description: Identifies a portion of a document. This can be a position at which the document has been changed since the most recent event history (stEvt:changed). For a resource within an xmpMM:Ingredients list, the ResourceRef uses this type to identify both the portion of the containing document that refers to the resource, and the portion of the referenced resource that is referenced.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Part#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stPart
xmp:pdfaType:type: Part
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/t/pg/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpTPg
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Paged-Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Fonts
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag Font
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: XMP08 Spec: An ordered array of plate names that are needed to print the document (including any in contained documents).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: PlateNames
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaType:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Font#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stFnt
xmp:pdfaType:type: Font
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methodology
  Results
Background
Methodology
Results
  The dynamics of HWF retention
    HWF Situation and contextual factors
  HRH policy on recruitment and deployment
  Anticipated process implementation of the HWF policy
  Actors, values, positions, and collaborations on HWF policy
  HWF education and its relation to the labor market supply
Discussion
  HRH situation and contextual factors
  Workforce policy content and anticipated implementation
  Actors, positions, and collaborations on HRH policy
  Educational developments concerning the HWF
  Governance of the Guinean HWF
  HWF development in Guinea
  Limitations
Conclusion
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Authors’ contributions
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Author details
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-019-0400-6
RESEARCH
Health workforce development and
retention in Guinea: a policy analysis
post-Ebola
Remco van de Pas1,3* [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6098-334X"] , Delphin Kolie2, Alexandre Delamou2,4 and Wim Van Damme1 
Open Access
Abstract
Background: The state of the Guinean health workforce is one of the country’s bottlenecks in advancing health
outcomes. The impact of the 2014–2015 Ebola virus disease outbreak and resulting international attention has provided
a policy window to invest in the workforce and reform the health system. This research constitutes a baseline study on
the health workforce situation, professional education, and retention policies in Guinea. The study was conducted to
inform capacity development as part of a scientific collaboration between Belgian and Guinean health institutes aiming
to strengthen public health systems and health workforce development. It provides initial recommendations to the
Guinean government and key actors.
Methodology: The conceptual framework for this study is inspired by Gilson and Walt’s health policy triangle. The
research consists of a mixed-methods approach with documents and data collected at the national, regional, and district
levels between October 2016 and March 2017. Interviews were conducted with 57 resource persons from the Ministry of
Health, other ministries, district health authorities, health centers and hospitals, health training institutions, health workers,
community leaders, NGO representatives, and development partners. Quantitative data included figures obtained from
seven health professionals’ schools in each administrative region of Guinea. A quantitative analysis was conducted to
determine the professional graduate trends by year and type of personnel. This provided for a picture of the pool of
professional graduates available in the regions in relation to the actual employment possibilities in rural areas. The
districts of Forecariah and Yomou were chosen as the main study sites.
Results: Limited recruitment and a relative overproduction of medical doctors and nurse assistants have led
to unemployment of health personnel. There was a mismatch between the number of civil servants administratively
deployed and those actually present at their health posts. Participants argued for decentralization of health workforce
management and financing. Collaboration between government actors and development partners is required to
anticipate problems with the policy implementation of new health workers’ deployment in rural areas. Further
privatization of health education has to meet health needs and labor market dynamics.
Keywords: Ebola virus disease, Health systems reform, Health workforce retention, Human Resources for Health
Governance, Decentralization, Health workforce finance
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:rvandepas@itg.be"] rvandepas@itg.be
1Department of Public Health, Institute of Tropical Medicine Antwerp,
Nationalestraat 155, 2000 Antwerp, Belgium
3Department of Health Ethics and Society, Faculty of Health Medicine and
Life Sciences, Maastricht University, P.O. Box 616, 6200, MD, Maastricht, The
Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2019 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63  Page 2 of 12
Background
The state of the Guinean health workforce (HWF) is one
of the country’s bottlenecks in advancing health outcomes
[1]. There has been a decade-long underinvestment with
limited public recruitment and a workforce dominated by
medical doctors [2, 3].  In 2014, a workforce projection
study found that maternal and neonatal health services
require particular attention. The main shortage is in skilled
birth attendance where only 18% of needs are met [4].
Although there is a relative oversupply of general practi-
tioners and nurse assistants (ATS), many of them work in
the private, informal sector. There are considerable varia-
tions in the distribution of health personnel given the
human resources for health (HRH) needs and HRH sup-
plies between rural and urban areas [4].  While overall
HRH needs for maternal and neonatal health services were
projected to increase by 22% between 2014 and 2024, the
supply was projected to decline by 15% under existing
recruitment patterns [4].
The Ebola virus disease (EVD) outbreak of 2014–2015
facilitated international finance and humanitarian assistance
and spurred the United Nations (UN) Security Council to
create the first ever UN mission for a public health emer-
gency [5]. In the wake of EVD, there has been much debate
and proposals for global health governance reforms by the
World Health Organization (WHO) and other institutions
to address future epidemics and build resilient health
systems. Authors have suggested that the EVD outbreak
could be a transformative moment in recognizing that there
are shared responsibilities by governments in strengthening
health systems [6]. The workforce is now considered a cru-
cial pillar for global health security and has been included
in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)1 [7, 8]. The
WHO’s Global Strategy on HRH: Workforce 2030 includes
a new estimate of the workforce density required to meet
the SDG2 [9].  This figure is ten times the proportion of
HWF currently employed by the Guinean public sector [1].
A UN commission has also provided a report and action
plan on the importance of health employment for eco-
nomic growth [10]. In Guinea itself, the impact of the EVD
outbreak and resulting international attention has provided
a policy window to invest in the workforce and reform the
health system after many years of stagnation (see Fig. 1).
Indeed, the government implemented a health system
recovery and resilience strategy with the intention to recruit
6000 staff from 2016 to 2018 and increase their salaries by
40% [11]. In 2016, the Ministry of public services recruited
3802 health workers (HWs) who signed a 5-year contract
1SDG Target 3c “Substantially increase health financing and the
recruitment, development, training and retention of the health
workforce in developing countries, especially in least developed
countries and small-island developing States”
2This target is set at 4.45 health workers/1000 population and is
almost twice the first estimation made by WHO in 2006 (2.28). 
committing to work in rural areas and were deployed in
March 2017 [12]. International development partners have
provided much support to further strengthen Guinea’s
health system, including 25 million Euros from the Euro-
pean Union in 2015, provided that the government ex-
pands its fiscal expenditure on health [13]. By 2017, the
government increased the total health expenditure from 4
to 8% [14].
Meanwhile, the government has planned to reform HRH
policy and management functions (Table 1).
Complementarily, the government has strengthened
essential public health functions such as epidemiological
surveillance by creating regional alert and response teams
as well as a National Health and Safety Authority (ANSS)
[15, 16].  Guinea’s Ministry of Health (MoH) has an-
nounced plans to invest in 11 000 new HWF jobs over the
next decade [17].
This research constitutes a baseline study to inform
scientific and educational capacity development as part of
a scientific collaboration between the Institute of Tropical
Medicine Antwerp (ITM) and the Centre National de For-
mation et de Recherche en Santé Rurale (CNFRSR),
Maferinyah, aiming to strengthen public health systems
and HWF development in Guinea. The study advances
academic debates on how to further HWF development
for resilient health systems in fragile contexts [18].  The
objectives and analysis are informed by a framework for
HWF labor market dynamics [19]. The study aimed to as-
sess whether a regional pool of qualified health workers
could be a basis for attracting unemployed HW to be re-
cruited to work in rural areas. It provides initial recom-
mendations to the Guinean government and key actors in
improving education, retention, and sustainability of staff
recruited to work in rural areas. Consecutive studies will
analyze the policy process, implementation, and health
systems’ impact of employing HWF in remote areas. Two
main research objectives have been identified:
(1) To assess the dynamics of HWF retention
in rural areas in the post-Ebola period.
(2) To assess the availability of HWF education
in relation to the labor market supply.
This study was conducted after the policy decision to
employ HWs in rural areas, but before the actual recruit-
ment and deployment in 2017. The study intends to pro-
vide policy guidance facilitating the actual retention of
HWF. This article is a short version of a research report
presented to the MoH and other relevant actors in a
workshop in September 2017 [20].
Methodology
The conceptual framework for this study follows Gilson
and Walt’s health policy triangle which indicates how
Page 3
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63  Page 3 of 12
Fig. 1 Evolution of HRH policy in Guinea post-Ebola
different actors (individuals, government, and national/
international organizations) interact to influence formula-
tion, planning, implementation, and evaluation of health
policies. This model also helps to assess perceptions, pro-
cesses, and complexities of established strategies [21]. In
this study, the policy triangle has been applied prospect-
ively to anticipate the formulation and implementation of
the new deployment policy. It provides for understanding
the processes through which influence is played out and
how actors and the political situation during and after
EVD outbreak shape and implement the new HWF policy
[21]. The different elements of the health policy triangle
provide the structure for the “Results” and “Discussion”
sections. These follow the interrelated components of the
Table 1 Reforms by the Guinean government in HW policy and
management functions [1]
• To develop a national strategy to retain staff in remote areas via
decentralized training and recruitment.
• Strengthen the institutional framework for HRH recruitment and
management performance.
• Re-concentrate initial formation of health workers to improve the
quality of care;
• Strengthen the capacity of health education institutions through
inter-sectoral collaboration.
• Strengthen the skills of personnel in terms of quality of care and
health management.
• Establish a strategy to develop and motivate a Community Health
Workforce [14].
• Reform of HRH policy and management is part of institutional
developments in Guinea in which policy dialogue and health
coordination structures have been established over the last years [15]. 
policy triangle: situational context, policy content, process
implementation, and actors involved. This study is a
mixed-methods approach with data collected at the
national, regional, and district levels between October
2016 and March 2017. Interviews were conducted with 57
key actors involved at multiple levels of capacity develop-
ment, training, and management of the HWF, both in and
outside government. Quantitative data were collected on
the aggregated pool of qualified HW available as well as
absenteeism and retention rates of HW at the district
level.
Table 2 depicts an overview of the study participants:
respondents were purposefully selected and, via snowball
sampling, additional key actors were included [22].
The health districts of Forecariah and Yomou were
chosen as the main study sites and represent two very
different rural contexts. This first study focused on rural
areas only given the gap between HWF needs and supplies
between Conakry and the rest of the country [4]. Given
feasibility and timeframe, only two study sites were selected
at this stage.
Forecariah is in lower Guinea and well accessible by
road in 2 h from Conakry and provides for personal and
market mobility. Yomou is situated over thousand kilome-
ters from Conakry in the Guinean forested region close to
the Liberian border. There are fewer government invest-
ments in infrastructure, education, and services than
lower Guinea. The HWF situation in Forecariah is less
deficient than in Yomou, but the former has been severely
Page 4
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63  Page 4 of 12
Table 2 Number of interviews conducted per groups of
participants
Groups of participants  Numbers
interviewed
Developments partners/donors,
international local NGO representatives 
12
Officials of the Ministry of Health
(central, regional and district authorities) 
13
Officials of the Ministry of Education
and Training Institutions 
08
Officials of the Ministry of
Public/Civil Services 
02
Officials of the Ministry of Decentralization
(regional and local authorities) 
05
Health workforce (civil servants working as
health-facility managers or caregivers,
contractors, and volunteers) 
17
Total  57
affected by EVD, with 433 cases identified and 10 HWs
infected. In Yomou, only 10 cases were identified.
Directors of the seven health professionals’ schools in
each administrative region of Guinea were interviewed to
obtain data on the HWs trained during the preceding 5
years and to assess whether these nursing/midwifery
schools were functioning in the post-Ebola period (Fig. 2).
Data on type and number of graduates per year were re-
trieved from the seven school registries. An overview was
generated to determine the professional graduate trends 
by year and type of personnel, which provide insights on
the decentralized supply of HWs in the regions (Fig. 3).
Qualitative data were collected through semi-structured
interviews based on interview guides that were piloted
and improved afterwards. This included questions on how
aggregated professional graduate trends (supply) match
with labor market needs, HWF retention dynamics in the
rural districts, and recruitment policies. The interviews
were then fully transcribed. The two main researchers in-
dependently coded and analyzed the results following a
coding grid that corresponded to different elements of the
health policy triangle. Quantitative data were collected
using a pre-developed form that was amended after a pilot
phase. At district levels, HWF registers were consulted
and absenteeism rates were calculated using the civil ser-
vants’ registry and comparing these with data from HWF
being present as reported by district health authorities.3
All participants received an information sheet and pro-
vided a signed consent to be included in the study. Study
participants and key actors could provide feedback on
the draft report during a research workshop in July
2017. The study was approved by the national research
ethics committee in Guinea4.
Results
The results are structured according to the two main re-
search objectives. The first objective on HWF retention
is presented along the 4 interrelated components of the
health policy triangle. The quantitative results on HWF
education are presented afterward.
Fig. 2 Geographic distribution of health training institutions in Guinea, April 2017
Page 5
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63  Page 5 of 12
Fig. 3 Distribution of graduates from 2010 to 2015 by staff category. Hierarchy A applies to physicians, dentists, and pharmacists. They have A-level
exam + 6 years (physicians) or 5 years of training. Hierarchy B is composed of nurses, midwives, laboratory technicians, public health technicians, and
social assistants. They all have A-level exam + 3 years of training. Hierarchy C is composed of nurse assistants (ATS). They have O-level exam + 3 years
of training
The dynamics of HWF retention
HWF Situation and contextual factors
An absolute shortage of HWF in both districts according
to global HRH policy guidelines5 was observed. This short-
age was more or less similar between Yomou and Forecar-
iah. In total, 289 HWs were registered in Forecariah and
135 in Yomou. This corresponds with a ratio of 1.2 avail-
able HWs per 1000 persons in each of the districts
(Table 3).
We also found an important mismatch (absenteeism)
between the number of HWs deployed (according to the
civil servant registry) and those actively working in the
district (according to the district authorities).  In fact, of
202 civil servants posted in Forecariah, only 83 were
present at their post (absenteeism rate 41%). This absentee-
ism rate was 39% (43 present of 111 posted) in Yomou.
3Absenteeism means “a situation in which people are not at school or
work when they should be”. Retention means “the ability of an
employer to keep its employees and stop them from going to work
somewhere else”. (Cambridge dictionary)
4Comité national d’éthique pour la recherche en santé (CNERS). No.
130/CNERS/16. Guinée, Conakry, October 11, 2016
5In 2016, “An SDG index threshold” of 4.45 doctors, nurses, and
midwives per 1000 population was identified by the WHO as an
indicative minimum density representing the need for health workers. 
Some participants argued that most of the healthcare tasks
were actually provided by local contractors or volunteers,
who hope to be prioritized during civil servant recruitment
processes.
Participants in the districts mentioned that the top-
down model of civil servant recruitment does not favor re-
tention in rural areas. Participants reported that the staff,
purposefully recruited from the capital, was parachuted in
underserved areas for just a few months to benefit their
civil servant salary, while volunteers or contractors work-
ing for decades in the municipalities had fewer chances of
being recruited.
We have recommended the central level to recruit
people already working with us as volunteers or
contractors for years but they prefer recruiting those
who are prepared for anything except staying in rural
areas (IDI 15, member district health office).
Furthermore, the available civil servants in both dis-
tricts were unequally distributed as depicted in Table 3.
Most of them worked in the urban conglomerations either
at the district management levels, district hospitals, or
urban health centers. In remote areas, temporary
contracted HWs and volunteers (graduated HW without
Page 6
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63  Page 6 of 12
Table 3 Health workforce profiles and distribution in Forecariah
and Yomou districts, Guinea, December 2016
Forecariah number (%)  Yomou number (%)
Health workforce per status
Civil servants* 83 (29)  43 (32)
Contractual/volunteers 206 (71)  92 (68)
Total  289 (100)  135 (100)
Health workforce distribution per status and categories in rural areas
Civil servants
Type A  5 (6)  0 (0)
Type B  4 (5)  7 (16)
Type C  14 (17)  9 (20)
Informal 0 (0)  0 (0)
Sub-total  23 (27)  16 (37)
Contractual/volunteers
Type A  0 (0)  1 (1)
Type B  22 (11)  12 (13)
Type C  31 (15)  25 (27)
Informal 99 (48)  36 (39)
Sub-total  152 (74)  74 (80)
Health workforce distribution per status and categories in the urban
center of the district
Civil servants
Type A  12 (14)  5 (12)
Type B  19 (23)  11 (26)
Type C  30 (36)  11 (26)
Informal 0 (0)  0 (0)
Sub-total  61 (73)  27 (63)
Contractual/volunteers
Type A  7 (3)  0 (0)
Type B  17 (8)  0 (0)
Type C  18 (9)  18 (20)
Informal 12 (6)  0 (0)
Sub-total  54 (26)  18 (20)
*83 health workers were present out of the 202 posted in Forecariah. In
Yomou, this was 43 out of 111 health workers
formal employment) were the most represented. Addition-
ally, there was also an imbalance in the distribution of
HWs according to their professional categories. Doctors,
pharmacist, and dentists (type A), and nurses, laboratory
technicians, and midwives (type B) were mainly found in
urban areas while assistant nurses (type C) and informal
community health workers occupied facilities in rural areas.
HWF aging is another highlighted challenge; many
HWs will retire in the coming decade [4]. The main point
emerging at local levels is that the state should accord suf-
ficient resources and engage with development partners to 
favor decentralization of its recruitment, deployment, and
payment policies. At the central level, participants identi-
fied three major issues: first, the state is solely responsible
for its employees and should not have support from part-
ners regarding their salaries; second, several donors are, in
principle, committed to supporting the state but this as-
sistance has been arriving slowly;
The EU wants to support the government in
this process but the funding has not yet been
received. The EU requires an indication of
further deconcentration and decentralization
of personnel management within the country.
(IDI 21, development partner)
Third, partners committed to supporting the govern-
ment in sustainable health system reforms have them-
selves recruited HWs into projects that they support.
HRH policy on recruitment and deployment
Participants reported that in the post-EVD period, staffing
shortfall was temporarily solved by ANSS and the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) maternal health project
contracting and deploying HWs. District health managers
were worried about the contracts of ANSS HWs ending
soon. At the district level, respondents suggested that
contracted HWs and interns from the health centers are
prioritized in the new recruitment; however, this should
also be followed by an administrative decentralization of
HWF management. HWF supervision was considered
inefficient with limited decision space at the district levels.
Respondents also argued for annual recruitments rather
than the currently practiced 5-yearly recruitments.
It was also suggested that the state take gender issues
into account when deploying staff since married women
may prefer to work in urban areas or near their husbands.
Respondents mentioned that recruitment from outside
the region had negative impacts mainly concerning
responsibilities and trust between staff members.
Participants provided policy propositions for improved
HWF retention. This includes local recruitment, strength-
ening supervision, allocation of wages by the local admin-
istration, including community overview, adopting career
plans and rotation schemes for staff, developing medical
specialist positions in rural hospitals, improving living and
working conditions, and creating incentives (financial) and
a particular status for health staff working in rural areas.
One participant confirmed that there are ongoing reflec-
tions to initiate real reform of the national human
resources policy.
The state needs to consider creating a local public
service in every region of the country. This service
could be directly under the authority of the regional
Page 7
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63  Page 7 of 12
governor and would be responsible for recruiting
state officials, including health professionals.
(IDI 14, government officer)
Anticipated process implementation of the HWF policy
Some local actors reported that central public adminis-
tration officials would be the first to undermine a new
transparent retention policy. They would do so by favor-
ing persons during the deployment process or by refus-
ing to adopt punitive measures against those who would
not stay in their job positions. Many HWs recruited dur-
ing the last round did not comply with their contract of
engagement.
Approximately 40% of participants were in favor of a 5-
year service contract working in rural areas and some
were ready to be deployed to such areas. Respondents
believe that new staff deployment will have a positive im-
pact on improving coverage and provision of care. Never-
theless, others said that the lack of state transparency in
HWF recruitment is a demotivating factor in seeking
employment in health services in rural areas.
In other countries, people line up to work in rural
areas as it allows them to access training grants but
at ours, those who refuse to go to the interior are the
same ones who could finalize their studies abroad or
who are promoted to positions of responsibility?
(IDI 30, health worker)
Although all respondents appreciated the new recruitment
of HWs, many had a negative perception of its organization
and reported low recruitment rates of specialists. Respon-
dents argued that the state should pay more attention to col-
laboration with the private sector which could be a real
driver of employment and growth for the country.
Actors, values, positions, and collaborations on HWF
policy
Educational and ministerial actors who are responsible
for the training, recruitment, and central management of
HWF confirmed that the MoH was not playing its full
role in HWF management. According to them, there is
an overproduction of less-qualified HWs in the country.
Additionally, their training curriculum does not follow
the needs and priorities set by the MoH. Respondents
reported that the MoH, which deploys HWs, collabo-
rates poorly with the Ministry of Finance (MoF) regard-
ing their payment.
We do not control the training of health workforce,
let alone its recruitment or salary. All these related
services report to their line ministries and not to the
Ministry of Health. (IDI 23, government officer) 
Central actors and respondents from a non-governmental
organization (NGO) and a multilateral organization were of
the opinion that the MoH’s main task is the supervision of
the HWF. They argued that poor coordination between min-
istries negatively impacted the sustainability of health gains.
Moreover, MoH respondents had doubts about the function-
ing of an inter-ministerial HWF committee as a consultative
platform. The ministry has proposed to transform the hu-
man resources division and create an HWF directorate but
respondents argued that such institutional development
should be accompanied by the allocation of more financial
resources to strengthen capacities and staff supervision.
Representatives of international organizations reported
that their institutions would recruit HWs in their areas of
intervention and thereby accompany the state in imple-
menting the health system’s recovery and resilience plan.
The development partners would be distributed between
several regions to allow coverage of the whole country but
also to evaluate the impact on the improvement of the
system in each actor’s area of intervention.
We are recruiting health workforce with the highest
criteria to run our health projects. The contract we
have with this health workforce is already perceived
by the state as a hiring contract in the public service.
The state does not respect its commitments and this
poses a problem for maintaining this staff in the
project areas. (IDI 24, development partner)
There has been progress in improving community-based
surveillance through support from the International
Organization for Migration. Additionally, both Forecariah
and Yomou districts benefited from staff being recruited
and contracted by the ANSS. The district hospital manage-
ment and health authorities reported good collaboration
between them and ANSS staff. Although these managers
appreciated the availability and motivation of ANSS staff,
they entrusted also that this staff lacked experience in
monitoring activities. ANSS employees, meanwhile,
reported difficulties in integrating immunization campaign
supervision activities at the district level. They also strug-
gled in participating in regular training activities organized
by the district health team. This integration challenge is
partly due to parallel financial and management systems.
HWF education and its relation to the labor market
supply
The results in this section provide a quantitative over-
view of the HWF education in Guinea. Figure 2 indicates
a mal-distribution of health training institutions across
the country. Most are located in Lower Guinea, particu-
larly in Conakry. Much of Middle and Upper Guinea
lacks health training institutions. This disparity mainly
concerns universities and professional schools (type B)
Page 8
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63  Page 8 of 12
which train state nurses, midwives, laboratory and public
health technicians, and social assistants.
Type A vocational schools that train ATS are more or
less well-distributed throughout the country, although
some type B vocational schools also train ATS. There are
four higher education institutions (universities) in Guinea:
three in Conakry (two are private) and one in N'zérékoré.
Figure 3 shows an upward trend in the number of
graduates (total 15 000 HWs) trained in Guinea between
2010 and 2015 and that ATS, state nurses, and midwives
were the largest professional groups trained. Almost all
professional categories (except ATS) were trained in
lower Guinea, amounting to nearly 44% of the HWF
trained over the last 5 years.
Figure 4 shows the importance of private institutions
in the training of certain professional categories between
2010 and 2015. Midwives, state nurses, and public health
technicians were primarily trained in private institutions.
Doctors, pharmacists, dentists, social assistants, and
ATS were exclusively trained in public institutions.
Discussion
The results provide an account of the challenges and
possible solutions to improve HWF development in
Guinea. The discussion builds on the results through
analyzing different elements of the health policy triangle,
followed by an analysis of the educational data, and fi-
nally some initial HWF policy, and governance recom-
mendations and implications.
HRH situation and contextual factors
It is challenging to employ and retain HWF in rural dis-
tricts. The results indicate that the economic development
situation makes it difficult for HWs to establish them-
selves permanently leading them to be often absent from
their workplace and district where deployed. They can 
only rely on a limited civil servant salary and there is less
economic demand for additional private health services
than in Conakry. Women HWs, generally about 60–70%
of the global workforce, face particular challenges. Inter-
national evidence points to systemic gender discrimin-
ation and inequalities in pre-service and in-service health
education and (rural) employment [23].  While not
specially addressed in this study, it is of importance to in-
clude a gender and equity analysis in follow-up studies
tracing HWF policy implementation in Guinea [24].
Respondents mentioned the need to be able to recruit
and manage the HWF locally. Since salaries are paid at
the central level, district-level health-team managers have
no leverage to incentivize or sanction HWs’  efforts. In
general, it is crucial to find a good balance in dividing
HWF governance responsibilities across central, regional,
and district institutions [25]. Ongoing decentralization of
government functions should facilitate this process.
Workforce policy content and anticipated implementation
The respondents indicated ongoing challenges in recruit-
ment policies in the past and were cautious regarding
the expectations of new policy developments. There are
three main government policy frameworks that should
enable HWF development in Guinea. The first concerns
the recruitment of HWF in public services [11, 12].
Although this policy has led to the actual recruitment of
3802 HWs in 2017, this study has not been able to
obtain an actual annual costed plan to finance this
expansion of the workforce. The national health finan-
cing strategy to attain universal health coverage (UHC)
targets spending 15% of the total government budget on
health by 2020. However, it lacks a plan to attain this
increase and provides no insight into the proportion of
the budget allocated to workforce development [26].
There is a considerable number of unemployed HWs away
from regular health services [4]. While they are formally
Fig. 4 Distribution of graduates from 2010 to 2015 by type of institution (private or public)
Page 9
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63  Page 9 of 12
graduated, many have not received postgraduate training.
Thoughtful planning and accompaniment will enable some
of them to be integrated into the health system. It has been
estimated that Guinea should increase its employed work-
force by 17% annually to meet the standard it has set itself.
While Guinea could be more ambitious in its scale-up of
the workforce, it seems possible to make these investments
within projected fiscal space available [27].
Secondly, the establishment of the ANSS aims to in-
crease public HWF capacity for essential public health
functions. In 2017, the ANSS contracted and deployed 10
HWs per district to increase this core capacity. Part of this
staff was later integrated into the recruited personnel by
the MoH. It remains unclear whether ANSS can still
contract staff outside the wage bill in the future.
Thirdly, in the wake of the EVD epidemic, there is rec-
ognition that health issues must be addressed directly at
the community level. The ministry, supported by organi-
zations like UNICEF, has begun to develop a community
health workforce (CHWF) to serve as an interface and
hence increase trust between formal health services and
communities [28]. The government was inspired by the
Health Extension Program in Ethiopia, where a cross-
country community-based program was rolled out [29].
The future capacity to actually manage an increased HWF
in the districts, including their performance and career
development, will be a challenge. Managing and supervis-
ing such a mixed HWF requires specific competencies,
resources, and training. Continuous training possibilities
and peer support are necessary to retain staff in remote
posts. Respondents also suggest a system of rotation and
scholarship schemes (for future specialization) to
incentivize HWs to stay in rural areas [25].
Actors, positions, and collaborations on HRH policy
The response to the EVD epidemic facilitated the
emergence and presence of many “new” actors, both
nationally and internationally. ANSS, NGOs, and inter-
national organizations have been recruiting personnel
at the district level creating a new staff “mix.” The
interviews indicate that there are challenges in aligning
the workforce along common objectives. A first chal-
lenge is generational since districts have an existing
group of often elder personnel that is now confronted
with a new generation of younger staff, trained in
Conakry, perhaps even with better remuneration. The
position of the “volunteers,”  basically unemployed
HWs, in the health centers, requires similar attention.
The results clarify that this cadre feels replaced by staff
coming from outside while not being given a chance
themselves to become civil servants. Both situations
might create potential conflict situations that should
be anticipated. 
A second challenge is skills mix. While there are
proportionally more medical doctors in the workforce,
international policies and donors urge for task-shifting
and the development of midwives and nurses [30]. Some
international agencies mentioned that they focus on re-
training and upgrading competences of ATS to have a
proper midwife or nurse accreditation. This creates a new
division of competences and tasks between the HWF and
requires a clear framework on how primary healthcare
teams function. A third challenge is possible tension
between the village health teams initially engaged in
addressing the Ebola outbreak and the CHWF deployed
by organizations afterwards. At the central level, the MoH
has attempted to create a terms of reference for the
CHWF profile [22]. At the local level, there seems to be
considerable variation in competences, remuneration, and
profiles in the CHWF. The fourth challenge is related to
remuneration and contracting. Several development actors
said that they have the flexibility to recruit HWs on a
short-term basis, often offering considerably higher salar-
ies than the MoH. The remuneration differences and
agreement on priorities require a strong district manage-
ment team to coordinate different actors and programs.
Nevertheless, workforce projections suggest that far more
international support is needed in Guinea, Sierra-Leone,
and Liberia to address their current training capacity
weaknesses if acceptable levels of HWF are to be pro-
duced. A suitable investment on the part of “an inter-
national community awakened to the global security
threat” [31] would be in supporting a significant scale-up
of this capacity [27].
Educational developments concerning the HWF
Interviewed actors acknowledged that there is no formal
coordination matching the growing supply of graduated
HWs in the more remote regions (Fig. 3) with labor mar-
ket dynamics. The prospect of having a job in healthcare
services might be reasonable in the long term but the
short-term prospects for newly graduated students remain
limited. Private schools focus mainly on nursing and mid-
wifery training. The directors indicate that the bottleneck
is the actual availability of competent teachers, internship
possibilities to enhance practical skills, as well as limited
accreditation and supervision. Exposure to practical
healthcare work is limited, impeding graduate quality and
potentially impacting population trust. Capacity develop-
ment in the areas of HWF management, professional
education, institutional development, and leadership re-
quires attention and investment [32, 33]. The labor market
mismatch requires reflection on student selection, man-
agement, and actually capping the number of entrance
candidates [4]. The medical faculty of Gamal Abdel Nas-
ser University has already imposed a student stop in 2016
to address the relative oversupply of medical doctors.
Page 10
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63  Page 10 of 12
Governance of the Guinean HWF
HWF governance is a complex health system function,
bringing state and non-state actors as well as different
sectors together at multiple levels. The centralized
management lines do not easily facilitate such a “hori-
zontal” approach. The respondents confirmed that in
2016, a new MoH-led HWF committee was established
at the national level. This committee should technically
be the governing body that analyses, oversees, plans,
budgets, and evaluates several HWF policy actions.
Ideally, all actors should buy-in to such a governance
mechanism. An HWF committee could consist of rep-
resentatives from several ministries, including the MoF.
Workforce development should be aligned with fiscal
and budgetary space to invest in the health sector.
Although some international actors favored more sec-
tor-wide budget support, they demanded accompany-
ing institutional reform of the MoH to rationalize
health system development and improve efficiency
and cooperation with other institutional government
partners [13].
A good national HWF strategy and implementation
plan should be based on evidence-based policy, labor
market, and demographic needs analysis, and include a
proper budget, monitoring and evaluation plan. Some
countries including Sudan and Indonesia have developed
an observatory to monitor HWF trends [34].  This re-
quires capacity and policy space at the MoH to plan,
manage, cost, and follow-up all actors adhering to one
HWF plan [35].  Leadership must acknowledge that
HWF is an important development (and not only health)
issue, so seeking alignment and support from the main
political and societal actors is required, even involving
them actively in the HWF committee [35].
HWF development in Guinea
The policy processes required to reform and develop the
Guinean HWF in a sustainable matter is complex, using a
range of interventions rather than a single-policy solution.
A comparative study on HWF policies in four post-crisis
settings indicated that these moments enable windows of
opportunity for change and reform can occur but are by
no means guaranteed—rather they depend on a constella-
tion of leadership, financing, and capacity [36].
Two main recommendations can be provided based
on the research. The first is that it is essential that there
is guidance, commissioned research, and space for policy
adjustments by the MoH on the implementation of the
different HWF processes in the country, most notably
the deployment of HWF to rural areas. This could im-
prove the fragile trust between the government, HWF,
and communities.
The second recommendation concerns the need to
initiate dialogue with all relevant national-level actors to 
provide a situational and comprehensive labor market
analysis of the HW situation, as to expand professional
education, financing, and various trends in the country
[19]. There is also a need to construct an HRH govern-
ance mechanism with its terms of reference and division
of tasks of relevant actors involved decided.
Limitations
Some difficulties were encountered during data collection.
Firstly, two educational centers could not be visited, so
data concerning these establishments were not collected.
Only HWF supply and needs have been assessed in this
study, while the financial and demand aspects require a
different, in-depth analysis. Secondly, two key resource
persons were not available for interviews. This limited
accessibility to the latest government health budget and
its breakdown for the HWF. Similarly, it has been impos-
sible to assess the financial contribution of development
partners to the budget for supporting staff recruitment.
Finally, the participation of a foreign researcher conduct-
ing interviews could influence responses and possibly con-
stituted a bias for the study.
Conclusion
Health workforce development in Guinea requires a
reform notably as there is a considerable mal-distribution
of HWF between rural and urban areas. The weak state of
the health system aggravated the EVD outbreak and led
the government to initiate a plan to revitalize the health
system and workforce. HWs were recruited in 2017 and
deployed to rural areas for a minimum of 5 years. This
study raises questions and challenges in terms of antici-
pated policy implementation, governance, HWF labor
dynamics, and professional education aiming to achieve
sustainable staff retention in rural areas. A longitudinal
follow-up of this deployment will be undertaken to under-
stand the structural issue driving the policy agenda includ-
ing options related to staff retention and to evaluate the
policy implementation of future medicalization of primary
care in the districts and impact on the quality of services
and health outcomes. The EVD outbreak provided for a
policy momentum to reform the HWF in Guinea. All
actors involved share a responsibility to sustain that
momentum and strengthen the health system.
Abbreviations
ANSS: National Health and Safety Authority (Agence Nationale de Sécurité
Sanitaire); ATS: Nurse assistants (Agents Technique de Santé);
CHWF: Community health workforce; CNFRSR: Centre National de Formation
et de Recherche en Santé Rurale de Maferinyah; EVD: Ebola virus disease;
HRH: Human Resources for Health; HW: Health worker; HWF: Health
workforce; ITM: Institute of Tropical Medicine Antwerp; M&E: Monitoring and
evaluation; MoF: Ministry of Finance; MoH: Ministry of Health; NGO: Non-
governmental organization; SDG: Sustainable Development Goals;
UHC: Universal health coverage; UN: United Nations; UNFPA: United
Nations Population Fund; WHO: World Health Organization
Page 11
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63  Page 11 of 12
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge participation and contribution by all research
participants as well as the input received during a research workshop in
Coyah, Guinea, in July 2017. Colleagues at ITM and CNFRSR provided
welcome feedback on study design, results, and follow-up. The authors thank
the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions.
Authors’ contributions
RP and DK designed the study. DK collected the main data and conducted
all interviews. RP conducted part of the interviews. DK transcribed the
interview data. RP and DK analyzed the data. DK wrote the original research
report. RP translated the report and wrote the research article. AD and WD
provided feedback and critical input during all phases. All authors agree on
the final manuscript.
Funding
This study is financed as part of a Fourth Framework Agreement (FA-IV)
program (2017–2022) between the Belgian Directorate of Development
Cooperation and government of Guinea pertaining to scientific capacity
building.
Availability of data and materials
The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available
from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The research protocol has been approved by the Comité national d’éthique
pour la recherche en santé under No. 130/CNERS/16. Guinée, Conakry,
October 11, 2016. All participants have provided consent to participate in the
study.
Consent for publication
All participants have provided consent for the results to be published.
Participants were invited to participate in a workshop discussing the initial
results of the study in July 2017.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
1Department of Public Health, Institute of Tropical Medicine Antwerp,
Nationalestraat 155, 2000 Antwerp, Belgium. 2Centre National de Formation
et de Recherche en Santé Rurale de Maferinyah, Ministère de la Santé, 2640
Forécariah, Guinea. 3Department of Health Ethics and Society, Faculty of
Health Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht University, P.O. Box 616, 6200,
MD, Maastricht, The Netherlands. 4Department of Public Health, Gamal Abdel
Nasser University, Conakry, Guinea.
Received: 14 January 2019 Accepted: 19 July 2019
References
1.  Ministère de la Sante de Guinée. Consultation intersectorielle des decideurs
et des partenaires des pays francophones. Note de la position du pays.
Abidjan: WHO; 2016.
2.  Kentikelenis A, King L, McKee M, Stuckler D. The International Monetary
Fund and the Ebola outbreak. Lancet Global Health. 2014;3(2):e69–70
 https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(14)70377-8. Accessed 7 Jan 2019
3.  Ministère de la Santé. Ressources humaines en Santé maternelle et
néonatale en Guinée. 2013:2014–23.
4.  Jansen C, Codija L, Cometto G, Yansané ML, Dieleman M. Realizing universal
health coverage for maternal health services in the Republic of Guinea: the
use of workforce projections to design health labor market interventions.
Risk Manag Healthc Policy. 2014;7:219 [URL: "https://doi.org/10.2147/RMHP.S46418"] https://doi.org/10.2147/RMHP.S46418.
Accessed 7 Jan 2019
5.  United Nations Security Council. Resolution 2177. S/RES/2177. 2014. [URL: "http://unscr.com/en/resolutions/doc/2177"] http://
 unscr.com/en/resolutions/doc/2177. Accessed 7 Jan 2019
6.  Kickbusch I, Reddy KS. Global health governance–the next political
revolution. Public Health. 2015;129(7):838–42 [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2015.04.014"] https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2
 015.04.014. Accessed 7 Jan 2019 
7.  Offline. No health workforce, no global health security. Lancet. 2016;
387(10033):2063 [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30598-0"] https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30598-0. Accessed 7
Jan 2019
8.  UN Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform. Sustainable
Development Goal 3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at
all ages. 2015. [URL: "https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg3"] https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg3. Accessed 7 Jan
2019
9.  WHO. Global Strategy on Human Resources for Health: Workforce 2030.
2016 [URL: "http://www.who.int/hrh/resources/global_strategy2030en-printversion.pdf?ua=1"] http://www.who.int/hrh/resources/global_strategy2030en-
 printversion.pdf?ua=1. Accessed 7 Jan 2019
10. UN High-Level Commission on Health Employment and Economic Growth.
2016 [URL: "http://www.who.int/hrh/com-heeg/en/"] http://www.who.int/hrh/com-heeg/en/. Accessed 7 Jan 2019
11. Ministère de la Santé, Guinée. Plan de Relance et de Résilience du système
de Santé 2015-2017. p. 2015.
12. Ministère de la Fonction Publique, de la Réforme de l’Etat et de la
Modernisation de l’Administration, Guinée, 2016
13. ECORYS Consortium de Santé. 2016. Audit Institutionnel, Organisationnel et
Fonctionnel du Ministère de la Santé – République de Guinée. European
Commission Directorate for Development Cooperation.
14. Diallo A. Minister of Health. Guinea. Plenary 6: The investor’s forum: Fiscal
policy and financing for jobs, health and inclusive growth. Dublin: Fourth
Global Forum on Human Resources for Health; 2017.
15. Ade N, Réne A, Khalifa M, Babila KO, Monono ME, Tarcisse E, Nabyonga-
Orem J. Coordination of the health policy dialogue process in Guinea: pre-
and post-Ebola. BMC Health Serv Res. 2016;16(4):220 [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-016-1457-8"] https://doi.org/10.1186/
 s12913-016-1457-8. Accessed 7 Jan 2019
16. Agence Nationale de Sécurité Sanitaire de Guinée, 2016
17. Ministère de la Santé ,  Guinée. Plan National de Developpement
Sanitaire, 2015.
18. Witter S, Hunter B. How do different types of provider affect access to
effective and affordable healthcare during and after crises? Health systems
during and after crisis: evidence for better policy and practice. Brief 4.
ReBUILD consortium. 2017. [URL: "https://rebuildconsortium.com/media/1538/rebuild_briefing_4_june_17_providers.pdf"] https://rebuildconsortium.com/media/1538/
 rebuild_briefing_4_june_17_providers.pdf
19. Sousa A, Scheffler RM, Nyoni J, Boerma T. A comprehensive health labour
market framework for universal health coverage. Bull World Health Organ.
2013;91(11):892–4.
20. Kolie D, Van de Pas R, Van Belle S, Delamou A, Beavogui AH, Van Damme
W. Analyze situationnelle du personnel de santé et des établissements de
formation pour le renforcement du système de santé afin de guider la
coopération au développement entre la Belgique et la Guinée. Rapport de
recherche. Institut de Médecine Tropicale, Anvers, Belgique et Centre
National de Formation et de Recherche en Santé Rurale de Maferinyah,
Ministère de la Santé, Guinée. 2017. [URL: "https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323541291_Analyse_situationnelle_du_personnel_de_sante_et_des_etablissements_de_formation_pour_le_renforcement_du_systeme_de_sante_Guinee"] https://www.researchgate.net/
 publication/323541291_Analyse_situationnelle_du_personnel_de_sante_et_
 des_etablissements_de_formation_pour_le_renforcement_du_systeme_de_
 sante_Guinee. Accessed 7 Jan 2019
21. Walt G, Gilson L. Reforming the health sector in developing countries: the
central role of policy analysis. Health Policy Plann. 1994;9(4):353–70.
22. Heckathorn DD. Respondent-driven sampling: a new approach to the study
of hidden populations. Soc Prob. 1997;44(2):174–99.
23. Newman C. Time to address gender discrimination and inequality in the
health workforce. Human resources for health. 2014;12(1):25 [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-12-25"] https://doi.
 org/10.1186/1478-4491-12-25.
24. Delivered by women, led by men: A gender and equity analysis of the global
health and social workforce. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 (Human
Resources for Health Observer Series No. 24). Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO
25. Kolehmainen-Aitken RL. Decentralization’s impact on the health workforce:
perspectives of managers, workers and national leaders. Hum Res Health.
2004;2(1):5 [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-2-5"] https://doi.org/10.1186/1478-4491-2-5.
26. Guinée. Ministère de la Santé. Strategie de Financement de la Sante vers la
couverture sanitaire universelle en Guinee. 2015
27. McPake B, Dayal P, Herbst CH. Never again? Challenges in transforming the
health workforce landscape in post-Ebola West Africa. Hum Res Health.
2019;17(1):19.
28. Guinée. Ministère de la Santé. In: Note de service portant termes de
reference de l’Agent Communautaire de Sante (ACS); 2016.
29. Banteyerga H. Ethiopia’s health extension program: improving health
through community involvement. MEDICC Rev. 2011;13(3):46–9.
30. Buchan J, Couper ID, Tangcharoensathien V, Thepannya K, Jaskiewicz W,
Perfilieva G, Dolea C. Early implementation of WHO recommendations for
Page 12
Pas et al. Human Resources for Health (2019) 17:63
the retention of health workers in remote and rural areas. Bull World Health
Org. 2013;91:834–40 [URL: "https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.13.119008"] https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.13.119008.
31. Kluge H, Martín-Moreno JM, Emiroglu N, et al. Strengthening global health
security by embedding the International Health Regulation requirements in
health systems. BMJ Glob Health. 2018;3(Suppl1):e000656 [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000656"] https://doi.org/1
 0.1136/bmjgh-2017-000656.
32. Nyoni J. Improving the health workforce in Africa: the weak link. Afr J
Midwif Wom Health. 2008;2(2):90–5 [URL: "https://doi.org/10.12968/ajmw.2008.2.2.90"] https://doi.org/10.12968/ajmw.2
 008.2.2.90.
33. Frenk J, Chen L, Bhutta ZA, Cohen J, Crisp N, Evans T, Fineberg H, Garcia P,
Ke Y, Kelley P, Kistnasamy B. Health professionals for a new century:
transforming education to strengthen health systems in an interdependent
world. Lancet. 2010;376(9756):1923–58+ [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61854-5"] https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736
 (10)61854-5.
34. Dussault G, et al. Follow-up on commitments at the Third Global Forum on
Human Resources for Health: Indonesia, Sudan, Tanzania. Hum Res Health.
2016;14(1):16.
35. WHO. Country Coordination and Facilitation. Principles and process. 2012
[URL: "http://www.who.int/workforcealliance/knowledge/resources/CCF_Principles_Processes_web.pdf?ua=1"] http://www.who.int/workforcealliance/knowledge/resources/CCF_Principles_
 Processes_web.pdf?ua=1. Accessed 7 Jan 2019
36. Witter S, Berton MP, Chirwa Y, Namakula J, So S, Wurie HR. Evolution of
policies on human resources for health: opportunities and constraints in
four post-conflict and post-crisis settings. Conflict Health. 2016;10(1):31
 https://doi.org/10.1186/s13031-016-0099-0.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations. 
Page 12 of 12
