Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
Title: Improving health information systems during an emergency: lessons and recommendations from an Ebola treatment centre in Sierra Leone
Keywords: Ebola virus disease,Disease outbreaks,Health emergencies,Health information systems,Medical records,Health records,Electronic health records,Data collection
ModDate: 2019/05/27 16:14:07+02'00'
Subject: BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 2019, doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0817-9
Author: Shefali Oza
CreationDate: 2019/05/24 16:17:02+08'00'
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Ebola virus disease,Disease outbreaks,Health emergencies,Health information systems,Medical records,Health records,Electronic health records,Data collection
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s12911-019-0817-9
xmp:dc:publisher: BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making
xmp:dc:description: BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 2019, doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0817-9
xmp:dc:subject: Ebola virus disease; Disease outbreaks; Health emergencies; Health information systems; Medical records; Health records; Electronic health records; Data collection
xmp:dc:title: Improving health information systems during an emergency: lessons and recommendations from an Ebola treatment centre in Sierra Leone
xmp:dc:creator: Shefali Oza; Kevin Wing; Alieu Amara Sesay; Sabah Boufkhed; Catherine Houlihan; Lahai Vandi; Sahr Charles Sebba; Catherine R. McGowan; Rachael Cummings; Francesco Checchi
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2019-05-27T16:14:07+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2019-05-24T16:17:02+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2019-05-27T16:14:07+02:00
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:b6f9e0da-f5ea-4059-ae75-6fb8a6f5cc14
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:553f4f54-a035-42de-8dca-f0d0771c1b5e
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:7fe54de0-9b89-431a-bea7-833540af323a
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2019-05-24T16:31:40+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Shefali Oza
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5872-486X
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A reference to the original document from which this one is derived. It is a minimal reference; missing components can be assumed to be unchanged. For example, a new version might only need to specify the instance ID and version number of the previous version, or a rendition might only need to specify the instance ID and rendition class of the original.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DerivedFrom
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: ResourceRef
xmp:pdfaType:description: Identifies a portion of a document. This can be a position at which the document has been changed since the most recent event history (stEvt:changed). For a resource within an xmpMM:Ingredients list, the ResourceRef uses this type to identify both the portion of the containing document that refers to the resource, and the portion of the referenced resource that is referenced.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Part#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stPart
xmp:pdfaType:type: Part
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/t/pg/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpTPg
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Paged-Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Fonts
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag Font
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: XMP08 Spec: An ordered array of plate names that are needed to print the document (including any in contained documents).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: PlateNames
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaType:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Font#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stFnt
xmp:pdfaType:type: Font
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Methods
  Results
  Conclusions
Background
  HIS challenges for Ebola
  Paper versus electronic health records
  Goals of this paper
Methods
  Setting
  Review of existing data collection solutions
  Determining inputs and outputs for the HIS
  Implementing the HIS
  System usage and evaluation
Results
  Review of existing data collection solutions
  Determining inputs and outputs for the HIS
  Implementing the HIS
    Data collection forms/modules
    Preparing the systems
    Staff training
    Revisions
    System maintenance
  System usage and evaluation
Discussion
  General design and implementation lessons
  Planning for high-quality data collection
  Connections between the HIS and other teams
  Ethical concerns
  Sharing across organizations
  Being better prepared for the next emergency
Conclusions
Additional files
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Authors’ contributions
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Publisher’s Note
Author details
References
Page 1
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-019-0817-9 
(2019) 19:100
RESEARCH ARTICLE  Open Access
Improving health information systems
during an emergency: lessons and
recommendations from an Ebola treatment
centre in Sierra Leone
Shefali Oza1,2* [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5872-486X"] , Kevin Wing1,2, Alieu Amara Sesay2, Sabah Boufkhed1,2, Catherine Houlihan1,2,3, Lahai Vandi2,
Sahr Charles Sebba2, Catherine R. McGowan1,2,4, Rachael Cummings2,4 and Francesco Checchi1,2,4
Abstract
Background: The 2014–2016 West Africa Ebola epidemic highlighted the difficulty of collecting patient information
during emergencies, especially in highly infectious environments. Health information systems (HISs) appropriate for
such settings were lacking prior to this outbreak. Here we describe our development and implementation of paper
and electronic HISs at the Sierra Leone Kerry Town Ebola treatment centre (ETC) from 2014 to 2015. We share our
approach, experiences, and recommendations for future health emergencies.
Methods: We developed eight fact-finding questions about data-related needs, priorities, and restrictions at the
ETC (“inputs”) to inform eight structural decisions (“outputs”) across six core HIS components. Semi-structured
interviews about the “inputs” were then conducted with HIS stakeholders, chosen based on their teams’
involvement in ETC HIS-related activities. Their responses were used to formulate the “output” results to guide the
HIS design. We implemented the HIS using an Agile approach, monitored system usage, and developed a
structured questionnaire on user experiences and opinions.
Results: Some key “input” responses were: 1) data needs for priorities (patient care, mandatory reporting); 2) challenges
around infection control, limited equipment, and staff clinical/language proficiencies; 3) patient/clinical flows; and 4) weak
points from staff turnover, infection control, and changing protocols. Key outputs included: 1) determining essential data,
2) data tool design decisions (e.g. large font sizes, checkboxes/buttons), 3) data communication methods (e.g. radio,
“collective memory”), 4) error reduction methods (e.g. check digits, pre-written wristbands), and 5) data storage options
(e.g. encrypted files, accessible folders). Implementation involved building data collection tools (e.g. 13 forms),
preparing the systems (e.g. supplies), training staff, and maintenance (e.g. removing old forms). Most patients had basic
(100%, n = 456/456), drug (96.9%, n = 442/456), and additional clinical/epidemiological (98.9%, n = 451/456) data stored.
The questionnaire responses highlighted the importance of usability and simplicity in the HIS.
Conclusions: HISs during emergencies are often ad-hoc and disjointed, but systematic design and implementation
can lead to high-quality systems focused on efficiency and ease of use. Many of the processes used and lessons
learned from our work are generalizable to other health emergencies. Improvements should be started now to have
rapidly adaptable and deployable HISs ready for the next health emergency.
Keywords: Ebola virus disease, Disease outbreaks, Health emergencies, Health information systems, Medical records,
Health records, Electronic health records, Data collection
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:shefali@alum.mit.edu"] shefali@alum.mit.edu
1London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London
WC1E 7HT, UK
2Save the Children International, Kerry Town, Rural District, Western Area,
Sierra Leone
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2019 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 2 of 14
Background
The 2014–2016 Ebola epidemic in West Africa was
unprecedented not only in its scope and scale [1],  but
also in the challenges and opportunities it presented for
collecting patient health records. In an emergency,
health information systems (HISs) are needed to support
patient care and to help coordinate the overall response.
Rapidly implemented basic health records that “get the
job done” are often justifiably prioritized over more
comprehensive, high-quality data collection systems.
There are, however, several benefits to having a
well-functioning HIS during a large-scale outbreak. First,
such a system makes patient care more efficient and
accurate [2]. Second, for diseases with a scant evidence
base such as Ebola, patient data are essential for clinical
trials and understanding prognostic factors for survival
[3].  Even basic questions, such as the importance of
intravenous (IV) fluids for survival, were hotly debated
during this outbreak [4].  Patient records of adequate
quality can help answer some of these questions. Third,
easily producible patient data summaries are needed for
staff and resource management, as well as for external
monitoring and surveillance.
HIS challenges for Ebola
The lack of established models for designing and
implementing HISs for a large-scale Ebola outbreak was
understandable since earlier Ebola outbreaks had fewer
than 500 cases [5].  In comparison, this outbreak had
more than 28,000 reported cases [6]. Pre-existing stan-
dardized data collection tools, like the Centers for
Disease Control’s Epi Info viral hemorrhagic fever appli-
cation [7],  were intended for outbreak tracking rather
than individual patient records. Other tools, like
ISARIC’s initial case record form [8], were too detailed
and research-focused to be directly useable in the Ebola
treatment centre (ETC) environment. Moreover, no “sys-
tem” existed that brought most or all of the necessary
HIS components together cohesively.
Recording of and communicating patient data in an
ETC has particular challenges, largely due to severe
infection control requirements [9].  The amount and
quality of patient data that can be reasonably recorded is
restricted by 1) personal protective equipment (PPE),
which limits dexterity, visibility, and time with patients;
2) the inability to move paper patient records from
highly infectious patient areas (red zone) to low risk
areas (green zone); and 3) one-way movement of people
and equipment from suspect to confirmed patient wards
(Fig. 1).
These restrictions are in addition to the more general
challenges presented during emergencies (especially in
low-resource settings),  such as high staff turnover,
varying skill/experience levels of clinical staff, multiple 
languages amongst clinicians and patients, limited data
collection training, fast-paced changes to treatment
protocols, and critical but time-consuming reporting to
external actors.
Paper versus electronic health records
Health records may be paper-based, electronic, or a
combination of the two. Paper health records (PHRs) are
familiar, easier to develop and modify, and generally in-
expensive. However, PHRs can be damaged or lost, hard
to use with PPE, and more error-prone. Version control,
especially of already circulated forms, can also be diffi-
cult. Electronic health records (EHRs) can result in
higher-quality/standardized data entry, be configured for
efficiency and review in difficult environments, and have
automated functions for reporting and quality checks
[10].  But they can require expensive/fragile equipment,
more time and programmers to develop, and additional
training. In the ETC, EHRs have a critical advantage in
transmitting information between the red and green
zones. While paper records cannot physically leave the
red zone, electronic records can be instantaneously com-
municated over a wireless local area network (WLAN)
even in settings with unreliable power and no Internet
connection.
Goals of this paper
The HIS for the Kerry Town ETC in Sierra Leone, oper-
ated by Save the Children International (SCI), consisted
of both paper and electronic health records. This paper
describes the system-level processes we used to develop
and implement the overall HIS structure at this site,
including integration of the HIS within the wider ETC
environment. A previous paper [11] describes technical
details of the EHR development and implementation, so
we will not go into depth on those topics in this paper.
In contrast, our goal here is to describe the higher-level
strategic approach we used, discuss lessons learned, and
provide recommendations for how high-quality patient
health records can be more efficiently collected in future
outbreaks and emergencies.
Methods
Setting
SCI operated the 80-bed Kerry Town ETC from Novem-
ber 2014 to March 2015. This multi-building facility had
distinct red and green zones. The red zone comprised
patient areas such as triage and wards for confirmed,
suspect, and recovery patients. The green zone had a cli-
nicians’  station, pharmacy, warehouse, kitchen, and of-
fices for the health, sanitation, operations, patient care,
and HIS teams (Additional file 1; section A1).  There
were two on-site laboratories. The over 100 clinical staff,
ranging from nursing assistants to doctors, were a mix
Page 3
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 3 of 14
Fig. 1 Schematic of people and equipment flow in the red zone of the Kerry Town Ebola treatment center
of long-term Sierra Leoneans, medium-term Cuban vol-
unteers, and some additional short-term internationals.
Common languages amongst the clinical staff included
Krio, English, and Spanish, with most of the inter-
national staff speaking only English or Spanish. Patients
spoke mostly Krio or other local languages.
Review of existing data collection solutions
Prior to designing our patient records, we searched for
possible PHR and EHR solutions that could be quickly
adapted for our setting. We did this by: 1) searching aca-
demic literature (using Google Scholar and PubMed)
and non-academic documentation (e.g. through Google),
2) directly approaching organizations involved in open-
ing large-scale ETCs in West Africa, and 3) having
informal discussions with individuals experienced in data
collection during emergencies (especially for Ebola or
other outbreaks).  Because of the rapid pace required,
these searches were conducted over the scale of hours
to days, with some discussions continuing for a few
weeks. Our academic literature search included dis-
ease search terms of “Ebola” or “viral hemorrhagic
fever” and data-related search terms of “data collection”,
“medical records”,  “patient records”,  “patient data”, 
“documentation”, “health information system”, and “health
information”.
Determining inputs and outputs for the HIS
To design the Kerry Town ETC HIS content and struc-
ture, we first identified the six core components that we
believed were necessary and feasible for a comprehensive
HIS at our site (Table 1).  This list was developed
through informal discussions within our team based on
our experiences with data collection systems in emer-
gency and non-emergency situations.
We then mapped out a set of fact-finding questions
about patient data needs and capabilities/resources at
the ETC (“inputs”) to inform structural decisions (“out-
puts”) for the HIS across these six core components
(Table 2). A similar informal team-based discussion ap-
proach was used to develop and revise these inputs and
outputs.
We then selected stakeholders to answer the input
questions. We chose these stakeholders by reviewing
HIS activities/needs in each ETC department and
amongst external partners. For any teams with data or
maintenance linkages to the HIS, the team leaders were
chosen as stakeholders. For those strongly connected to
Page 4
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 4 of 14
Table 1 Core components of a health information system during an emergency
Core HIS component Description
Data collection tools  Paper and/or electronic forms that constitute the information (e.g. demographic, epidemiological, medical) collected
on individual patients.
Communication of data  Methods and channels for communicating patient information as securely as possible to relevant parties within the
care facility, and externally as necessary.
Coordination amongst
relevant parties 
Channels for up-to-date communication with the individuals and departments that play a role in using and/or
maintaining the HIS.
Staff training  Development and use of standardized training tools, schedules, and sessions related to HIS, including medical ethics.
Data management All aspects of managing data, including data digitization, entry, storage, security, and archiving.
Data analysis and reporting Processing and analyzing data for monitoring care, internal/external reporting, and research.
the HIS (e.g. clinical team), 1–3 non-leader staff members
were also included to represent different user perspectives.
The stakeholders included clinicians, epidemiologists,
pharmacists, lab specialists, information technology (IT)
personnel, water/sanitation/hygiene (WASH) staff, ETC
operations management, and various internal teams and
external partners that needed specific or aggregate patient
data. We used informal semi-structured interviews to ask
each stakeholder the input questions relevant to their
team. We then used their responses to formulate the out-
put decisions, framed in the context of strict infection
control, through discussions within our team. Time con-
straints ruled out a more formal approach. The inputs and
outputs were part of an iterative process, with answers
changing based on evolving needs as well as trial and error
during implementation. 
From the outset, we chose to develop both a PHR sys-
tem (to be ready for the ETC opening) and an EHR system
(to address the critical red zone communication chal-
lenges, but longer to develop) (Additional file 1, section
A2).  Most of the inputs/outputs were for higher-level
structural decisions, and thus applicable to both the PHR
and EHR systems. For areas where the two systems di-
verged, we sought inputs and formulated outputs for each
system.
Implementing the HIS
The key tasks for implementing the HIS included: 1)
building the PHR forms/databases and EHR software, 2)
preparing the systems for use, 3) training staff on using
the systems, 4) further revisions based on feedback and
monitoring, and 5) maintaining the systems.
Table 2 Inputs and outputs for designing a health information
system during an emergency
Inputs from key stakeholders
I1 What are the priorities for the use of the patient data?
I2 What patient data are needed to meet these priorities?
I3 What challenges may restrict data collection?
I4 What is the patient flow at the site?
I5 What is the clinical workflow at the site?
I6 Who needs access to which data, where, and how often?
I7 Which activities may interfere with the HIS?
I8 What resources (equipment, money, personnel, infrastructure, time)
are available for building and using the system?
Outputs to guide design of the health information system
O1 Which data and where to collect them
O2 Platform for data collection
O3 Design decisions for data collection tools
O4 Who collects the patient data
O5 How data are communicated to the necessary people
O6 How data errors are minimized
O7 How the patient records are digitized and processed
O8 How and where the patient records are stored and secured 
System usage and evaluation
PHR and EHR system usage was monitored through
both routine clinical care and retrospective analyses of
patient records. We assessed missing individual records
across different aspects of patient care and tried to iden-
tify why the records were missing.
Additionally, we developed a structured questionnaire
on clinicians’  experiences with the PHR system and
opinions on an EHR system as part of routine feed-
back for system improvements (Additional file 1, section
A3). This questionnaire was available in English and Span-
ish. Clinicians were asked (through team leaders,
word-of-mouth, and in person) to complete it in February
2015, three months after the ETC opened and prior to the
implementation of the EHR system. We also documented
informal feedback received from HIS users through the
duration of ETC operations. A comparison of patient data
that were entered in both the PHR and EHR systems is
described elsewhere [11].
Results
Review of existing data collection solutions
We found no publication with guidance on designing an
overall HIS for Ebola or other viral hemorrhagic fever
Page 5
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 5 of 14
(VHF) outbreaks. Buhler et al. discussed red to green
zone communication methods [12],  and some previous
clinical publications noted the need for quality data col-
lection [13, 14]. Most of the organizations we contacted
had not yet set up data collection systems for the Ebola
outbreak and none had one that suited our needs. Méde-
cins Sans Frontières (MSF) gave us valuable advice on
data collection and communication challenges. Through
informal discussions, we learned about the ISARIC case
record form and CDC’s case investigation form. Based
on these discussions and our previous experiences, we
were aware that most data collection during emergency
outbreaks was minimal. See section A4 of “Additional
file 1” for details on our EHR platform search.
Determining inputs and outputs for the HIS
Table 3 summarizes our findings from the stakeholder
interviews (inputs) and our HIS decisions based on their
responses (outputs).
Implementing the HIS
Data collection forms/modules
We made 13 forms for the PHR system, had two log
books for the clinicians’ station, and retained case inves-
tigation and intake forms for patients from their previ-
ous Ebola holding centres. Essential forms were
implemented on the day the site opened. Additional
forms, including IV fluid infusion charts, nutrition
forms, and a patient exit survey, were added based on
staff feedback. A triage form was deployed when the sus-
pect ward opened. See section A6 of “Additional file 1”
for PHR form descriptions and rollout dates and “Add-
itional file 2” for copies of the PHR forms. The PHR da-
tabases were built and implemented over the first two
months. We made eleven key modules for the EHR sys-
tem, with five for the tablet-based application and six for
the desktop application [11].
Preparing the systems
For the PHR system, we ordered necessary HIS supplies;
bulk printed forms; prepared pre-written wristbands; es-
tablishing dedicated physical spaces for blank forms and
in-use patient record folders in the clinicians’  station
and wards; identified storage space in the HIS office for
completed records; and, more generally, ascertained that
the “outputs” were completed. Additional EHR tasks,
like deploying tablets and field testing, are described
elsewhere [11].
Staff training
Clinicians were trained on how to use the PHR system
using Powerpoint presentations. We trained and ob-
tained feedback from initial clinical staff prior to the
ETC opening. Later incoming staff received HIS training 
upon arrival as part of their introductory clinical train-
ing. The training included an overview of what HIS
entails and how it fits into the ETC, a description of
each PHR form, “do”s and “don’t”s of properly filling out
forms, and planned improvements. Printed forms were
provided to clinicians for familiarization. Any further
HIS trainings (e.g. refresher sessions) were conducted
over several days while clinicians were on break between
shifts. EHR training is described elsewhere [11].
Revisions
We made several system modifications based on user
feedback, especially during the first two months of the
site opening. The majority of revisions were focused on
ease of use, feasibility, and usefulness. The key changes
to the forms were to: 1) add forms based on clinical
feedback (e.g. IV fluid charts, nutritional intake); 2) add
requested questions and delete unnecessary ones (e.g. vi-
tals or signs not collected in practice due to time con-
straints); 3) increase font sizes for red zone forms; and
4) move item locations on forms to improve intuitive
flow. We also attempted several red to green zone com-
munication methods, including ones that were too time
consuming or difficult to implement. See “Additional file
1, section A8” for more details on various revisions we
made to HIS components.
System maintenance
This included tasks such as ensuring that only new ver-
sions of forms were in circulation, staff turnover did not
disrupt the system, clinical protocol changes were incor-
porated into the HIS structure, and generally that the
various HIS components were operating well.
System usage and evaluation
The PHR system was used for all 456 suspect and con-
firmed Ebola patients admitted to the Kerry Town ETC.
Basic demographic, Ebola status, and outcome informa-
tion was recorded for all patients. For 451 patients
(98.9%),  additional epidemiological, clinical, and/or ad-
ministrative data were collected and stored. Medication
recordings were available in the drug charts of 96.9% (n
= 442) of patients. On average, about 2–3 pages were
added to the patient file for each additional day at the
ETC. Red zone records were retained for 40% (105/264)
of Ebola-positive patients (excluding five who were dead
on arrival). Lack of red zone records were due to being
1) lost or damaged in the red zone, 2) incinerated prior
to scanning, or 3) not collected in the red zone. An ex-
ample of an inpatient form completed in the red zone
and scanned retrospectively is shown in Fig. 4. See sec-
tion A9 of “Additional file 1” for other results, including
on missing data. EHR usage details are published else-
where [11].
Page 6
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 6 of 14
Table 3 Summary of input and output results for designing the Kerry Town ETC health information system
Brief description of inputs/outputsa  Summary of results
Inputs
I1: Data use priorities  High priority: patient care; mandatory reporting to the government and SCI leadership;
Medium priority: longer-term medical research; Low priority: assessing data collection quality
control, actively informing treatment practices.
I2: Necessary patient data  Patient care: baseline (intake) information and daily medical records; Reporting: daily status
updates by various breakdowns (e.g. demographics, outcome); Research: detailed medical
records, epidemiological factors.
I3: Data collection challenges  Data collection restricted by PPE, limited ETC equipment/facilities, high variance in clinical
skill levels, language differences between patients/staff and amongst staff.
I4: Patient flow  See Fig. 1.
I5: Clinical workflow  Strictly designated rotations for patient rounds, medication administration, food, and other
care during morning, afternoon, evening, and night shifts. Patient data were collected and
reviewed in the red and green zones depending on the task. Similar to patients, clinicians
also had one-directional flow in ETC. See section A5 of Additional file 1 for more specific
details.
I6: Data access – who, which, where, how often Red zone: bedside patient records for clinician rounds; green zone: daily individual patient
data for clinical, pharmacy, laboratory, HIS, and patient care (e.g. psychosocial and
community) staff; aggregate daily patient numbers for operations management team; weekly
aggregate updates for leadership.
I7: Activities interfering with HIS  WASH staff incinerating red zone materials could destroy patient records; clinical protocol
changes could alter HIS workflow; staff turnover and limited handover time could affect
system maintenance; infection control means monitoring system is difficult in red zone.
I8: Available resources  Equipment: generators, printer/copier, scanners, laptops, office supplies (toner, paper).
Additional for EHR - waterproof tablets, server, Wi-Fi routers with uninterruptable power
sources (UPSs). Money: minimal needed for PHR, additional £25 k pounds from SCI for EHR
development/equipment. Personnel: 1–5 person site-based HIS staff and 1–2 overseas advi-
sors for PHR; additional off-site software development team for EHR [11]. Time: requirement
for functional (but later modifiable) HIS needed for site opening.
Outputs
O1: Which data and where  We categorized possible patient data as essential versus desirable, aiming to start with
essential only. We mapped data flow across the ETC including how to split data across
forms/modules and rooms (Additional file 1; section A6).
O2: Data platform  We used 1) Microsoft Word to adapt ISARIC’s case record form and develop other forms for
the PHR, 2) EpiInfo and EpiData databases for some PHR data entry, and 3) OpenMRS for the
EHR. We converted final paper forms to PDFs.
O3: Data collection design decisions For the forms/modules, we aimed for minimal information, large font sizes (no smaller than
size 14 on forms) for entry/review in red zone, checkboxes or buttons for faster and clearer
entry/review, ordering information in intuitive ways (e.g. symptoms from top to bottom of
body). Examples of these decisions are demonstrated in the PHR baseline assessment form
(Fig. 2) and the EHR IV fluid ordering/monitoring module (Fig. 3).
O4: Who collects data  Selecting which staff should record patient data varied based on which data were being
collected, data collection platform being used, preferences of medical lead, and staff
member availability and skills (e.g. language, computing, writing).
O5: How data are communicated Site layout and infection control dictated communication methods. Key approaches were 1)
radio transmission (typically for complicated information i.e. drug orders, vital signs), 2)
“duplicate” charts in green zone from “collective memory” of clinicians returning from red
zone (typically general information i.e. patient status, symptoms), and 3) red zone Wi-Fi scan-
ner (only retrospectively due to logistical problems). Clinicians brought in patient record cop-
ies from green zone to review in red zone. EHR automatically transmitted information over
the Wi-Fi router to on-site server for access by Wifi-enabled devices.
O6: How errors are minimized  We 1) assigned patient ID numbers with a check digit (instead of sequential) final number
(Additional file 1; section A7), 2) carefully handwrote patient wristbands in advance, 3)
reviewed log books when individuals patient files had errors or unusual values, 4) performed
retrospective accuracy checks on subset of digitized data and data re-entry.
O7: How records are digitized / processed HIS staff used simple EpiData database to digitize data needed for daily and weekly
reporting from PHR forms. De-identified data were exported and converted into Stata format
for analysis and report production. Additional patient data were retrospectively digitized by
securely scanning PHR forms and entering selected data into EpiInfo database. EHR exported
data into a CSV file.
Page 7
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 7 of 14
Table 3 Summary of input and output results for designing the Kerry Town ETC health information system (Continued)
Brief description of inputs/outputsa  Summary of results
O8: How and where records are stored/secured Patient records were stored in: 1) red zone until patient visit was over; 2) green zone
clinicians’ station for log books and duplicate charts of current patients, and 3) longer-term
storage in a locked HIS office cabinet for discharged patient files. Scans and databases were
secured using Safehouse Explorer Encryption software on password-protected laptops stored
in a locked cupboard. Some departments stored own additional patient records, including
pharmacy and labs. EHR data were on a secure green zone server with nightly backups. Clin-
ical staff logged in to access patient files but only HIS team lead could access downloadable
files on server.
a See Table 2 in the methods sections for a full description of the inputs and outputs
Sixteen (of approximately 70) clinical staff, including
community health assistants and officers, nurses, and
doctors, completed a structured evaluation questionnaire
in February 2015. These clinicians included five Sierra
Leoneans, six Cubans, and five from other countries. We
had difficulty with further participation because of clin-
ician availability and exhaustion between shifts. PHR
aspects the clinicians liked included the checkboxes on
the forms; ability to document clinical information
throughout the patient stay; better handovers because of 
documentation; simplified forms; and ability to review
charts inside and outside of wards. Common responses
about PHR challenges included difficulty collecting and
viewing records while wearing PPE in the red zone; radio
working well for communicating information in wards
but disturbing patients; limited time in red zone to rec-
ord information after patient care, easily damaged and
sometimes misplaced records in the red zone; many cli-
nicians using each patient’s record; and the challenge of
memorizing information for duplicate green zone
Fig. 2 The first two pages of the baseline ward assessment paper form
Page 8
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 8 of 14
Fig. 3 Screenshots of the intravenous fluid (IV) ordering and monitoring module of OpenMRS-Ebola. Legend: Patient summary screen with current IV fluid
orders (with start, hold, restart, and stop buttons) (a), screen that opens with a button for adding new IV fluids when action button on patient summary
screen is pressed (b), nine IV fluids available for ordering (c), and screen with buttons to select infusion rate and time period for the selected IV fluid (d)
Page 9
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 9 of 14
records. On several data collection topics, opinions were
divided. Six respondents preferred data collection in the
red zone because relying on radio and memory for green
zone records was difficult, while eight strongly preferred
green zone recording only. Ten of those surveyed pre-
ferred having patient records available in the red zone,
but three thought this was not useful. Opinions on the
drug and IV fluid charts were the most varied, with
about half of questionnaire respondents saying the
process worked well while the rest found it to be the
most challenging aspect of the PHR system. This is un-
surprising since accurate drug ordering is essential; this
particular challenge was a key factor when we consid-
ered building an EHR system. Nearly all (15/16) believed
an EHR could improve patient record collection because
of the challenges of using paper in the red zone [11].
Discussion
We built and implemented paper-based and electronic
data collection systems for patient records at the Kerry
Town Ebola treatment centre in Sierra Leone. Both the
quality and quantity of patient data varied over time
based on staff training, clinical leadership, protocol
changes, and the methods used to communicate infor-
mation from the red to green zone. Here, we discuss the
HIS challenges we faced and present recommendations
based on our experiences and lessons learned. 
General design and implementation lessons
In the time-limited and often chaotic environment of an
emergency, ad-hoc creation and amalgamation of HIS
components is more common than planning a
well-designed system. Typically, data collection tools will
be created with limited to no design processes or user
feedback, minimal formal training, and extempore revi-
sions. If paper-based data are digitized, data entry is usu-
ally done using spreadsheets rather than databases. This
more ad-hoc approach is understandable given the
urgency of an emergency setting. However, a compre-
hensive HIS can be relatively quick to design and is
likely to save substantial time later, improve data quality,
and facilitate ongoing system maintenance. We found
that using Tables 1 and 2 together – mapping out the
inputs and outputs to design processes across the six
core HIS components – helped us strive for a more sys-
tematic approach.
First, the best way to design a successful complex
health record system in an emergency is to begin with a
basic one that captures only essential patient informa-
tion. After sufficient training and data quality evaluation,
more complexity can be added. This allows users with
different proficiencies (including language) to become
comfortable entering the basic set of data, and provides
HIS staff an opportunity to evaluate implementation
problems and alter training as needed. One difficulty
with implementing a basic system is that requests to add
Fig. 4 An inpatient form completed in the infectious (red) zone at the Kerry Town Ebola treatment center
Page 10
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 10 of 14
or remove questions are common. Competing priorities
amongst various individuals and departments resulted in
our own initial forms having more questions than the
minimum needed for care, and this became a key
challenge for system rollout. While the approach of
starting with basic functionality may initially cause fric-
tion, we believe it is the optimal approach for obtaining
high-quality data in settings with many users, little train-
ing time, and diverse skillsets/backgrounds.
We used an Agile development approach [15] for both
the PHR and EHR systems. This was particularly useful
for quick implementation during an emergency, but
required regular attention to find a balance between
making necessary changes and maintaining a system on
which users were already trained. For us, the two most
challenging areas were 1) ensuring paper and EHR data
capture were appropriate for the setting and users and
2) communicating information from the red to green
zone. The latter, which was primarily a problem for the
PHR system, required the most trial and error.
Planning for high-quality data collection
Five important ways to maximize high-quality data
collection are 1) designing simple, intuitive, easy-to-use
forms (as discussed above),  2) user training and
re-training as needed, 3) regularly monitoring system
usage, 4) incorporating simple error-reduction tech-
niques, and 5) ensuring sufficient HIS staffing. These are
not easy to accomplish, and we struggled with several of
these. But they are doable, and if planned from the start,
can help maintain smooth operation of an HIS during
high turnover of a diverse staff.
For training, simple tools can include individual copies
of forms for review and practice, laminated examples of
completed/annotated forms in common areas, and slide
decks demonstrating good and bad data collection prac-
tices. Having standardized training tools ready, along
with a plan for when and how refresher training will be
done is important. Whether all clinicians or a small
group of “superusers” will record data affects both train-
ing decisions and clinical workflow. Although selecting
“superusers”  can result in higher data quality, this
approach increases overall process complexity (e.g. con-
tingencies needed for staff absences or changes).
Ongoing system monitoring can then be performed,
ranging from retroactively reviewing data collection
forms and modifying trainings accordingly to conducting
user surveys and interviews. Incorporating monitoring
into the HIS from the start is optimal. For instance, hav-
ing staff record their names, initials, or ID numbers on
records can help during retroactive review and refresher
training. EHRs can be programmed to facilitate monitor-
ing, including by easily identifying users and automating
data quality checks. 
Examples of techniques to reduce long-term system
errors include maintaining updated version numbers
and dates on forms, use of pre-written wristbands and
sticker labels, and using non-sequential patient ID num-
bers. Patient ID number mix-ups, which are particularly
common with handwritten data, can have serious conse-
quences. To mitigate this problem, we believe that the
use of check digits should be the norm for patient ID
numbers. At our site, we experienced several problems
with ID numbers but were able to resolve these mostly
because we used check digits. Other error reduction
approaches include attaching stickers with patient ID
numbers to each patient record page, double entry of
patient data during digitization, and scannable radio-
frequency identification (RFID) tags on wristbands and
stickers if feasible.
With five HIS staff performing activities across the six
core HIS components (Table 1), we were able to oversee
the system and maintain daily operations. These staff in-
cluded an on-site team leader to develop and oversee
the system and liaise with other leadership, a manager to
oversee daily HIS tasks, and three data entry clerks to
digitize records needed for immediate and anticipated
uses. Additional staff would have been useful for better
monitoring of the system, double data entry, and further
digitization of paper records (which we were unable to
accomplish until well after the ETC closed).  Remote
assistance with some minor tasks could have also saved
valuable time.
Connections between the HIS and other teams
At our ETC, HIS users included HIS, clinical, pharmacy,
laboratory, WASH, IT, patient care, management, and
logistics staff. This diffuse network meant that several
potential weak points existed in our system. Important
information could be missed due to the high staff turn-
over and rapid changes to protocols and operating
procedures. For example, valuable patient data stored in
the red zone was mistakenly incinerated, likely due to a
lack of communication between the HIS, clinical, and
WASH teams during a period of high staff turnover.
Such problems could be mitigated by having 1) an
HIS-led organizational chart detailing which depart-
ments are responsible for which HIS system tasks, 2)
written HIS protocols and training with the different
departments, 3) regular communication with all relevant
departments, and 4) detailed handover plans. Import-
antly, these strategies need to be followed at the begin-
ning and throughout the emergency to help prevent
problems that are much harder and time-consuming to
fix later.
A strong link between the HIS and clinical teams is
paramount for a smoothly operating HIS. Disruptions
within and between these teams are common during an
Page 11
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 11 of 14
emergency. For example, new teams often want to
change forms or communication methods. Although this
could yield improvements, it can also wreak havoc on
well-established systems on which other users are
already trained. We frequently experienced this tension
at our site. Ways to mitigate such disruption include
having strong communication between the HIS and
clinical leads; prioritizing minimal turnover in HIS and
clinical leadership positions; involving long-term clini-
cians (who are often local rather than international
staff ) in HIS decisions and training; preparing for hand-
overs with detailed written notes; documenting system
design decisions in a shareable format; presenting key
statistics regularly (e.g. weekly) to demonstrate the im-
mediate value of a good HIS to staff; and incorporating
design decisions into HIS user training to provide
context. 
useful training document with additional advice on
patient confidentiality and other ethical issues encoun-
tered during health emergencies [16].
Finally, precautions need to be taken to ensure the
ethical use of patient data for research, particularly dur-
ing emergencies with high research value (e.g. emerging
or ill-understood diseases such as Ebola). Ethical review
of research proposals is mandatory, and organizations
like MSF and WHO have made important contributions
towards this [17–19].  An internal process is needed
within organizations to streamline and manage clinician
research requests, and to prevent inappropriate use of
clinical data. Our process involved channeling all
research requests to two designated staff members for
initial review prior to further ethical clearance. Clearly
and regularly communicating this process to clinicians is
critical, especially with high staff turnover.
Ethical concerns
During emergency situations, confidentiality may appear
to be a luxury compared to the difficult task of providing
rapid patient care. However, ethical failings can have
repercussions for the individual patient and the health
system (especially for a disease as stigmatized as Ebola).
Patient confidentiality violations can range from minor
to serious. For example, shouting, publicly visible white
boards, and radio communication were common mecha-
nisms to convey patient information from the red zone
during this outbreak. For ease of access to patient
records, our own patient files were in an unlocked clini-
cians’  station during the patient’s stay, and were only
locked away after their discharge or death. We also used
a whiteboard there which initially included patient
names (subsequently changed to ID numbers only). An
EHR system has an inherent advantage here because it
can be secured with a password, have restricted access,
and accesses can be logged with usernames and
timestamps.
For clinicians, an emergency response is often different
from their normal clinical environment, so an ethics
refresher focused on this emergency context is highly
advisable. Additionally, non-clinical staff in such emer-
gencies may know information about patients, but have
no formal confidentiality training. At our site, the major-
ity of our 600+ staff were non-clinical, and many of the
patients came from the same communities as the local
staff. Approaches for handling patient confidentiality
(with HIS staff well-placed to coordinate) include: 1)
enacting a policy on confidentiality (and violation conse-
quences), 2) training all staff and clearly communicating
the organizational policy, 3) having staff members sign a
document committing them to confidentiality, and 4)
enforcing the policy through further training, warnings,
and dismissals if necessary. The WHO has developed a 
Sharing across organizations
Proactively sharing any available HIS components with
other organizations can help save substantial amounts of
time for others; create informal standardization that can
aid with system compatibility and data comparability;
and improve one’s own systems, whether through feed-
back on shared systems or others more willingly sharing
their own systems. Furthermore, promoting a culture of
openness and sharing is an important goal in itself, and
should be the norm. Although the public health commu-
nity has acknowledged that sharing data during an emer-
gency is essential [20, 21],  similar considerations have
not been easily applied to HIS components. Common
reasons not to share include: 1) that sharing takes add-
itional time in a very time-limited setting, 2) not wanting
to release preliminary forms or focusing on other prior-
ities by the time the forms are finalized, 3) there being
no common easy-to-use platform for sharing, and 4) it
not yet being normal practice.
But successful examples demonstrating the benefits of
sharing HIS components exist. In this outbreak, MSF
shared training, tools, and protocols with others [22]. We
circulated our preliminary paper-based forms over email,
in person, and on the OpenMRS wiki [23]. We know of at
least two organizations that adapted our forms for their
ETCs: International Medical Corps [24] and Partners in
Health (E. Ball, written communication, January 2015).
We also directly shared our experiences, including mis-
takes, with HIS teams from newly opening ETCs during
the outbreak. For the EHR, we intentionally chose an
open-source platform to facilitate sharing. MSF’s Project
Buendia also used the OpenMRS platform as its backend
and we were able to share clinical vocabulary across the
projects [25].
Potential ways to make sharing easier and more com-
mon include: 1) encouraging a culture of sharing
Page 12
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 12 of 14
resources (including preliminary versions), 2) having an
easy-to-use open-source platform to upload/download
HIS tools in editable formats and communicate with
HIS teams, and 3) reporting on lessons learned after-
wards to help improve best practices for future emergen-
cies across organizations.
Being better prepared for the next emergency
Even as the West African Ebola outbreak ended, the
Zika virus outbreak in the Western hemisphere, cholera
outbreaks in Yemen and parts of Sub-Saharan Africa,
and the current Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Re-
public of Congo are reminders that epidemics will not
wait while we design better systems. Yet an emergency
setting is also the worst time to design a system. 
Even minimal planning and time, though, can result in a
more cohesive, comprehensive, and higher quality HIS if
approached systematically. For example, we found that
daily and weekly situation reporting requirements were
very time-consuming, and initially entailed several hours
of work each week. We were able reduce this work to
minutes by developing written procedures, statistical soft-
ware scripts for analyses, and templates for report writing.
Using the list of inputs and outputs outlined in Table 2
could help HIS teams foresee possible future pitfalls and
time sinks while still in the early stages of designing the
HIS.
An emergency response organization would ideally have
the core components of a high-quality HIS in place
already, thereby only needing to adapt the system for a
specific emergency. In Table 4, we provide a set of
Table 4 Recommendations for designing and implementing the core components of a health information system during an
emergency
Core HIS component Recommendations
Overall  Use the inputs and outputs from Table 2 as a framework to design the HIS
Create an overall plan of which system components will be needed, including priorities and thinking through
contingencies
Incorporate feasible evaluations (e.g. user questionnaires, comparison of records) into system planning from start if
possible
Create communication channels with other organizations to share HIS components throughout the emergency
Data collection tools  Investigate whether adaptable tools already exist through other organizations or in similar emergencies
Pre-plan as many tools (e.g. forms, databases) as possible, and treat them as a unit
Include error reduction techniques from the beginning (e.g. check digits)
Communication of data Identify range of approaches that will allow data communication with speed, accuracy, and confidentiality
Test different methods early and make sure they are working for all relevant parties
Think unconventionally (e.g. plasticized paper) if needed
Coordination amongst
relevant parties 
Maintain communication between HIS and other relevant departments throughout the emergency
Try to hire staff in leadership roles who can stay involved for a long period to minimize turnover
Pre-plan handover strategies, including overlap timing between outgoing/incoming staff and written handover notes
Staff training  Create tools in advance that are easy-to-use and easily updated (e.g. simple PowerPoint slides) for training sessions
Allow time for staff to become familiar with the data collection tools
Ensure that training includes “do”s and “don’t”s for high-quality data collection based on tools in use
Develop a plan for training, including training schedules, frequency of refresher trainings, and easy accessibility to HIS
staff outside of regular training
Make easy-to-access tools (e.g. laminated, annotated forms in the clinicians station) available in addition to training
sessions
Ensure training is done in as many languages as necessary for staff to be fully trained
Data management Make and use databases for data digitization as early as possible
Perform digitization in as close to real-time as possible
Hire staff according to planned double entry during digitization if possible
Ensure that all patient data are securely stored, and develop a plan in advance for what will happen to the patient
records after the emergency ends
Data analysis/ reporting Develop templates and analysis scripts for reports to internal and external actors
Ensure that one master database is used for analyses
Page 13
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 13 of 14
recommendations for organizations needing to design and
implement an HIS during an emergency.
Evaluations, while often sidelined during emergencies,
are important because they help move the field forward
by providing a measure of what worked and what failed.
The best likelihood of performing an evaluation is to
plan for it during the system design phase. We planned
our first evaluation questionnaire early and were thus
able to implement it even months later. But planning for
a Krio translation would have increased participation
amongst non-English speaking local staff. Our vaguer
plans for a follow-up questionnaire fell through because
other urgent priorities meant we no longer had time
later to both draft and implement it. Simple and fast
evaluation strategies exist, and situations may arise that
yield unintended opportunities. For example, we were
able to 1) conduct a staff questionnaire (i.e. simple and
fast) and 2) compare data that were collected using dif-
ferent methods as our protocols and systems changed
(i.e. unintended opportunity).
Finally, this outbreak highlighted the need for appro-
priate standardized health record forms that can be used
across organizations in an emergency, mitigating diver-
gence between organizations. Divergence occurred dur-
ing the West African Ebola outbreak partly because the
available standardized forms were not designed for ETC
red zones. Having any pre-existing form was helpful,
though, and allowed organizations that adapted these
tools to still collect relatively similar information. But
minor differences in question wording can make data in-
comparable. Efforts to retrospectively combine data from
different ETCs thus now have the more difficult task of
trying to amalgamate less comparable data while main-
taining data quality for research.
Standardized forms need a set of essential core ques-
tions, with flexible templates that permit the addition of
organization-specific questions. The CDC’s case investi-
gation form is an example of the benefits a standardized
tool can provide [7], although even this form had to be
simplified during the outbreak [26]. Ideally, future stan-
dardized data collection forms (and their associated
training) would be developed based on lessons learned
during this and other emergencies, feedback from orga-
nizations, and user testing. These tools must be openly
available, and hosted by well-established organizations
such as the CDC or WHO.
Conclusions
Health information systems are often designed quickly
and in an ad-hoc fashion during emergencies. Yet,
thoughtful design and implementation is possible and
can lead to more efficient and higher quality data
collection for patient care, reporting, and research. The
limitations imposed by onerous infection control for 
Ebola forced us to design health information systems
that were focused on ease of use and efficiency. Many of
the results and lessons learned from our experience are
generalizable to non-Ebola emergencies. With systematic
planning and design processes, alongside improvements
during non-emergency times, high quality data collec-
tion in a low-resource health emergency can become a
norm.
Additional files
 Additional file 1: Supplementary details for the main manuscript.
(PDF 594 kb)
 Additional file 2: Forms of the paper-based health information system
used at the Kerry Town Ebola treatment center. (PDF 5350 kb)
Abbreviations
EHR: Electronic health records; ETC: Ebola treatment center; HIS: Health
information system; IT: Information technology; IV: Intravenous;
MSF: Médecins Sans Frontières; PHR: Paper-based health records;
PPE: Personal protective equipment; RFID: Radio-frequency identification;
SCI: Save the Children International; UPS: Uninterruptable power supply;
VHF: Viral hemorrhagic fever; WLAN: Wireless local area network
Acknowledgements
We thank Save the Children International, Save the Children UK,
ThoughtWorks, and the OpenMRS community for their contributions to this
work. We are grateful to Darius Jazayeri, Hamish Fraser, Ellen Ball, Jonathan
Teich, and David Walton for their hard work of making OpenMRS-Ebola a
reality. We share our profound sympathies with the patients of the Kerry
Town Ebola Treatment Center and our gratitude to the staff who worked
there during this heartbreaking epidemic.
Funding
This research was supported by the Save the Children Ebola Emergency
Public Appeal. The funder had no role in the design of the study and
collection, analysis, and interpretation of data and in the writing of the
manuscript.
Availability of data and materials
The datasets generated and/or analysed during the current study are not
publicly available due to lack of permission from participants but are
available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Authors’ contributions
SO and FC conceived, designed, and implemented the initial systems and
this study. KW, AS, and SB conducted further refinement and implementation.
AS, LV, and SS were integral to the data collection efforts. CH provided clinical
input. FC, RC, and CM provided relevant feedback and support. SO wrote the
first draft of the manuscript, with subsequent feedback from all authors. All
authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
No patient data was used for this work. Staff questionnaires were conducted
as part of routine data collection to obtain feedback for system
improvements and not for the purpose of research. Therefore, ethical
approval was not required for the work presented here.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Page 14
Oza et al. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making (2019) 19:100  Page 14 of 14
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Author details
1London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London
WC1E 7HT, UK. 2Save the Children International, Kerry Town, Rural District,
Western Area, Sierra Leone. 3University College London, Gower Street,
London WC1E 6BT, UK. 4Save the Children UK, London, 1 St John’s Lane,
London EC1M 4AR, UK.
Received: 1 June 2018 Accepted: 16 April 2019
References
1.  Piot P, Muyembe J-J, Edmunds WJ. Ebola in West Africa: from disease
outbreak to humanitarian crisis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2014;14(11):1034–5.
2.  Wyatt J. Hospital information management: the need for clinical leadership.
BMJ. 1995;311(6998):175–8.
3.  Kortepeter MG, Bausch DG, Bray M. Basic clinical and laboratory features of
filoviral hemorrhagic fever. J Infect Dis. 2011;204(suppl 3):S810–6.
4.  McNeil D Jr. Ebola doctors are divided on IV therapy in Africa. New York:
The New York Times; 2015. p. 1.
5.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Outbreaks chronology: Ebola
virus disease. Atlanta: CDC; 2015.
6.  World Health Organization. Ebola situation report: 10 June 2016. 2016.
7.  Schafer IJ, Knudsen E, McNamara LA, Agnihotri S, Rollin PE, Islam A. The
epi info viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF) application: a resource for
outbreak data management and contact tracing in the 2014–2016 West
Africa Ebola epidemic. J Infect Dis. 2016;214(3):S122–S136. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiw272"] https://doi.
 org/10.1093/infdis/jiw272.
8.  ISARIC, WHO. ISARIC WHO CCP VHF Case Record Form v7.0 10 August 2014.
2014; [URL: "https://isaric.tghn.org/site_media/media/medialibrary/2016/06/ISARIC_WHO_CCP_VHF_Case_Record_Form_v7.0_10AUG14.docx"] https://isaric.tghn.org/site_media/media/medialibrary/2016/06/ISARIC_
 WHO_CCP_VHF_Case_Record_Form_v7.0_10AUG14.docx.
Accessed 2017/08/28.
9.  Wilson D. CE: Inside an Ebola treatment unit: a Nurse's report. Am J Nurs.
2015;115(12):28–38.
10. Akanbi MO, Ocheke AN, Agaba PA, et al. Use of electronic health records in
sub-Saharan Africa: Progress and challenges. J Med Trop. 2012;14(1):1–6.
11. Oza S, Jazayeri D, Teich JM, et al. Development and deployment of the
OpenMRS-Ebola electronic health record system for an Ebola treatment
Center in Sierra Leone. J Med Internet Res. 2017;19(8):e294.
12. Buhler S, Roddy P, Nolte E, et al. Clinical documentation and data transfer
from Ebola and Marburg virus disease wards in outbreak settings: health
workers’ experiences and preferences. Viruses. 2014;6(2):927–37.
13. Roddy P, Howard N, Van Kerkhove MD, et al. Clincial manifestations and
case management of Ebola haemorrhagic fever caused by a newly
identified virus strain, Bundibugyo, Uganda, 2007-2008. PLoS One.
2012;7(12):e52986.
14. Borchert M, Mutyaba I, Van Kerkhove MD, et al. Ebola haemorrhagic fever
outbreak in Masindi District, Uganda: outbreak description and lessons
learned. BMC Infect Dis. 2011;11:357.
15. Greer D, Hamon Y. Agile software development. Software: Practice and
Experience. 2011;41(9):943–4.
16. World Health Organization. Ethics in epidemics, emergencies and disasters:
research, surveillance and patient care: training manual. 2015.
17. Schopper D, Dawson A, Upshur R, et al. Innovations in research ethics
governance in humanitarian settings. BMC Med Ethics. 2015;16:10.
18. Alirol E, Kuesel AC, Guraiib MM, de la Fuente-Núñez V, Saxena A, Gomes MF.
Ethics review of studies during public health emergencies - the experience
of the WHO ethics review committee during the Ebola virus disease
epidemic. BMC Med Ethics. 2017;18(1):43.
19. Schopper D, Ravinetto R, Schwartz L, et al. Research ethics governance in
times of Ebola. Public Health Ethics. 2017;10(1):49–61.
20. Modjarrad K, Moorthy VS, Millett P, Gsell PS, Roth C, Kieny MP. Developing
global norms for sharing data and results during public health emergencies.
PLoS Med. 2016;13(1):e1001935.
21. Littler K, Boon WM, Carson G, et al. Progress in promoting data sharing in
public health emergencies. Bull World Health Organ. 2017;95(4):243.
22. Pagano H, Poncin M. Treating, containing, mobilizing: the role of Medecins
sans Frontieres in the West Africa Ebola epidemic response. In: Halabi SF, 
Gostin LO, Crowley JS, editors. Global Management of Infectious Disease
After Ebola. New York: Oxford University Press; 2016.
23. SCI. Paper forms for SCI ETC. [URL: "https://wiki.openmrs.org/display/projects/Paper+forms+for+SCI+ETC"] https://wiki.openmrs.org/display/projects/Paper
 +forms+for+SCI+ETC. Archived at: [URL: "http://www.webcitation.org/6sx1wZTEO"] http://www.webcitation.org/6sx1wZTEO.
Accessed 24 Aug 2017.
24. Roshania R, Mallow M, Dunbar N, et al. Successful implementation of a
multicountry clinical surveillance and data collection system for Ebola virus
disease in West Africa: findings and lessons learned. Glob Health Sci Pract.
2016;4(3):394–409.
25. OpenMRS. Fighting Ebola with open source collaboration. 2016; Available:
URL:[URL: "https://openmrs.org/2016/08/openmrs-ebola-case-study/"] https://openmrs.org/2016/08/openmrs-ebola-case-study/. Archived at:
 http://www.webcitation.org/6sz1ULGe1. Accessed 25 Aug 2017.
26. McNamara LA, Schafer IJ, Nolen LD, et al. Ebola Surveillance - Guinea,
Liberia, and Sierra Leone. MMWR Suppl. 2016;65(3):35–43.
