TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM
BOARD OF SELECTMEN
Memorial Building
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702 
Dennis L. Giombetti, Chair
Laurie Lee, Vice Chair
Michael J. Bower, Clerk
Charles J. Sisitsky
Jason A. Smith
February 25, 2014
Memorial Building
Open Session will convene in Nevins Conference Room at 6:30 p.m. followed immediately by
Executive Session. At the conclusion ofExecutive, the Board will reconvene in Open Session at7:00
p.m. in the Ablondi Meeting Room.
Executive Session
Collective Bargaining for FPSOA/Superior Officers MOA per G.L. c. 30A, secs. 21(3)a)(
7)and Suffolk Construction v. DCAM 449 Mass. 444 (2007)
Open Session
Public Participation
1. Town Manager's Report
2. Foodie Cafe -Community Project Presentation
3. Public Hearings: Consideration of signage on town -owned property —Dunning School PTO
4. Police Department Presentation onSmart 911
5. Tax Liens Presentation and Action to be Taken
6. Consideration to be referred to the Planning Board:
a) Concord, School and A Streets Intersection Improvement
b) 583 Edmands Road - Edmands Traffic Calming Project
7. DPWBridgeandUpcomingConstructionUpdate
8. Preliminary Warrant Articles List for Annual Town Meeting
9. Second Reading of Policies:
a) Policy on Purchase Orders and Bid Procedures
b) Policy on Designer Selection Procedures
c) Policy on Nevins Hall Rental
d) Policy on Employees Recognition Policy
10. Approval of Meeting Minutes:
a) 02/201404/Open andExecutive Sessions
b) 02/20141/Open and Executive Sessions
Selectmen Reports
Page 2
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM
Memorial Building, 150 Concord Street, Room 121, Framingham, MA 01702
508 -532 -5400 1508-5409 ( 532-fax) I  rhalpinkframinhamma.gov I  www.govframinghamma.
Town Manager
Robert J. Halpin
Assistant Town Manager
Jennifer Thompson 
Board of Selectmen
Dennis L. Giombetti, Chair
Laurie Lee, Vice -Chair
Michael J. Bower, Clerk
Charles J. Sisitsky
Jason A. Smith
TOWN MANAGER' S REPORT
February 25, 2014
GIC Communications and Transition Plan
We conducted a joint municipal and school coordination meeting, including Superintendent Scott and his
Human Resources staff to review the plan, establish specific time lines, and specific roles and
responsibilities with regard to the GIC Transition plan. The Town Manager will be creating an overall
communications and transition plan for the move to the GIC and will be presenting it to the Board of
Selectmen on March 4tn.
Tech Park, 9/90 Corporate Park, and MassDOT
On Friday, February 14' the Town Manager and Community and Economic Development Director met
with Jeffrey Simon, Assistant Secretary for Real Estate and Asset Development. The purpose of the
meeting was to explain the town's broad thinking for the future of the Tech Park and the 9/90 Corporate
Center — andenlistMassDOT support. Much ofthediscussion turned onapproaches tomixed use,
transit -oriented development and transportation infrastructure improvements. Mr. Simon recognized
significant development opportunity inthisareaandhighlighted the potential forimprovements, based on
MassPike conversion to all electronic toll collection. He also expressed interest in a comprehensive
planning approach, among all stakeholders. He committed to getting back to us in two weeks with more
detailed feedback.
New Hire: Webmaster / Public Information Officer
We are pleased to inform you that we have recruited an excellent candidate for the position of
Webmaster /Public Information Officer. In addition to a focus on revamping the town website this
position will focus on exploring strategic communication initiatives on behalf of the town, including
integration with media services, press releases, written materials, social media trends and applications.
Nichol Figuerido comes to this position with a wealth of experience in website development,
communication strategies andoutreachto residents andbusinesses. She played akeyrole inthe
Department of Public Works communication plan during the large scale capital improvement initiative,
including creation of the "Building Framingham" webpage, communication materials for residents and
businesses impacted by construction activities, social media and email alerts to disseminate timely
information relative to traffic and storm impacts. Nichol will play a key role in promoting Framingham's
success stories and shaping a communication strategy that embraces using technology to better interface
and supply information to our residents and businesses.
Page 3
Pho Dakao Grand Opening
Pho Dakao the new Vietnamese restaurant to be located at 101 Concord Street in Downtown has
announced its grand opening on Saturday, March 1S at l lam. This new establishment is a welcome
addition to the downtown area and we look forward to having Pho Dakao as a part of our business
community.
Transit Oriented Roundtable 3/1419/
On March 19' we will host our 3r d roundtable discussion on transit oriented development. It is
anticipated that featured guest speakers will expand upon the concepts and ideas discussed at the previous
two sessions, with an open dialogue and discussion with various community stakeholders.
Choose Framingham Event
Through its marketing consultant, the Town is working on an event to highlight our efforts to become
more business - friendly. Based on EDSAT learning and Town follow up — to include the creation of three
expedited permitting areas" the town has accrued important wins worth sharing with Framingham
businesses, as well as brokers and business service providers in the area. The event, envisioned as an
evening reception including brief speeches from Town and business leaders, will infuse new energy into
the "Choose Framingham" brand. The Town is currently looking for a business - hosted location, and is
targeting April 10th for the event.
Eastleigh Farms Barn Collapse
On February 19 the collapse of the roof on a barn at Eastleigh Farms resulted in the death of two cows
andinjuries toseveral otheranimals. The response fromourFireDepartment andDepartment ofPublic
Workswere exceptional. Theimmediate actions andcollaboration betweenthesetwo Departments
resulted inanincredibly highlevelofassistance inresponse tothistragedy. Support fromourAnimal
Control Officer, as well as other employees of the town displayed a truly coordinated response to this
event.
Page 4
n
To: Framingham Selectmen
From: Alicia and David Blais
Foodie Cafd
102 Fountain Street
Framingham, MA
We are requesting a time on the selectman's meeting to present a community project that
we are starting
March 4, 2014 we are starting a program focusing on feeding the hungry in Framingham.
The first phase. using a Tom's Shoes model, every time someone purchases a salad,
breakfast or lunch we will feed someone less fortunate.
Right now we feed 100 people a month with the help of the Salvation Army and want to
expand into a community wide program.
Our belief is that it is not the Government's responsibility or the responsibility of some
social program to feed the poor and disadvantaged. As people of faith we believe that it is
the Church's responsibility to respond to that need. My understanding is that there are
300 churches small and large in Framingham and we are working with a small number
right now to fill this need in the way of volunteers. Alicia & I fund this ourselves.
Phase two: We are in the process of purchasing a food truck and have the desire to go
into neighborhoods and feed people free of charge. As we become more adapt at this we
will start to see the people that need further assistance and hopefully be able to respond to
those needs.
Alicia and I have a 20 year history ofcommunity projects. To get a sense ofwho we are
go to the Walpole Times website and put either of our names or A Little Something in the
search section and you will see how involved we can get.
I'm telling you this not to brag but to show you that we are not new to this. This is our
biggest project ever but driving around Framingham there is also tremendous need.
Now the big Question, What's in it for Alicia and I? Our desire to feed people goes way
beyond our financial desires. We do not see this as a financial windfall by any means. If
you know any restaurant owners ask them their thoughts.
Page 5
Please let us know your thoughts. You can reach me at 781 -664 -0500 any time. At this
point I can not answer every question but I can give you a clear vision of where we are
heading,
Thank you
David Blais
Page 6
F
ti # . 
79
I '
y ;.. 
1 7 r7 
ate  F _
z `
1
11 }`. 
yam. '  Imo ' 
1 
S
I 
II yy 
C  I
t 
5 { +. 
h }
Page 7
Page 8
What is Smart911 ?
How Smart911 Works
When does Smart911 Help?
Keeping Your Community Safe
Page 9
Page 10
Phone Number
is  Location
Latitude
N4 
Longitude
Page 11
View Profile Gopy Profile' Copy Ticket Number History ;  About z  Initiate Chat
Page 12
Private and secure website
Citizens create a Safety Profile
of valuable information they
want to provide 9-1 -1 call
takers and first responders 
Addresses
Y .2 v.
sxsi4"
Service is free to citizens 
Anna 
People
n8LCo,1 Fro
WeP
u 
vehicles 
L , .
Page 13
You create a Safety Profile at www.comsmart911.
Page 14
Enter as much or as little information as you like
µ 
IFIE, 
w, '. . f t.''
3a " Phones  m  People
a ':
nAdreses Ut 
X31
rp  ri  d 3 iA0 " 
ch 
f0.Ernergency
Contactsr  Animas x, > 
r
Vehides 
m 20N`c5g
Page 15
Safety Profile is stored in secure national database
84 %zrnFv-
Phones  U;,people
sAddresses
TwNS
iv tai5 I  v5: L.x 
ra 
Ewgeny Carlat"ts
r' Ammas 
Jehcies 
xr 
i 
it 
e<
Page 16
a 
Safety Profile pops on call taker's screen when you dial 9-1 -1
pre t 
C R'k 
Ji . .... .... . , 
7 7777
cM
Page 17
s 
Unknown Address and Location
Mobile phones can be linked to
specific addresses:
Home
Work
Schoo 
U PU  KJ;
Yreou' Almost Ibere, Just Add Your Phone
You can kl n many P as VIOU  0111  accourn
Nilone
Fmne nuraber
Confirm Location
SOSpeepSteet-Framingharr MA01701
0
Result: Result: 9.1-19.-knowsknows whowho isis calingcaling andand wherewhere theythey areare located.located.
MNMN
Page 18
Caller Cannot Communicate
Caller by not be able to
communicate due to:
Allergic reaction
Heart attack
Home invasion
m 
Result: Information is immediately available and caller doesn't
need to be the sole source of information.
Page 19
s  Medical Emergency
@  Important medical information
can be included: 
iill e  a '!I nfo
IiS! is d ' ne"Sig.tJ to GMMUNcate Me nOja irnp".
ents diced bv, par mie&S and Ae ' espcnde—s
tq
Medical issues
Medications 
Pec: ia! o' ot ,A,z
Usna DqHsh, alessute any additional mekal n,,safeb =erns
Allergies
Result: Knowing these details ahead oftime can help avoid allergic
reactions or dangerous medication combinations.
Page 20
I  Missing Child
Smart911 Safety Profile displays:
Recent photo
Physical description
Result: 9-1-1 call takers can immediately forwarded picture and
description to officers in the field fora faster response.
Page 21
Create a Smart911 Safety Profile for your household at
www.comsmart911.
Spread the word to your friends and family
Follow Smart911 on Facebook and Twitter for news and safety
information.
Facebook.coml Smart911  Twitter,comlSmart911
Page 22
Page 23
Tax Lien Bulk Sales
Board of Selectmen
February 25, 2014
Page 24
What is a tax lien.?
When property taxes and water/sewer bills
are not paid on a property the Town puts a
lien on that property
The Treasurer/ Collector can take action on
that lien via three different methods:
After 6 months process the liens in house; take
the case to Land Court and foreclose on the
property
Assign individual or groups of liens to a private
collector
Go out to bid to "sell" the lines in bulk to a
contracted collector (bulk assignment)
Page 25
Process liens in house
Benefits
Tax counsel forecloses
on the property in Land
court; costs us nothing
upfront 
Town now owns the
property and can .
auction it and keep
anything proceeds that
exceed the taxes, 
interest and fees due 
Challenges
We have to wait 6
months to go to land
court
Land court takes a [ong
time
Once we own the
property we have to
insure it secure it and
then auction it in order
to recoup our taxes and
interest and expenses
Page 26
Assign Individual or Group of Liens
i ................................................................................... ...............................  i
i 
Benefits Challenges
Can be assigned quickly
No bid process re quired
Funds received up front 
Lack of publicity in this
process doesn't generate
direct redemptions
Using multiple collectors
is difficult to manage
May not get dollar for
dollar rate for the lien
Can't control speed with
which properties are
redeemed, resold to put
back on tax rolls
Page 27
Bulk Sale of Liens
B "
Funds received up front
Bid process encourages
higher cost per dollar
price for lien
Less collectable liens are
bundled with more
attractive ones to get
higher rate
Publicity of bid process '
makes property owners
more aware and they pay
u p front before the lien
is sold (60% last bid 
Ceges ha[[ n
Bid process takes longer
than a straight assignment
Subsequent lien years ma y .
be purchased by another
collector in another bulk
sale bid
Can't control speed with
which properties are
either redeemed resold
to put back on tax rolls
I
J
L .................................................................................................................
J 
I
Page 28
Action Plan
Bulk Sale through Purchasing Dept
Remove bankruptcies and payment plans
from bulk sale list
Put out a bid for the final bulk sale list
Have to notify property owners of the sale 60
days ahead of assignment
Page 29
Potential Value of Bulk Sale
Principal $1,798673,
Interest $1,637162,
Fees $24,243
Total $2,680860,
Page 30
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
FRAMINGHAM, MASSACHUSETTS 01702 
Dedicated to
E,ceffence
in 2u6fic
Service "
PETER A. SELLERS
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR I  FOPW
PAUL G. BARDEN
DEPUTY DIRECTOR I  FDPW
WILLIAM R. SEDEWITZ -
CHIEF ENGINEER I  FDPW 
PE
JEREMY T. MARSETTE -
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR I  FDPW 
PE
February 20, 2014
Robert J. Halpin
Town Manager
Memorial Building
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
RE: Concord /School /A Street Intersection Improvement Project
Request to Planning Board for Review of Layout and Acceptance as Town Way,
Dear Mr. Halpin,
I  am recommending that the Board of Selectmen refer the proposed layout alterations for Concord
Street to the Framingham Planning Board for its review and report pursuant to Mass. General Laws,
Chapter 41, Section 811 in advance of considering their layout and proposed acceptance as a Town
Way.
Section 811 specifies that no town way shall be laid out or layout altered by the Selectmen unless
the proposed action has been referred to the Planning Board for its report or the passage of 45
days without such a report being returned.
The improvement project at Concord /School and Concord /A Street intersections will alleviate the
current safety and operational deficiencies for vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic.
Intersection reconstruction will accommodate the installation of fully actuated traffic signals at both
intersections with interconnect, necessary road widening to facilitate traffic operations, pedestrian
indications and push buttons, ADA compliant wheelchair ramps, curbing, drainage improvements,
and streetscape amenities including ornamental street lighting. The project will befunded by
mitigation funds from proposed developments in the area supplemented by local appropriations.
Ideally the review of the layout plan would be completed by mid -March and a decision would be
made to alter the layout so it could be included in the April 29, 2014 Annual Town Meeting warrant.
Please let me know if you have any questions.
Yours very truly, 
b 
F
William R. Sedewitz, P.E.
Chief Engineer
C: 
Peter Sellers I  Robert King I  Christopher Petrini I  Amanda Loomis I  Stephen Shull, Chair, SCP &Z
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 1  100 WESTERN AVENUE I  FRAMINGHAM, MASSACHUSETTS 01 702 1  TEL 508- 532 -5600
Page 31
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
FRAMINGHAM, MASSACHUSETTS 01702 
Dedicated to
Ex,ceffence
in Pu6fic
Service"
PETER A. SELLERS
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR I  FDPW
PAUL
DEPUTY 
G. BARDEN
DIRECTOR I  FDPW
WILLIAM R. SEDEWITZ -
CHIEF ENGINEER I  FDPW 
PE
JEREMY
ASSISTANT 
T. MARSETTE -
DIRECTOR I  FDPW 
PE
February 20, 2014
Robert J. Halpin
Town Manager
Memorial Building
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
RE: Edmands Road Traffic Calming Project
Request to Planning Board for Review of Layout and Acceptance as Town Way
Dear Mr. Halpin,
I  am recommending that the Board of Selectmen refer the proposed layout alterations for Edmands
Road to the Framingham Planning Board for its review and report pursuant to Mass. General Laws,
Chapter 41, Section 811 in advance of considering their layout and proposed acceptance as a Town
Way.
Section 811 specifies that no town way shall be laid out or layout altered by the Selectmen unless
the proposed action has been referred to the Planning Board for its report or the passage of 45
days without such a report being returned.
Traffic calming measures, including the installation of five speed humps and one speed table to
reduce traffic speeds and improved safety will be installed on Edmands Road between Grove Street
and just East of Genardy Way. In addition, critical roadside obstructions ( utility poles, trees, etc.)
which are considered to the safety hazards will be removed /relocate and existing roadside grades will
be adjusted to create necessary roadside clear zones, wherever feasible. Sight distance improvements
are proposed at Genardy Way, Winch Street, Garvey Road (East),and Carter Drive. An alteration of
roadway layout adjacent to 583 Edmands Road is required to complete these improvements.
Ideally the review of the layout plan would be completed by mid -March and a decision would be
made to alter the layout so it could be included in the April 29, 2014 Annual Town Meeting warrant.
Please let me know if you have any questions.
Yours very truly,
q
William R. Sedewitz, P.E.
Chief Engineer
C:  Peter Sellers I  Robert King I  Christopher Petrini I  Amanda Loomis I  Stephen Shull, Chair, SCP &Z
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS I  100 WESTERN AVENUE I  FRAMINGHAM, MASSACHUSETTS 01 702 1  TEL 508 -532-5600
Page 32
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
FRAMINGHAM, MASSACHUSETTS 01702 
Dedicated to
Exce(fence
in Pubfic
Service"
PETER A. SELLERS
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR I  FDPW
PAUL G. BARDEN
DEPUTY DIRECTOR IFDPW
WILLIAM R. SEDEWITZ - PE
CHIEF ENGINEER I  FDPW
JEREMY
ASSISTANT 
T. MARSETTE -
DIRECTOR I  FDPW 
PE
February 20, 2014
Robert J. Halpin
Town Manager
Memorial Building
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
RE: DPW Bridge and Upcoming Construction Update
Dear Mr. Halpin,
The Department of Public Works is scheduled to update the Board of Selectmen at their February 25,
2014 meeting on upcoming bridge and construction projects. In preparation for that meeting, the
following background information is attached:
1. Anticipated 2014 Infrastructure Improvements Projects Map
2. Anticipated 2014 Infrastructure Construction Schedule
3. High Level Traffic Impact Areas Map
4. High Impact Areas Project Summary with Mitigation Strategies
5. Anticipated 2014 MassDOT Project Map
6. Central Street Bridge Detour Map
7. Winter Street Bridge Detour Map
8. 2014 Infrastructure Project Overviews
Please let me know if you have any questions. Representatives from the Public Works Department
will be available on February 25, 2014 to provide an overview of these projects and address any
questions or concerns the Board may have.
Yours very truly,
William R. Sedewitz, P.E.
Chief Engineer
C:  Jennifer Thompson I  Peter Sellers I  Paul Barden I  Jeremy Marsette I  Daniel Nau I  Paul
Scott I  Eric Johnson
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 1  100 WESTERN AVENUE I  FRAMINGHAM, MASSACHUSETTS 01 702 1  TEL 508- 532-5600
Page 33
2014 ANNUAL TOWN MEETING WARRANT ARTICLES
Listed by Anticipated Sponsor)
Principal Contact "  Potential5takeholders
Linelf Person Anticipated Sponsors or Parties ofiInterest Title or subject matterof the proposed article  Brief Summary of need orproblemtheartick seeks toaddress
AMEND GENERAL BY -LAW Article I, section 2.3, TO ADD BOARD OF ASSESSORS TO EXCEPTION BOARD
1  Will Naser  Board of Assessors Board & Public  Amend General By -law: Article I  Sec. 2.3  COMMITTEE LIST FOR MEETING TIMES
2  Jeremy Marsette
3  Jeremy Marsette 
BOS
BOS 
Acceptance of Claudette Circle
Acceptance of Currier Drive 
Consider accepting Claudette Circle Extension as a public way.
Consider accepting Currier Drive as a publicway,
4  IJeremy Marsette BOS
5  Bill Sedewitz BOS
6  Bill Sedewitz BOS
7  Joel Winett BOS
8  Daphne M. Collins BOS
9  Daphne M. Collins BOS
10  Christopher J. Petrini BOS 
Acceptance of Walkup Circle
Concord Street Layout Alt
Edmands Rd Layout Alt,
Annual Report of Selectmen
CDBG Subgrantees FY2014 CDBG Budget
CDBG Subgrantees FY2015 CDBG Budget
BOIS/ CFO  Major Litigation Contingency
11  Christopher 1. Petrini BOS  Town Counsel, DPW, PO Street Acceptance Special Legislation
12  Robert Halpin BOS /  PB  DPW
13  Robert Halpin  BOS/Town Manager 
Drainage Danforth PUD
Energy Services Contract
14 1  Mary Ellen Kelley CFO  Departments 53 E 1/2 Revolving Funds
15  Mary Ellen Kelley CFO  Town Departments FY14 GF Budget Adjustments 
Consider accepting Walkup Circle as a public way.
Traffic improvements, including signalizing Concord St@ ASt and Concord St@ School Stare being proposed
which will necessitate an alteration of the roadway layout.
Traffic calming improvements are being proposed for Edmands Road which will necessitate an alteration of the
roadway layout.
To see if the Town will hear a report from the Board of Selectmen for the preceding calendar year and receive
the Annual Report made available to the inhabitants of the town pursuant to Massachusetts General
Laws Chapter 40, Section 49.
The Community Development Department seeks authorization from Town Meeting to authorize funding changes,
approved by the Board of Selectmen, to Framingham's FY2014 Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
budget, previously approved bythe Town and the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in
2013.
The Board of Selectmen seek authorization from Town Meetingto submit Framingham's recommended FY2015
Community Development Black Grant (CDBG) budget, approved February 25, 2014 to the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
Byway of Article 19 ofthe 2012 Annual Town Meeting, Town Meeting established a Major Litigation Contingency
Fund warrant article appropriation that could be used to fund major litigation which required spending of more
than $25,000 in a given fiscal year. Due to major litigation in FY 2014, most of the original funding has been
expended, requiring replenishment.
Street acceptances ofprivate ways isacumbersome, complicated and costly procedure. The proposed special
legislation will streamline, expedite and simplify the street acceptance procedures needed to obtain clean title and
legallyeffective streetacceptances. Similarversions ofthespecial legislation hasbeen enacted forFranklin,
Medway and other municipalities.
The developer of the Danforth Green PUD is required to make improvements for drainage purposes as requested
by FDPW and approved by the Plan Bd. Some of these improvements are on town land. This article will seektown
meeting approval ofan agreement fartheconstruction, use and maintenance ofthis drainage improvement on
said Town property
To see if the Town will vote to authorize a long term contract to perform energy improvements to school and town
buildings.
MGL Ch. 44, X53 E X requires that all Town revolvingfunds be reauthorized annually and their spending limits and
purposes reaffirmed,
This warrant article requests thatTown Meeting approve certain transfers between line items and accounts within
the FY14 General Fund operating budgetto address projected shortfalls.
PagePage 11
NOTE: NOTE: PleasePlease notenote thatthat thethe LineLine NumbersNumbers referreenncceedd oreore for arganizzoottiioonnaall  purposes only andand dodo NOTNOT reepprreesseenntt thethe actualactual WarrantWarrant ArticleArticle numbers.numbers.
Page 34
2014 ANNUAL TOWN MEETING WARRANT ARTICLES
Listed by Anticipated Sponsor)
Principal Contact  Potential Stakeholders
Line #  Person Anticipated Sponsors or parties of Interest Title or subject matter of the proposed article  Brief Summary of need or problem the article seeks to address
16  Mary Ellen Kelley CFO  Rate Payers /Sewer Dept FY14 Sewer Enterprise Budget Adjustments 
This warrant article requests that Town Meeting approve certain transfers between line items and accounts and /or
appropriate from retained earnings for the FY14 Sewer Enterprise operating budget to address projected
shortfalls,
17  Mary Ellen Kelley CFO  Rate Payers /Water Dept FY14 Water Enterprise Budget Adjustments 
This warrant article requests that Town Meeting approve certain transfers between line items and accounts and /or
appropriate from retained earnings for the FY14 Water Enterprise operating budget to address projected
shortfalls.
18  Mary Ellen Kelley CFO
19  Mary Ellen Kelley CFO
20  Mary Ellen Kelley CFO
21  Mary Ellen Kelley CFO
22  Mary Ellen Kelley CFO
23  Mary Ellen Kelley CFO
24 Mary Ellen Kelley CFO
25  Mary Ellen Kelley
26  Mary Ellen Kelley 
CFO
CFO
Dolores Hamilton /
27  Mary Ellen Kelley
28  Amanda Loomis 
HR
Planning Board
29  Amanda Loomis Planning Board 
Town Deptartments FY15 GF Capital Budget  This warrant article asks Town Meeting to approve and fund the FY15 General Fund Capital Budget.
Town Deptartments/Tax
Payers  FY15 GF Operating Budget  This warrant article asks Town Meetingto approve and fund the FY15 General Fund Operating Budget.
Sewer Department /Rate
Payers  FY15 Sewer Enterprise Capital Budget This warrant article asks Town Meetingto approve and fund the FY15 Sewer Enterprise Capital Budget
Sewer Department /Rate
Payers  FY15 Sewer Enterprise Operating Budget
Water Department/Rate
Payers  FY15 Water Enterprise Capital Budget
WaterDepartment /Rate
Payers  FY15 Water Enterprise Operating Budget
Town Departments Off -Site Mitigation Funds
Tax Payers
Tax Payers 
PriorYear Bills
Rescind Authorized & Unissued Borrowings 
This warrant article asks Town Meetingto approve and fund the FY15 Sewer Enterprise Operating Budget.
This warrant article asks Town Meetingto approve and fund the FY15 Water Enterprise Capital Budget.
This warrant article asks Town Meetingto approve and fund the FY15 Water Enterprise Operating Budget.
The Department of Revenue requires that Town Meeting appropriate mitigation funds received from developers
as a result of Site Plan Review decisions by the Planning Board in order to be expended for the purposes) stated in
the decision,
This warrant article requests Town Meeting to authorize payment of prior year bills of the town from the current
fiscal year departmental budget in which they were incurred.
This warrant article asks Town Meetingto rescind authorized and unissued debt.
Town of Framingham 
Collective Bargaining
Floodplain District 
This warrant article asks that Town Meetingvote to approve and fund any and all collective bargaining agreements
that have been tentatively approved bytheTown and thebargaining units. Changes tothesalary corresponding
salary schedules and transfer of funds may also be requested under this article.
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Zoning By -Law to conform to FEMA requirements.
Town of Framingham Preservation Cluster Development 
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Framingham Zoning By -law by adding new definitions to Section I.E. and
adding a new Section IV.S. Preservation Cluster Development By -law
30  Joel Winett  Rules Committee TMMs, Town Clerk TMM Attendance 
Town Meeting Member who do not attend more than a few Town Meetings do not appropriately represent their
precinct.
The attendance record of TMMs should be published before the nomination form is due,
31  Joel Winett  Rules Committee TMMs, Town Manager Div Heads Attendance at Town Mtg 
The MGL Ch. 143 of the acts of 1949 states that the chair of boards and committee and the head of each
department shall attend all sessions of Town Meeting. This is not the practice. Attendance is only needeed when
an article relevant to their position will be discussed.
PagePage 22
NOTE: NOTE: PleasePlease notenote thatthat thethe LineLine NumbersNumbers refeerreenncceedd areare forr orgaanniizzaatitoionnaal l purposespurposes only andand dodo NOOTTrreeppreresesnetnt thethe actualactual WarrantArticleWarrantArticle numbers.numbers.
Page 35
2014ANNUAL TOWN MEETING WARRANT ARTICLES
Listed by Anticipated Sponsor)
Principal Contact  Potential Stakeholders
Line #  Person Anficipated Sponsors or Parties of Interest Title or subject matter of  proposed article  Brief Summary ofneed or problem the article seeks to address
32  Joel Winett  Rules Committee TM Ms, Town Clerk Election of a Twn Mtg Mbr
33  Joel Winett
34 Joel Winett 
Rules Committee Town Mgr, and TMMs Publication of the Warrant
Rules Committee 
Twn Mgr, CFO and
others  Reports to Town Meeting
35 1  Edward Gotgart School Department 
Students /Staff /Commun
ity  Lease of Office Space
36  Robert Halpin Town Manager  Authorize Solar Net Metering 
ATown Meeting Member can be elected with only one vote. This sometimes happens when a person is elected by
write -in votes.
Provide the warrant to Town Meeting Members in a timely manner.
Reduce the cost of running a Town Meeting
Following Town bylaws and MGLs
Responding to requests made a previouls town meetings
Keeping Town Meeting Members informed.
Dueto a significant increase inenrollment, itis necessary to convert the use ofthe King School from office space
forSchool Administration toaninth elementary school intheDistrict. Kindergarten students will beplaced atthe
King School in August 2014. Thus theimmediate need for office space to house School Department Administrative
Of0ces.
To see if the Town will vote to authorize the Board of Selectmen to enter into alternate energy net metering
credit purchase agreements, including solar energy and related net electricity metering credits, for terms of more
than three years, on such terms and conditions as the Board of Selectmen deem in the best interest of the Town;
and to authorize the Board of Selectmen to take all actions nec
37 Jeffrey Cox
38  Robert Snider
39  Deborah Butler
40 Ted Anthony
41 Ted Anthony
42  Kenneth Weiss 
Veterans Council
ZBA
Citizens' Petition
Citizens' Petition
Citizens' Petition
Citizens' Petition 
Framingham Veterans Council Meetings Outside
Framingham Veterans of Restrictive Times  Amend General bylawsto allow Framingham Veterans Council to meet outside of restrictive times.
Town of Framingham Portico
Framingham Taxpayers Assessment Practices
Amend General Bylaws: Article II, Section 2
Amend General Bylaws: Article III • Town
Meetings
Framingham Employees Resolution on Fossil Fuel Divestment 
Agriculture Transfer of Development Rights
To see if the Town will vote to amend the Framingham Zoning By -law by adding adding a new Section IV.b.sas.2
regarding porticos.
The Town's failure to adopt the best "assessment" practices recommended in the September 2012 Matrix
Consulting Group report as well as the Town's continuing failure to comply with the requests for documentation
by the Matrix Consulting Group and the Assessment Review Committee have arguably resulted in millions in lost
revenue, unfair tax assessments and erosion ofthe public trust.
Add the following to Article II, Section 2-Town Manager: 2.7 Prepare and submit annually a warrant article for the
Fall Town Meeting to present an assewssment of the budgetary needs of the Town for the next fiscal year; and
requesting the advise and consent of the Town Meeting on the maximum increase in the current year's tax lexy
which should be used in preparing the next fiscal year's budget presentation for the Annnual Town Meeting.
Amend Article III -Town Meetings by adding the following at the end of paragraph 1.3: 13.The Chief Financial
Officer shall also present an assessment of the budgetary needs of the Town for the next fiscal year including the
anticipated change in the current year's tax levy recommended to be used in preparing the next fiscal year's
budget.
Global warming, caused primarily by the burning of fossil fuels and resulting increase in greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere, is a serious threat to current and future generations in Framingham and around the world. Therefore
the Town of Framingham should avoid investment in fossil fuel stocks from a moral reason and financial benefit of
Framingham town residents and town employees.!I  have attached a document "RESOLUTION ON FOSSIL FUEL
DIVESTMENT" tothisarticle.
PagePage 33
NOTE: NOTE: PleasePlease notenote thatthat thethe LineLine NumbersNumbers referreenncceedd areare for organizational puurrppoosseess only andand dodo NOTrepreesseenntt  thethe actualactual WarrantWarrant ArticleArticle numbers.numbers.
Page 36
2014 ANNUAL TOWN MEETING WARRANT ARTICLES
Listed by Anticipated Sponsor)
Page 4
NOTE: Please note that the Line Numbers referenced are for organizational purposes only and do NOT represent the actual Warrant Article numbers.
Page 37
o
Christopher J. Petrini,
Town Counsel
Barbara J. Saint Andre 
TOWN OF FRAMMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS
Office of the Town Counsel
Petrini & Associates, P.C.
372 Union Avenue .  Framingham, MA 01702
508) 665 -4310 . Facsimile (508) 665 -4313
www.competrinilaw.
MEMORANDUM
To: Board of Selectmen
From: Heather C. White rc_
Petrini & Associate, P.C.
cc: Robert J. Halpin, Town Manager
Jennifer L. Thompson, Assistant Town Manager
Mary Ellen Kelley, Chief Financial Officer
Jennifer L. Pratt, Chief Procurement Officer,
Christopher J. Petrini, Town Counsel
Date: February 6, 2014
Re: Policy on PurchaseOrdersandBid Procedures — First Reading 
Peter L. Mello
Heather C. NYVhite
Christopher L. Brown
In July 2013 the Massachusetts Legislature adopted legislation raising certain bidding
and contracting thresholds under G.L. c. 30B. State law now allows the use of sound business
practices for contracts up to $10,000, raising the threshold for the requirement of receiving three
quotes from $5,000 to $10,000. Additionally, the requirement of a written contract was raised
from $5,000 to $10,000. On January 30, 2014, the Policy Subcommittee voted in favor of
amendments to the Policy on Purchase Orders and Bid Procedures ( " Policy ")to make the local
thresholds consistentwith state law. The proposed Policy attached hereto as Exhibit A is now
being submitted to the full Board of Selectmen for a first reading at the meeting on February 11,
2014. 
I will attend the Board's meeting on February 11 to answer any questions you may have.
Thank 
you.
2014.0602.Memo to BOS re Purchase Orders and Bid Procedures (606 -01)
Dedicated to excellence in public service -
Page 38
Town of Framingham
Board of Selectmen
Policy on Purchase Orders and Bid Procedures
Issue date: September 8, 2000
Type of policy: New (  x )  Amendment ( )
Effective date: September 15, 2000
Level: Department ( )  Division ()  Town Wide (x)
Policy Statement
The following policy sets forth the purchase order thresholds for expenditures by all Town
Departments, as well as bid guidelines including thresholds for procurement, preparation of bids,
addendum, bid openings, recommendations for award, and contractual items.
References
M.L., G.Chapter 30B
Special Terms
Best business practices ":  Sound business practices, which should include some type of
informal bidding of goods or services required, in order to determine if goods or services are
being received at a competitive price.
I.  Purchase Orders 
Policy Description _
A. PurchaseOrderThresholds
Page 39
Purchase orders are required only for expenditures in excess of $2,500. No purchase
orders will be processed for goods and services below this threshold.
In order to maintain financial accountability for all departments at the end 'of the fiscal
year, purchase orders in excess of $1,000 are required during the month of June only. All.
items in excess of $1,000 must be submitted to the Purchasing Office no less than ten
10) business days prior to June 30to be encumbered forthe current fiscal year. Items
received after this date will be held until July F and encumbered against next fiscal year.
B. Confirming Purchase Orders
Purchase orders must be obtained prior to purchasing goods or services. No purchase will
be honored or invoice paid if1 a purchase order is submitted after the item has been
ordered ortheworkperformed. Emergency procurements requiring purchase ordersneed
prior authorization from the Division Head and/or approval from the Purchasing Office.
C. Telephone Ordering
Purchase orders required in order to make a purchase over the telephone (i.e.,supplier
will not process order without purchase order number) will be distributed by the
Purchasing Office on an as- needed basis.
II. Bid Procedures
This is not intended as a step -by -step procedure for formally bidding out a product or service;
rather, to be used as a guideline in conjunction with Massachusetts Procurement Laws.
A. Bid Thresholds
As of July X088 the Massachusetts Legislature amended the bid thresholds for
procurement to the following:
For procurement of goods and services under $10 -5,000, cities and towns should follow
best business practices ".
For procurement of goods and services between $10 -, 000 and $24,999, cities and towns
should obtainthree (3) written quotes fromvendors. These quotesshouldbebased upon
a uniform, written scope of services or specifications.
For procurement of goods and services in excess of $25,000, formal bid procedures are
required.
B. Preparation ofBids
Each Department should prepare their own bid packages, including specifications, bid
forms, andotherrelevantinformation. The Purchasing Department will provide you with
Page 40
standard contracts, forms for non -collusion, certificate of authority, tax compliance, and
other relevant bid documents, as well as advertise the bid appropriately. Purchasing will
also be responsible for obtaining the Wage Rates from the Department of Labor for each
project, if necessary, once we are notified.of the intended bid. Please allow seven (7) to
ten (10) working days to obtain the bid rates in your bidding process.
C. Addendum
Attention should be paid to detail prior to submitting the bid packages to Purchasing for
advertising, to avoid unnecessary addendums to the bid package after the initial mailing.
Addendum should be used only in those rare circumstances where an omission in the
original bid package will either nullify the bid or provide the Town with a product or
service that it does not want or cannot use. Addendum will not be issued within five (5)
working days of the bid opening.
D. Bid Openings
Bid openings are conducted in the Purchasing Office at the time and date specified in the
bid package and advertisement. The Division Or Department Head that is responsible for
the bid must be in attendance at the bid opening, or their representative. This assists the
Purchasing Office in answering any questions. specific to the details of the bid from any
Bidders in attendance, and often times provides the necessary witness to the bid opening,
as required by Mass. Procurement Law.
E. Recommendation forAward
After. the bids have been opened and recorded, the Division or Department Head will
more carefully review the bids and make a recommendation for award to the Purchasing
Office. The recommendation for award must be submitted in writing, and will be kept
with the bid file. An award letter will not be issued from the Purchasing Office without
the written recommendation for award from the Division or Department Head.
F. Contracts
All procurements equal to or in excess of $10 -5,000 are required by Massachusetts
General Law to have a contract or agreement between the parties. In order for the
contract to be valid, it must have the following signatures in the following order:
The successful Bidder
The Chief Procurement Officer
The Town Accountant
Town Counsel, approving the contract as to form
The Town Accountant must also know the funding source for the.piocurement, and itwill
be notedonthe contract in the space provided. The contract or bid number should then
Page 41
be listed on each invoice submitted to the Town for payment by the Bidder under said
contract.
G. Termination ofBidder
In the event that a contract with a Bidder must be terminated for poor or nonperformance,
the termination of the contract must be done within the procedure contained in the
contract. Since the contract was signed by both the Town and the successful Bidder, and
therein contains the termination clause, it is implicitly the procedure agreeable to both
parties if such cause arises. Notice of termination will be sent out by the Purchasing
Office upon receipt from the Division or Department Head of a written recommendation
for termination of the contract and the reasons for termination. If the Division. or
Department Head intends to award the bid to the next lowest responsible Bidder, he /she
must submit a new letter of recommendation to the Purchasing Office so that a new
award letter may be sent out.
Page 42
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM, MASSACHUSETTS ( "Awarding Authority ")
Designer Selection Procedures
Adopted [date])
These procedures govern the selection of designers for any municipal building project
subject to the state designer selection law, M.L. G.c. 7C, §§44 -57. Any other local law
governing the procurement of services will be inapplicable to these procurements.
2.  The Board of Selectmen has the authority to conduct the designer selection process for
the Awarding Authority. The Approving Body may delegate any duties described herein to the
extent such delegation is permissible by law.
The Board of Selectmen hereby designates the Chief Procurement Officer as the
individual who will conduct the designer selection process ( "Approving Body "). The Chief
Procurement Officer may delegate the duties associated with the designer selection process to an
individual or group of individuals ( hereinafter referred to as " the Committee ") who will conduct
the designer selection process for any particular project. No member of the Committee shall
participate in the selection of a designer for any project if the member, or any of the member's
immediate family:
1.  has a direct or indirect financial interest in the award of the design contract to any
applicant;
2. is currently employed by, or is a consultant to or under contract to, any applicant;
3. is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning future employment or contracting
with any applicant; or
4. has an ownership interest in, or is an officer or director of, any applicant.
4.  A Request for Qualifications (RFQ) for each contract subject to these procedures shall be
advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the locality of the building project, in the
Central Register published by the Secretary of the Commonwealth, and in any other place
required by the Approving Body, at least two weeks before the deadline for filing applications.
The advertisement shall contain the following information:
a description of the project, including the specific designer services sought, the
time period within which the project is to be completed, and, if available, the
estimated construction cost;
Page 43
b.  if there is a program for the building project, a statement of when and where the
program will be available for inspection by applicants;
C.  when and where a briefing session (if any) will be held;
d.  the qualifications required of applicants;
e.  the categories of designers' consultants, if any, for which applicants must list
names of consultants they may use;
f.  whether the fee has been set or will be negotiated; if the fee has been set, the
amount of the fee must be listed in the advertisement;
g.  when and where the RFQ can be obtained and the applications must be delivered.
6.  The RFQ shall include the current "Standard Designer Application Form for
Municipalities and Public Agencies not within DSB Jurisdiction,"which is available for
download from the Massachusetts Designer Selection Board website. The Application Form may
be amended to include additional information on a project- specific basis.
7.  The Committee shall evaluate applicants based on the following criteria:
a.  prior similar experience;
b.  past performance on public and private projects;
C.  financial stability;
d.  identity and qualifications of the consultants who will work with the applicants on
the project; and
e.  any other criteria that the Committee considers relevant to the project.
The Committee shall select at least three finalists. Finalists may be required to appear for
an interview or provide additional information to the Committee, provided that all finalists are
afforded an equal opportunity to do so.
9.  The Committee shall rank the finalists in order of qualification and transmit the list of
ranked finalists to the Approving Body. No person or firm, including applicants' listed
consultants, debarred pursuant to M.L. G.c. 149, §44C, shall be included as a finalist on the list.
The list must be accompanied by a written explanation of the reasons for selection including the
recorded vote, if any. The written explanation and recorded vote, if any, shall be public records
and shall be maintained in the contract file.
10.  If the fee was set prior to the selection process, the Approving Body shall select a
designer from the list of finalists. If the Approving Body selects a designer other than the one
ranked first by the Committee, the Approving Body shall file a written justification for the
Page 44
selection with the Committee and maintain a copy in the contract file.
11.  If the fee is to be negotiated, the Approving Body shall review the list of finalists and
may exclude any designer from the list if a written explanation of the exclusion is filed with the
Committee and maintained in the contract file. The Approving Body shall inform the Committee
of the first ranked designer remaining on the list, and the Committee shall request a fee proposal
from such designer and begin contractnegotiations. The Committee shall consultwith the
ApprovingBodyduring the negotiations. IftheCommitteeandtheApprovingBodyareunable
to negotiate a satisfactory fee with the first ranked designer, negotiations shall be terminated and
undertaken with the remaining designers, one at a time, in the order in which they were ranked
by the Committee until agreement is reached. In no event may a fee be negotiated which is
higher than the maximum fee set by the Approving Body prior to selection of finalists.
12.  If the Committee and Approving Body are unable to negotiate a satisfactory fee with any
of the finalists, the Approving Body shall recommend that the Committee select additional
finalists.
13.  The Approving Authority may allow a designer who conducted a feasibility study to
continue with the design of a project. However, the Approving Authority may commission, at its
discretion, an independent review, by a knowledgeable and competent individual or business
doing such work, of the feasibility of the designer's work to insure its reasonableness and its
adequacy before allowing the designer to continue on the project, provided the Approving
Authority otherwise complies with the statutory requirements for selecting a designer under
Chapter 7C of the General Laws, including those set forth in M.L. G.c. 7C, §54(i). a)(
14.  Every contract for design services shall include the following:
a.  certification that the designer or construction manager has not given, offered, or
agreed to give any person, corporation, or other entity any gift, contribution, or
offer of employment as an inducement for, or in connection with, the award of the
contract for design services;
b.  certification that no consultant to, or subcontractor for, the designer or
construction manager has given, offered, or agreed to give any gift, contribution,
or offer of employment to the designer or construction manager, or to any other
person, corporation, or entity as an inducement for, or in connection with, the
award to the consultant or subcontractor of a contract by the designer or
construction manager;
Page 45
C.  certification that no person, corporation, or other entity, other than a bona fide
full -time employee of the designer or construction manager, has been retained or
hired by the designer or construction manager to solicit for or in any way assist
the designer or construction manager in obtaining the contract for design services
upon an agreement or understanding that such person, corporation, or other entity
be paid a fee or other consideration contingent upon the award of the contract to
the designer; and
d.  certification that the designer has internal accounting controls as required by
M.L. G.c. 30, §39R(c),and that the designer has filed and will continue to file an
audited financial statement as required by M.L. G.c. 30, §39R(d).
All fees shall be stated in design contracts, and in any subsequent amendments thereto, as a total
dollar amount. Contracts may provide for equitable adjustments in the event of changes in scope
or services.
15.  The Awarding Authority shall not enter into a contract for design services unless the
designer has obtained professional liability insurance covering negligent errors, omissions, and
acts of the designer or of any person or business entity for whose performance the designer is
legally liable arising out of the performance of the contract. The total amount of such insurance
shall at a minimum equal the lesser of one million dollars or ten percent of the project's estimated
cost of construction, or such larger amounts as the Awarding Authority may require, for the
applicable period of limitations. A designer required by the Awarding Authority to obtain all or a
portion of such insurance coverage at its own expense shall furnish a certificate or certificates of
insurance coverage to the Awarding Authority prior to the award of the contract.
16.  Every contract for design services shall include a provision that the designer or its
consultants shall not be compensated for any services involved in preparing changes that are
required for additional work that should have been anticipated by the designer in the preparation
of the bid documents, as reasonably determined by the individual responsible for administering
the design contract.
17.  In the event of an emergency that precludes the normal use of these designer selection
procedures, the Approving Body may elect to authorize expedited procedures to address the
emergency. The Approving Body shall document in writing the reasons for the emergency
declaration, the proposed scope of work, the estimated cost of construction, the established fee
for the needed design services, and any other relevant information.
Page 46
The Approving Body may select three finalists from any standing list of designers who have
applied for projects of a similar nature, or may otherwise select three designers to be considered
as finalists for the project. The Approving Body shall rank the finalists in order of qualification
and select the designer for the emergency work.
18.  The Awarding Authority shall publish the name of any designer awarded a contract in the
Central Register.
19.  The following records shall be kept by the Awarding Authority:
a.  all information supplied by or obtained about each applicant;
b.  all actions taken relating to the project; and
C.  any other records related to designer selection.
All records shall be available for inspection by the state Designer Selection Board and other
authorized agencies.
20.  The Awarding Authority shall evaluate designers' performance on contracts using the
Designer Selection Board evaluation form(s) in accordance with M.L. G.c. 7C, §48(g),and file
completed evaluations with the Board and any other agency named in M.L. G.c. 7C, §48(g).
21.  Nothing in these Procedures shall be interpreted to require the establishment of a board or
waive or reduce the requirements of any other applicable law or regulation.
22.  For any municipal design or construction project that includes funding provided by the
Commonwealth, in whole or in part (such as reimbursements, grants and the like),the Awarding
Authority must incorporate minority -owned business enterprise and women -owned business
enterprise participation goals. If applicable, the Awarding Authority shall take steps to assure
that it complies with all State Office of Minority and Women Business Assistance requirements.
Page 47
Christopher J. Petrini,
Town Counsel
Barbara J. Saint Andre 
TOWN OF FRANIINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS
Office of the Town Counsel
Petrini & Associates, P.C.
372 Union Avenue .  Framingham, MA 01702
508) 665 -4310 .  Facsimile (508) 665 -4313
www.competrinilaw.
MEMORANDUM 
Peter L. Mello
Heather C. White
Christopher L. Brown
To: Board of Selectmen
From: Heather C. White 4uD
Petrini & Associate, P.C.
cc: Robert J. Halpin, Town Manager
Jennifer L. Thompson, Assistant Town Manager
James J. Paolini, Director of Facilities Management
Ashley M. Borges, Office Manager, Facilities Management
Christopher J. Petrini, Town Counsel
Date: February 6, 2014
Re: Policy on Nevins Hall Rental —First Reading
On January 30, 2014, the Policy Subcommittee voted in favor of proposed amendments
to the Policy on Nevins Hall Rental ( "Policy "). The revisions are intended to clarify the
restrictions on use of the hall, strengthen enforcement mechanisms, and revise the fee schedule.
The Policy is now being submitted to the full Board of Selectmen for a first reading at the
meeting on February I I' 2014. A redlined draft showing the proposed changes to the Policy is
attached hereto as Exhibit A.
I will attend the Board's meeting on February 11 to answer any questions you may have.
Thank you.
2014.0602.Memo to BOS re Nevins Hall Rental (606 -01)
Dedicated to excellence in public service -
Page 48
Town of Framingham
Board of Selectmen 
Policy on Nevins Hall Rental
Issue date: February 8, 2001
Type of policy: New ()  Amendment (x)
Effective date: February 15, 2001
Amendmentdate: May 29, 2003
Amendment date: February 5, 2004
Amendment date: June 12, 2007
Amendment date: July. 14, 2009
Amendment date: December 13, 2011
Amendment date: ,  2014
Level: Department O  Division O  Town Wide (x)
Policy Statement
Subject to availability, consistent with the needs of the Town and requests of the public, and at
the discretion of the Board of, Selectmen, Nevins Hall is available for rental to non -profit and
commercial groups or individuals for meetings or programs of an educational, informational or
cultural nature. 
References
Nevins Hall Rental Application
Use of Town Property Agreement
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Code, Section 501 (c)(3)
Special Terms
None.
I.  Reservations 
Policy Description 
1
Page 49
Reservations may be made in person, by mail or telephone, but a reservation form must be
completed in advance by an 
authorized representative of the group or organization. The
individual signing the form will be responsible for the conduct of the group and the protection of
Town property.
In order to ensure that Nevins Hall is available to all who may wish to rent it, advanced bookings
will notbetaken more than one year inadvance ofaplanned event. The use ofNevins Hall for
municipal purposeswilltake precedence over allotherreservations. IftheTowncancelsa
r 
reservation, every effort will be made to provide as much advance notice as possible. A refund
will be issued if a fee has been paid in advance.
No set up or breakdown of Nevins Hall is provided by the Town unless arrangements have been
made atcosttotherenter. Thehall floor willbeclearoftables and chairs attime ofremoval.
Nevins Hall is available for rental between the hours of 9:00 A.M. through 10:00 P.M. seven
days per week. The Town Manager may authorize extended hours on a case -by -case basis.
II. Insurance
The organization or individual will be required to sign an indemnification agreement with the
Town of Framingham for each scheduled event. A general liability policy ($1,000) 000, is
requiredaspartoftherentalagreement. Acertificate ofinsurance mustbeprovidedasproofof
said policy. The organization shall obtain insurance from a private agency in the amount of
1,000000,general liabilityandProperty Coverage indemnifying theTownofFramingham. A
certificate of insurance shall be presented 14 days prior ine -of the rental naming the
Town of Framingham as indemnifted insured The certificate shall include the
organization or individual and the function date. Events that are sponsored or co- sponsored by
the Town may be eligible for coverage under the Town's insurance policy, at the sole discretion
of the Town Manager.
The Town is not responsible for the loss or damage to the person or property of any user, or of
any individual attending the event. The factthatagroup ororganization ispermitted tomeet in
Nevins Hall does not in any way constitute an endorsement of that group's policies or beliefs.
Smoking is prohibited in all public buildings, which includes Nevins Hall and any portion of the
Memorial Building, by definition_
III. Service of Alcoholic Beverages
Therentalagreement doesnotinclude aliquorlicense. Consumption ofalcoholic beverages is
prohibited in the Memorial Building, including Nevins Hall, as stated in the Town's General
Bylaws (Article V. section 1.1). 4. As a result of this bylaw, no group or organization renting
Nevins Hall will be permitted to serve, sell or allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
the premises. The Town ofFramingham has zero tolerance for Alcohol on Nevins Hall premises
2
Page 50
The host of the event is responsible for monitoring guest activities to insure compliance with this
prohibition If any alcohol is consumed on the premises, the event will be terminated
immediately, all guests will be ordered to leave the premises and the host will forfeit all fees and
security deposits Additionally, the host and any individual consuming alcohol on the premises
will be subject to enforcement of all applicable laws regarding consumption of alcohol, and the
host will be subject to enforcement of all applicable laws and regulations regarding service of
alcohol without a license.
IV. Fees
Regulations concerning the fees for Nevins Hall shall be established by the Town Manager, and
shallbereviewed fromtimetotime asisdeemed necessary. The schedule offeesisattached to
therentalapplication. Facilities Management willdetermine thenumber ofcustodians needed
for each event and calculate the corresponding fee.
Allfeesarepayable inadvance. TheTownManagermaywaivetherentalfeeathisdiscretion,
but that does not relieve the applicant of their responsibility for the additional costs of renting the
Hall, including custodial, police and fire details, Nevins Hall Restoration fee and other licenses
and permits.
V. Police /Fire Details
A Police and Fire detail is required for gatherings expecting an excess of one -  hundred
2-NIQJpersons. Thetotalnumber ofdetails willbedependent onthetotalnumber ofexpected
participants and will be at the discretion of the Town Manager.
Buildi Sen4eesThe applicant shall be responsible for requesting Police and Fire details as
required, and all details shall be paid directly to the Framingham 'Police Department and
Framingham Fire Department in advance of the scheduled event by the organization or
individual renting the Hall.
VI. Security Deposit
A security deposit of Five One Hundred dollars ($500100200.00) is required at the time of
reserving the Hall. This deposit is refundable afterthe event is held and the Town has conducted
an evaluation of the condition of the premises If the event is cancelled before it is held or is
terminated for violation of any provision of this policX the Town of Framingham reserves the
right to withhold the security deposit as a penalty. Cancelations must be made in writing and
received in the Facilities Manageament Office at least 48 hours prior to the function If an event
runs overtime, fees for use of custodians during the additional time period will be deducted from
the security deposit.
VII. Use of Hall
The use of tape, nails, and pins on walls, stage or any area shall be prohibited. Any material,
cloth paper or decorations used in the hall shall be pre- approved and have a flame certificate
Page 51
approved by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Fire Marshall and the Framingham Fire
Department.
Any questions or concerns may be directed to the Building Ser-v ees Offi- eFacilities
Management Office 150 Concord Street, Room 133, Framingham, MA 01702. Phone: (508)
532 -5485, Email: Building. Services amb @framinghamma.gov 
M
Page 52
r 
G
G•  v
Page 53
Page 54
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM
lu,  FACILITIES MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
NEVINS HALL RENTAL APPLICATION
Name of Applicant/ Organization:
Is your organization a non- profit, charitable, or service organization as defined by IRS code section
501(c) ( 3)?Y  N (  If yes, attach proof of the status to this application.)
If a non -profit entity, are you requesting a waiver of the rental fee? Y
Please note on custodian, police, and fire details cannot be waived.) 
N
Contact person responsible for
Requested Date: 
Telephone #
Email:
Day of Week:
Hours of Use:
Initial here to confirm that you understand alcohol cannot be served.
Please give abrief description ofthe event you are planning, including adescription offood items that
will be served, sold, or consumed?
Will you be charging an admission? Y  N  How Much?
Will tickets besold for this event? Y  N  If so, how many?
Approximate number of people expected?
Initial here to confirm that you understand you are required to hire a Police and Fire detail if estimated
attendance exceeds X100 people.
I have attached a Certificate of Liability Insurance stating that "The Town of Framingham is included
as additional insured as respects to the General Liability policy per written agreement/contract."Y
MEMORIAL 13L;ILDING ® 1.50 CONCORD STREET • rRAMINGIIAIt1, MA 01702
PHONE: 508 -532-5485 •  FAX: 508- 732 -5741
Page 55
Food Permits -  Contact Board of Health for requirements 508.5470532.
Fire Details -  Contact Fire Department for required permits 508. 532.5930
Police Details- Contact Police Department - Safety Officer, Licensing Officer & Detail Officer - 508. 532.5909
Entertainment License - Contact License Administrator for required permits 508. 532-5402
All fees are payable in advance: rental, clean up, permits, police, fire, etc.*
Ihave read, understand and will comply with allguidelines written in the Policy for the use of
Nevins Hall. Applicantherehyag reel to indemnih, defend and hold harmless Town and its -
officers, attorneys, employees, attorneys, and agents from andagainst any 
andallclaims demands.
suits, actions, liabilities, darnaees, penalties, iudements, and costs and expenses, 
includino without
limitation the costs and expenses oflitiw on and attorney's fees, ofor hyanvone that in any wav is
caused hy, arises out of or is occasioned hy, the acts or omissions of applicant in connection with
this even or anv activities, operations, conducts, nez&ence, omissions ofapplicant or
r . .................._......... - -- -- - - - - -- - -- ....... - .._.........._._..................._........ .......................
or went, regardless of whether same is caused in part by Town or an y third parts: 
or 
its guests - _
Signature of Applicant  Phone#  Date
Approved:
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT
BOARD OF HEALTH
FIRE DEPARTMENT
LICENSE ADMINISTRATION
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Deposit Received Y
Amount $
Payment Received Y
Amount $
Employee Assigned
W9 Received 
N
N 
FOR DEPARTMENT USE ONLY 
Date _
Date
Date
Date
Date
By  Date
By  Date
Hours Worked
Y 0 N 
Formatted: Font: Goudy Old Style, 12 pt, Bold,
Ital ic
Formatted: Font: Goudy Old Style, 12 pt, Bold, 
Italic
Formatted: Font: Goudy Old Style, 12 pt, Bold,
Italic
Formatted: Font: Goudy Old Style, 12 pt, Bold,
Italic
11EMOR.TAL BUILDING •  1.50 CONCORD STREET •  FR.'MINGTIAM, NTA 01702
PHONE: 508- 532 -5485 • FAX: 508 -532 -5741
Page 56
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
Certificate of Insurance Received
Proof of Non -Profit
Board of Health Permit
Police /Fire Detail 
Y
YF
Y
YF 
N El
N
N
N 
Formatted: Centered
MEMORIAL BUILDING •:1.50 CONCORD S'REET • T' FRAMINGIIAM, MA 0170
PHONE: 508- 532 -5485 a FAX: 508- ; i32 -5 r 41
Page 57
TOWN OF FRAMINGHAM
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
RENTAL FEE:
ommercial,$1500
Non-Profit- $750.00
If selling tickets, 5% surcharLye with Nevins Hall Restoration Fee ($50)
CUSTODIAN FEE:
A.- ~ -- 
1formatted: Font: 12 pt
Formatted: Font: Goudy Old Style, 12 pt
Formatted: Font: Goudy Old Style, 12 pt
Formatted: Font: Goudy Old Style, 12 pt
Formatted: Font: Goudy Old Style, 12 Pt
Formatted: Nounderline
MEMORIAL 
zsm CONCORD STREET ^rRaMovoex.MxoznnX4.
ruomu 508-5485 ~ 532-r^508532'u:5741
Page 58
Town of Framingham
Board of Selectmen
Policy on Employee Recognition Program
Issue date: May 1, 2000
Type of policy: New ( )  Amendment ( x )
Effective date: May 8, 2000
Amendment date: (DATE BoS votes on second reading, plus seven
Level: D  Division  Wi
ent
The employee recogniti
the vital role employee,
Town's commitment to
program will recognize
worker 
program recognizes emp
ay in the attainment of su
erating in an efficient, cu
individual efforts by em
FFramingham.
Referen 
s as the Town's most valuable asset and
by our organization in promoting the
erservice oriented manner. This
es toward citizens, businesses, co-
None.
Special Terms
None.
Policy Description
The Employee Recognition Program provides opportunities for citizens, employees and
supervisors to recognize staff, subordinates, supervisors, peers and co- workers for their
achievements, dedication to public service, and special contributions to the Town's mission in
areas such as customer service and superior performance.
Page 59
1. The Program.
Employee Appreciation: Each year, there will be two Employee Appreciation luncheons- an
outing in the spring /summer and a Holiday luncheon in fall /winter.
2. Service Awards.
An Employee Recognition Committee will be formed to develop the components of an
Employee Recognition Program. The committee will be a one -year commitment. The focus
will be on recognizing employees who go above and beyond the Town of Framingham' s core
values of excellence, innovation, integrity, collaboration and respect in serving the citizens of
Framingham. These values can be demonstrated by excellence in customer service,
suggestions, volunteering on committees, special projects or superior performance.
Nominations for employees who demonstrate these values can be made by citizens, peers,
co- workers, supervisors, or subordinates. A key component will be to recognize employees
in a timely manner. The committee will determine categories ofawards such as customer
service, innovation, and /or public safety. There will be on- the -spot awards, recognition at
board meetings, and annual recognitions ofthose recognized during the calendar year.
The committee will be comprised of one member from Human Resources, Parks and
Recreation, Library, Public Works and Tow Hall and will meet monthly. On- the -spot
awards will be delivered by the town manager, assistant town manager or a
division /department head.
