CITY OF FRAMINGHAM By City
BOARD OF LICENSE COMMISSIONERS
Memorial Building - 150 Concord Street 
Clerk at 1:22 pm, Apr 21, 2022
Tiel D. Wadland, Chair
Stuart Pologe, Vice Chair
Laura Medrano, Clerk
Framingham, MA 01702  Sara Porter, Member
508.532.5402  Marques Lipton, Member
April 25, 2022 – 7:00 p.m. 
REMOTE
Join Zoom Meeting
 https://us02web.zoom.us/j/86061335193?pwd=dzgyVS9YREFBa29FK2t1Y2tkSXpoQT09
Meeting ID: 860 6133 5193
Passcode: 799473
One tap mobile
+13017158592,,86061335193#,,,,*799473# US (Washington DC) 
+13126266799,,86061335193#,,,,*799473# US (Chicago) 
Dial by your location
+1 301 715 8592 US (Washington DC) 
+1 312 626 6799 US (Chicago) 
+1 646 558 8656 US (New York) 
+1 253 215 8782 US (Tacoma) 
+1 346 248 7799 US (Houston) 
+1 669 900 9128 US (San Jose) 
Meeting ID: 860 6133 5193
Passcode: 799473
Find your local number: [URL: "https://us02web.zoom.us/u/kcf1F3g2C"] https://us02web.zoom.us/u/kcf1F3g2C
*****************************************************************
1.  General Public Comments
2.  Public Hearing--Alteration of Premises All Alcohol Restaurant and Common Victualer Licenses—
Margaritas Management Group-Framingham, Inc. d/b/a Tio Juan’s Margaritas Mexican Restaurant, 
725 Cochituate Road
3.  Alleged Alcohol Violation Hearings
a. Lao Sichuan, Inc. d/b/a Sichuan Gourmet II, 271 Worcester Road
b. Mall Liquors, Inc. d/b/a Lincoln Liquors, 1 Nicholas Road
c. Tropical Island, Inc. d/b/a Tropical Café, 85 Hollis Street
d. Yogivinodp, Inc. d/b/a AV’s Market II, 888 Waverly Street
4.  New Business
a. Consider Approving Open Session Meeting Minutes
i.  February 28, 2022 
ii. March 14, 2022
b. Commissioners’ Reports/Concerns
 Link to hearing documents available April 25 
Page 1 of 1 
Page 2
Page 3
Page 4
Page 5
Page 6
Page 7
Page 8
Page 9
Page 10
Page 11
Page 12
Page 13
Page 14
Page 15
Page 16
Page 17
Page 18
Page 19
Page 20
Page 21
Page 22
Page 23
Page 24
Page 25
Page 26
Page 27
Page 28
Page 29
Page 30
Page 31
Page 32
Page 33
Page 34
Page 35
Page 36
Page 37
Page 38
Page 39
Page 40
Page 41
Page 42
Page 43
LICENSING DEPARTMENT 
Diane R. Willoughby
Licensing Coordinator 
o 508-532-5402
f  508-532-5769
e drw@framinghamma.gov
w www.framinghamma.gov
Agenda Item 3.a. 
Alleged Alcohol Violation Hearing 
MEMORIAL BUILDING
150 Concord Street, Room 203
Framingham, MA 01702 
Lao Sichuan, Inc. 
d/b/a Sichuan Gourmet II
271 Worcester Road 
Hearing Date: April 25, 2022
1. Lt. McCarthy’s Power Point 
2. Hearing Notice to Mr. Liu dated April 5, 2022
3. Framingham Rules and Regulations Governing Alcoholic Beverages 7th Revision, 
September 1, 2021 (amended and restated December 13, 2021) 
Page 1 of 1 
Page 44
Framingham Police Department
April 25, 2022
Sichuan Gourmet II Violation Hearing
Lieutenant Thomas McCarthy
Licensing Bureau Commander
Page 45
Lao Sichuan, Inc.
DBA: Sichuan Gourmet II
271 Worcester Road
All Alcohol Pouring License
Manager of Record: Lijun Liu
Assistant Manager: Melody Huang 
Photo courtesy of Trip Advisor
Page 46
Alcohol compliance check:
• The alcohol compliance checks are conducted on an annual basis
• An underage operative under police supervision enters the establishments without
identification and attempts to purchase alcohol with police issued money
• The process was conducted on various weekdays over a several week period
• Pursuant to ABCC regulations and FPD policy, a notification announcement was
provided to local media outlets and posted on social media approximately four (4) 
weeks in advance
• At the time of the operation, eighty (80) alcohol licenses were active
• All establishments were visited and fifty-two (52) active attempts were conducted
• Ten (10) establishments failed the operation
Page 47
circumstances:
• Tuesday, December 14, 2021
• At 4:28 p.m. an underage operative entered Sichuan Gourmet II and was seated at a
table in the dining area
• The operative was served a Bud Light bottled beer
• Identification was never requested by the waiter
Page 48
Violations:
• Violation of MGL Chapter 138 s34 - Sale to an underage person
• Violation of 204 CMR 2.05 (2) - Permitting an illegality (underage sale) 
Page 49
RECORD HISTORY:
• No previous documented violations since the ABCC approved the license in 2004
• The establishment is eligible for three (3) days of relief based on having no violations
for over seven (7) years
• A disposition negotiation meeting was held on February 15, 2022 and an agreement
was reached
Page 50
PENALTY FACTORS:
AGGRAVATING FACTORS:
• Failure to request identification
• Failure to attend the 2022 Annual Alcohol Seminar
MITIGATING FACTORS:
• Establishment cooperated with investigation and accepted responsibility
• Internal policies were reviewed and updated
• Managers hold regular staff meetings to reinforce regulations
Page 51
Agreed upon recommendation:
• One (1) day suspension of the All Alcohol Pouring license to be held in abeyance for
six (6) months
• $300 reimbursement cost payable to the city within thirty (30) days of BOLC decision
• Lao Sichuan, Inc. agrees to waive rights to appeal the disposition agreement
Page 52
Page 53
Page 54
Page 55
Page 56
Page 57
Page 58
Page 59
Page 60
Page 61
Page 62
Page 63
Page 64
CITY OF FRAMINGHAM RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Effective Date: September 1, 2008 1st.
Revision: October 2, 2008 2nd.
Revision: December 16, 2008 3rd.
Revision: November 3, 2009 4th 
Revision: May 4, 2011
5th Revision: September 17, 2013
6th Revision: January 1, 2016
7th Revision: September 1, 2021 (amended and restated on December 13, 2021)
By virtue of the authority contained in Chapter 138 of the Massachusetts General Laws (“Chapter
138”), and Article V, Section 1 of the City of Framingham General Ordinances (the “Ordinances”), the
Board of License Commissioners of the City of Framingham, serving as the City’sLiquor Licensing
Authority (the “Board”) hereby promulgates these Rules and Regulations Governing Alcoholic Beverages
(“Regulations”). The Regulations shall supersede all previous regulations or policies issued by the City of
Framingham (the “City”), or, collectively as the preceding licensing authority, the Town of Framingham
and/or Board of Selectmen. The Board has the power under the Ordinances and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts to amend these Regulations periodically from time to time as it sees fit. 
For the purposes hereof, the Regulations, Ordinances, and Chapter 138 shall be collectively referred to as
the “Laws”.
Any license issued for the sale in any manner of any alcoholic beverages (a “License”) shall be
issued on the condition of full compliance with these Regulations. The failure to comply with the Laws and
other Ordinances or rules issued by the City and/or the Board shall constitute sufficient cause or grounds for
refusing to grant the license, or for suspending, canceling, modifying, or revoking such license or permit
already granted, in accordance with Article XIV herein. Any individual, organization, or company licensed
by the Board pursuant to the Laws shall be referred to herein as a “Licensee”.
Any premises licensed by the Board pursuant to the Laws shall be referred to as the “Licensed
Premises”.
I.  Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
Public consumption of alcoholic beverages as defined in Chapter 138, Section 1 is permitted only in
accordance with an appropriate License issued by the Board. Absent an appropriate License issued by the
Board, it is prohibited to drink any alcoholic beverage while on, in or upon any public way or upon any way
to which the public has a right of access; any place to which members of the public have access as invitees
or licensees; a park or playground. It is prohibited to drink any alcoholic beverage while on, in or upon or
private land or place without consent of the owner or person in control thereof. All alcoholic beverages used
in violation of this shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of the charge against the person or
persons arrested or summoned before the court, at which time they shall be returned to the person entitled to
lawful possession.
Page 65
II.  General Provisions Regarding the Administration of Licensed Premises
1.  Licensure Requirements. The applicant for any type of License must meet the
requirements of the Laws.
2.  Alcohol Training Program. The Licensee shall require all employees serving alcohol or
viewing identifications cards to determine age to successfully complete an alcoholic 
beverage server training program which has been approved by the Board (the “Alcohol
Training Program”). The requirement set forth in the preceding sentence shall include and
apply to the Manager (as defined below), Assistant Manager, and all persons responsible for
viewing identification cards to determine the age of patrons for service of alcoholic
beverages.
The Alcohol Training Program may be completed on-line. The Licensee shall require all
employees engaged in serving alcoholic beverages and/or viewing of identification cards to
obtain Alcohol Training Program certification within thirty (30) days of employment and
the Manager shall maintain a list of employee certifications. To the extent an employee
serves alcohol or views identification cards prior to obtaining Alcohol Training Program
certification, the Manager of Record, as defined by Chapter 138, Section 26 (the
“Manager”), will be personally responsible for that employee, and any violation of these
regulations committed by the employee will be treated as if the Manager and/or Licensee
had committed the violation. Managers and Assistant Managers shall obtain Alcohol
Training Program certification prior to assuming the duties of Manager or Assistant
Manager. The Licensee shall strongly encourage all alcohol servers to attend periodic
retraining programs at least bi-annually that reinforce the certification training described
herein. The retraining programs underscore the importance of proper server training on the
dangers associated with alcohol abuse on Licensed Premises.
3.  Management ID Cards. City of Framingham Alcohol Management Identification Cards
(the “Management ID Card”) shall be required for all Managers and Assistant Managers, 
who shall be registered with the Framingham Police Department prior to assuming the
duties as Manager or Assistant Manager. The Management ID Card shall be carried on the
Manager and Assistant Manager’s person or shall be otherwise be available for inspection at
the Licensed Premises. The Licensee shall keep on file at the Licensed Premises photocopies
of the Management ID Cards. Any Manager or Assistant Manager who allegedly violates
any provision of the Laws is required to attend the Board hearing conducted in accordance
with Article XIV herein. Failure to attend said hearing may result in the revocation of the
Manager or Assistant Manager’sID Card by the Framingham Police Department. Violation
of this section shall further subject Licensees and management to penalties under Article
XIV as may be imposed by the Board.
4.  Identification of Patrons. Licensees shall ensure that the identification of persons 
purchasing alcoholic beverages occurs at the point of sale or service. Wristbands, stickers,
or any other kind of markings/marking devices are prohibited as a method of
Page 2 of 21
Page 66
identifying persons to be served alcoholic beverages.
5.  Prohibition Against Happy Hours and Discounted Sales. “Happy Hours” are prohibited
at any Licensed Premises. As used herein, Happy Hours shall be defined as the sale of
alcoholic beverages at a “two-for-one” price or any promotion or discount on the sale of
alcoholic beverages. Further:
A.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for less than the actual cost of the beverage to
the licensee. An admission charge shall not be credited towards the purchase price of
any alcoholic beverage.
B.  All licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks to be
served and drunk on the licensed premises. Prices shall be effective for not less than
one calendar week.
C.  No licensee, employee or agent of a licensee shall:
i.  Offer or deliver any free drinks to any person or group.
ii.  Deliver more than two drinks to one person at one time.
iii.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group any drinks at a price less
than the price regularly charged during the same calendar week, except at a
private function that is not open to the general public.
iv.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person an unlimited number of drinks
during a set period of time for a fixed price, except at private function
that is not open to the general public.
v.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver drinks to any person or group of persons on
any one day at prices less than those charged to the general public on that
day, except at a private function this is not open to the public.
vi.  Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink without
increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for the drink during
the same calendar week.
vii. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
viii. No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or
without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this
section.
6.  Nothing contained in this Section II.5 shall be construed to prohibit Licensees from 
offering free food or entertainment at any time; including a drink as part of a meal package;
the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one
person; or to prohibit those licensed under Chapter 138, Section 15, from offering free
tastings as allowed under Chapter 138.
Page 3 of 21
Page 67
7.  Cover Charges. Cover charges are not permitted except in compliance with 
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 140, Section 183D and Alcoholic Beverages
Control Commission 204 CMR 2.16.
8.  Public Need; Discretion of the Board. The licensing of establishments and vendors
serving and selling alcoholic beverages, and the determination of public need and 
convenience in the City is subject to the informed discretion of the Board, consistent with
the Laws.
9.  Inspection of Licensed Premises.
9.1.  The Licensed Premises shall be subject, at all times, to inspection by the Mayor or
his/her designee(s), the Board of Health or its designee, the City Health Agent, the 
Department of Public Works, Police, Fire, or any other department or official of the City of
Framingham.
9.2.  The Police Department shall have the authority to investigate potential violations
of the Laws on or about the Licensed Premises on behalf of the Board, and to conduct other
such enforcement as the Chief of Police deems appropriate, including the use of plainclothes
police officers for the purposes of ensuring compliance with the Laws.
9.3  The Board shall have the authority to refer potential violations of any Laws to the
Framingham Police Department, which shall be handled in accordance with subsection 9.2
above.
10. No Employee Consumption of Alcohol. No employee or person holding an ownership
interest in the Licensee, or any employee acting in any type of management capacity shall
consume alcohol on the Licensed Premises prior to going on duty or during their respective
on duty hours.
11. Common Victualer; Prohibition Against Keeping Alcoholic Beverages Onsite. 
Common Victualer Licensees operating without a duly authorized alcoholic beverages
license are not permitted to keep alcoholic beverages on its Licensed Premises, except for a
commercially reasonable quantity used exclusively in preparation of certain specialty
foods.
12. Annual Education Seminar. The City shall conduct an annual Alcohol Education Seminar. 
Notice of said seminar will be provided to each Licensee no less than ten (10) days prior to
the date of said seminar and shall be posted at City Hall at least ten (10) days prior to the date
of the seminar. Each Licensee is strongly encouraged to attend the Annual Education 
Seminar. Failure to attend the seminar shall not constitute a defense to any alleged violation
of the Laws. Each Licensee is required to have knowledge of the requirements of the Laws, 
and such knowledge will be imputed to Licensees regardless of their attendance or non-
attendance at the annual Alcohol Education Seminar sponsored by the City.
Page 4 of 21
Page 68
III. Hours of Operation
1. In accordance with Chapter 138, Section 12 the “Official Opening and Closing Hours” are
those which are designated on the Licensee’s alcoholic beverages License. “Last call” for 
alcoholic beverages shall be at least fifteen (15) minutes before the Licensee’s “Official 
Closing Hour.”
2. No alcoholic beverages may be served after the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
3. With the exception of any Licensee primarily operating as a movie theater, all tables and bars
must be cleared of all glasses, bottles, and containers of alcoholic beverages within thirty (30) 
minutes after the “Official Closing Hour” and all customers must be off the Licensed Premises
by the “Official Closing Hour”. Subject to Article III Section 5 of these Regulations, owners
and employees of the Licensee must be off the Licensed Premises no later than sixty (60) 
minutes after the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
4. For any Licensee primarily operating as a movie theater, all tables and bars must be cleared of
all glasses, bottles and containers of alcoholic beverages and all customers must be off the
Licensed Premises within thirty (30) minutes after the conclusion of any movies in progress at
the time of the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
5. Owners and their employees and contractors may be on the Licensed Premises at any time for
the purpose of cleaning, making emergency repairs, providing security for the Licensed
Premises, or preparing food for the next day’s business, or opening or closing the business in an
orderly manner.
6. No alcoholic beverage shall be served or consumed on the Licensed Premise before the 
Licensee’s approved and official opening hours or after approved and “Official Closing 
Hours.” Patrons of any Licensed Premises are not permitted to bring alcoholic beverages on
the Licensed Premises.
7. A violation of any of the restrictions contained in this Article III shall constitute a violation of
the Regulations and shall subject the Licensee to possible discipline and/or penalties by the
Board in accordance with the procedure set forth in Article XIV herein.
IV. Change of Manager
1.  Timeline Requirements for Filing a Change of Manager Application. An application for
Change of Manager of Record or Assistant Manager must be filed with the Board at least two (2) weeks
before the proposed effective date of the change (“Change of Management Notice Deadline”), unless the
Manager of Record has terminated his or her employment without prior notice to the Licensee or is
terminated by Licensee under circumstances which do not reasonably allow for advance Change of 
Management Deadline Notice (“Early Management Termination”). In the event of Early Management
Termination, the Licensee must, within thirty (30) days of such termination, notify the Board of: (a) the
basic facts surrounding such termination; (ii) the name of the person who will discharge the duties of
Manager pending selection and approval of a new Manager of Record; and
Page 5 of 21
Page 69
(iii) shall file the application for a Change of Manager no more than thirty (30) days after the departure of
the approved Manager of Record. If the Board finds that the circumstances justify the noncompliance with
the Change of Manager Notice Timeline, no penalty will be imposed so long as the Licensee complies with
subsections (i) through (iii) above. If the circumstances for the delay are not found to be sufficient, or if the
application for a Change of Manager is filed more than thirty (30) days after the departure of the Manager of
Record, the Board may impose a penalty or suspension of up to one (1) day of suspension for each day of 
unjustified non-compliance or for each day that passes beyond the passage of thirty (30) days after departure
of the Manager of Record before the application for a new manager is filed, or such other penalty permitted
by Article XIV herein. In addition to the foregoing, the Board shall also have the right to impose penalties
for the failure to provide timely notification of the departure of an Assistant Manager. When submitting an
application for change of Manager or Assistant Manager, the Manager or Assistant Manager shall be certified
as an alcohol server and registered with the Police Department prior to submitting the application. Further, 
approval of a change in Manager may be conditioned upon proof of payment of all outstanding local, state, 
and federal taxes and fees.
2.  Manager Background Checks. Upon receipt of an application for an original License, or, in
the case of a new Manager of Record or Assistant Manager, upon being advised of the new Manager of
Record or Assistant Manager’s identity, the Framingham Police Department will conduct a background
check of any proposed Licensee, Manager of Record or Assistant Manager, and such check will include a
review of any existing criminal record. The Board may reject any application where the Licensee’s, 
Manager of Record’s or Assistant Manager’s criminal record indicates, theft, unlawful drug offense(s) (with
the exception of any criminal arrest or conviction relating to possession of marijuana which predate the
enactment of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G), alcohol-related offenses, a propensity for violence,
or other behavior, that, in the opinion of the Board, might disqualify the individual from responsibly
carrying out their duties as Manager of Record or would otherwise put the public at risk.
3.  Violations. A violation of any of subsection 1 regarding change of Manager shall 
constitute a violation of these Regulations and shall subject the Licensee to possible discipline and/or
penalties in accordance with this section or with Article XIV herein.
V.  Responsibilities of Manager of Record:
1.  Authority & Control of Licensed Premises. The Board regards the Manager of Record of
Licensed Premises as the principal representative of the Licensee and as having full authority and control of
the Licensed Premises and of the conduct of all business therein relative to alcoholic beverages, all as
provided in the Laws. An Assistant Manager or other suitable managerial employee capable of fulfilling the
duties of Manager of Record must be listed on the License by the Licensee. This will allow for continuity of
the Manager position should either the Manager of Record or Assistant Manager positions become vacant
during the course of the year.
2.  Responsibilities. Without limiting the scope of the previous subsection, the Board will hold
the Manager of Record responsible for the following:
a. Careful selection of qualified employees of the licensed business, including servers, 
clerks and persons who are engaged with the public in any capacity;
Page 6 of 21
Page 70
b. Training of employees in all matters relating to the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages;
c. Assuring that employees serving alcohol to the public have successfully completed an
alcoholic beverage training program for serving alcohol responsibly and strongly
encourage continual training of employees engaged in serving and selling alcoholic
beverages;
d. Ensuring that no criminal activity, including the sale and distribution of narcotic
drugs, takes place on the Licensed Premises, including within any parking area 
ancillary to or serving the Licensed Premises;
e. Promptly reporting to the Police Department all instances of attempted purchases or
procurement of service of alcoholic beverages by minors, including attempts to gain
access to premises upon which alcoholic beverages are served and from which minors
are excluded, and appropriate action taken by the Licensee in response thereto. Such
appropriate action shall include (1) Reporting to the Registry of Motor Vehicles
instances involving possession or use of a false, forged, or counterfeit license to operate
motor vehicles or identification card issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles; (2) 
confiscation of liquor identification cards or motor vehicle operator’s license presented
by the minor; and (3) if a purchase was made or service was procured, the name of the 
Licensee’s employee participating therein;
f. Enforcement of the Laws with respect to the operation of the licensed business;
g. Ensuring that the Licensed Premises, including the exterior, are kept clean, neat, and
sanitary at all times; and
h. The Board strongly encourages the Manager of Record and/or Assistant Manager to
attend the recommended Annual Alcohol Education Seminar. Failure to attend such
seminar shall not constitute a defense to any violation of the Laws.
3.  Hours on Licensed Premises. Except as provided herein, the Manager of Record must be
a full-time employee or a corporate officer of the Licensee, must be engaged exclusively in the
management of the licensed business, and must be a qualified seller or server of alcoholic beverages
registered with the Framingham Police Department. The Manager of Record shall not undertake any non-
managerial position(s) (i.e., bartender, server, cook) or any other role which interferes with the Manager of
Record’s oversight of the Licensed Premises. The Manager of Record must be on the Licensed Premises at
least forty (40) hours per week in the course of business, consistent with the permitted hours of operation.
When the Manager of Record is not upon the Licensed Premises, the person in charge of the business must
be an Assistant Manager or a qualified seller or server of alcoholic beverages registered with the
Framingham Police Department and designated by the approved Manager of Record to have charge of the
business in the Manager’s absence. The Manager of Record shall be responsible for the operation of the
business whether or not on the Licensed Premises. When the Manager of Record is not upon the Licensed
Premises, a method 
Page 7 of 21
Page 71
of contacting the Manager of Record promptly must be arranged so that the Manager of Record can be
reached at all times by the person designated to be in charge of the Licensed Premises. The provisions of
the first sentence of this subsection shall not apply to any Licensee holding a license issued under Chapter
138, Section 12 to a veterans’ organization or to a Licensee holding a license issued to a club under
Chapter 138, Section 17.
4.  Failure of the Manager of Record to comply with this policy or to properly discharge the
duties of manager may result in removal as Manager or suspension or revocation of the License as may be
appropriate to the circumstances.
VI. Procedure for Obtaining Liquor Licenses
The applicant for a License of any type should submit a letter to the Board outlining the proposal
with a completed application and include a request for a hearing with the Board. The applicant should
request to be placed on the agenda and publish a public notice of the date selected for the hearing in
accordance with Chapter 138. At a duly noticed public hearing, the Board will consider the application for a
License and the input of any interested members of the public. The Board will then consider the application
and respond in a timely manner to the applicant. The Board shall provide a copy of these Regulations to
each Licensee at the time when they pick up their annual license. The Licensee shall sign a receipt to be
maintained by the Board evidencing their receipt of a copy of these Regulations.
Pursuant to Chapter 138, Section 15A, where there are no premises actually in existence at the time
the application for a License is made, the applicant shall file a plan showing the actual dimensions of
premises which are to be constructed on which the License is to be exercised. A License granted under this
provision shall be upon the condition that such License shall not be issued until completion of the Licensed
Premises in accordance with the plan, and the decision of the Board as to whether the plan has been
complied with shall be final. The Board may include as a condition of such License that the Licensed
Premises be completed in accordance with the plan by a date certain or the License shall be deemed null and
void. Said specified completion date may be extended by the Board in its sole discretion upon written
request by the applicant submitted to the Board at least 45 days prior to the expiration of the initial
anticipated completion date as stated in the License.
VII. Considerations for Approval of New License or Transfer:
The Board will consider any or all of the following that can be reasonably offered in support of a
particular License application:
1. The applicant is a qualified Veterans’ organization and seeks a club license.
2. Subject to applicable zoning requirements, the applicant proposes an establishment that offers
a regular forum for music and musicians to play and obtain exposure for their work.
3. The applicant offers variety, or uniqueness, in its proposed establishment or shop, in
contrast to what exists in the City of Framingham at the time of the application.
4. The applicant demonstrates the elements for public need for the License particular location.
5. The applicant proposes an establishment that offers a substantial economic benefit to the City
of Framingham. 
Page 8 of 21
Page 72
6. Where the application pertains to a License to be issued pursuant to Chapter 138, Section 12, the
applicant offers, in addition to alcoholic beverages, a variety of non-alcoholic beverages (or
beverages containing only trace amounts of alcohol), such as mocktails, craft sodas, teas, 
kombucha, and non-alcoholic beer and wine, which are distinct from traditional non-alcoholic
beverages (water, soda, juice, etc.).
7. Proposals for off-premises retail establishments to be located in shopping malls or high-
density retail areas, either as new Licenses or transfers, are discouraged if the applicant’s
proposed License application duplicates or is similar to Licensed Premises presently located
in the area.
VIII. Modifications to Licensed Premises
Once a License is issued, no material physical changes to the Licensed Premises shall be made without the
prior approval of the Board. For the purpose of these Regulations, a material physical change shall be
considered a change in location or number of seats, location of bar, addition or reduction in square footage,
or any other change sufficient to require a building permit from the City of Framingham.
IX. Transfers of License
Licensees may request that their License be transferred to a third party. A $500 fee shall accompany each
application for ownership or transfer of location. Applications for transfer of ownership or location shall be
processed similarly to an original License application and the Board is not required to grant such transfer
requests. Approval of a transfer of majority ownership further may be conditioned upon the proof of
payment of all outstanding local, state, and federal taxes including, without limiting, the following: receipts
showing remittance to the proper taxing authorities of sales taxes, excise taxes and withheld federal and state
income taxes. Transfers of ownership to trustees in Bankruptcy, court- appointed receivers, or to assignees 
for the benefit of the creditors and those taking title or possession of the Licensed Premises by, through or
under them will not be deemed to transfer or convey any rights to the license or the renewal or transfer of
such license, unless provided by contrary superior law. Bona fide mortgagees in possession who are listed in
the application as holding such interest shall be treated in the same manner as the original majority
ownership license. A public hearing shall be required for any transfers of ownership or location, including, 
but not limited to transfers to mortgagees.
X.  Distribution of Regulations
These Regulations, in their most updated form, shall be provided to all Licensees upon issuance of
their License and, further, shall be regularly available at the City of Framingham Licensing Department and
online at the City of Framingham Board of License Commissioner’s webpage. These Regulations shall be
appended to each annual license issued by the Board. The Licensee may not pick up his/her annual license
until the Licensee has signed a receipt acknowledging that a copy of these Regulations has been received. A
copy of the most updated Regulations shall be maintained on the Licensed Premises at all times and shall be
available for inspection upon request. 
Page 9 of 21
Page 73
XI. Filing Fees and Annual Licensing Fees
Filing Fees and Annual Licensing Fees shall be determined by the Board and made publicly available at the
administrative offices of the Board at City Hall and online at the Board’s webpage at 
 www.framingamma.gov.
XII. Miscellaneous Operating Provisions
1.  Exterior Doors. Exterior doors to the Licensed Premises must remain closed, but not
locked, during all times that the Licensed Premises are open for business.
2.  Access to Licensed Premises. The Licensee shall ensure that the Framingham Police 
Department, the Framingham Fire Department, and authorized agents of the Board shall have
immediate access to the Licensed Premises at all times and under all circumstances.
3.  Underage Service. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold to anyone under the age of 21
years. It shall be a defense to any alleged claim of sale of alcohol to a minor if the Licensee
can show that the patron produced a valid Massachusetts driver’s license, a valid
Massachusetts Liquor Identification Card, a valid Passport issued by the United States or
by a government of a foreign country recognized by the United States government, or a
valid U.S. issued Military ID card or a valid U.S. Passport Card. Licensees may accept out
of state licenses as proof of age but Licensees shall bear the risk that such licenses are real
and valid.
4.  Responsible Operations. The Licensee shall ensure that all business within the Licensed
Premises, and within areas under the Licensee’s control that abut the Licensed Premises, is
conducted in a responsible manner so that no activity shall detract from the quality of life in
the City generally, or in the neighborhood in which the Licensed Premises is located. This
shall include, but not be limited to, ensuring that there shall be no disorder, unlawful use or
sale of drugs, indecency, prostitution, assaults, lewdness, or gambling on or about the
Licensed Premises.
5.  Sale to Intoxicated Persons. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or delivered to an
intoxicated person.
6.  Off-Premises Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. No patron may remove any alcoholic
beverage from Chapter 138, Section 12 on-premises Licensed Premises, unless the patron is
taking off the premises of a restaurant or hotel a resealed bottle of partially consumed wine
as regulated by Chapter 138, Section 12 and the Rules and Regulations of the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission.
7.  Entertainment. No Licensee shall provide or allow entertainment unless an 
entertainment license has been obtained from the Board (or Mayor of Framingham, if on a
Sunday).
8.  No Discrimination. No Licensee shall make any distinction, discrimination, or
Page 10 of 21
Page 74
restriction on account of race, color, creed, sex, sexual/gender orientation or designation, or
ancestry relative to the admission or treatment of any person.
9.  Bottle Service. “Bottle Service” (i.e., the sale and/or service of an entire bottle of hard
alcohol or spirits) shall be strictly prohibited unless expressly authorized in advance by the
Board. Any licensee authorized for Bottle Service shall have the term “Bottle Service,”
along with any relevant conditions included on the physical License displayed at the
Licensed Premises. The Board shall have the authority to deny or condition an application
for Bottle Service in its sole discretion.
XIII. One-Day Licenses
Individuals holding social events and the following types of organizations are eligible for one-day
alcoholic beverage licenses under these Regulations:
1.  Civic or municipal organizations;
2.  Commercial establishments;
3.  Fraternal organizations;
4.  Non-profit organizations;
5.  Non-profit unincorporated associations;
6.  Unincorporated groups or organizations not engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages
forprofit;
7.  Service clubs; and
8.  Veteran’s organizations
Other organizations or individuals may submit applications for consideration.
Criteria for Approval for One-Day Licenses:
A. The following matters will be taken into account in approving one-day licenses:
1. ADMISSION AGE: The Board will not deny a one-day license for a function at which individuals
to whom alcoholic beverages may not be supplied are present, but the Board will require that a
sufficient number of trained servers be present to assure compliance with the laws governing the sale
of furnishing of alcoholic beverages to such persons.
2. FREQUENCY: One-day licenses are to be issued primarily to applicants sponsoring functions that
are not held more than once annually. Except for applicants that are in the business of catering or
accommodating individual functions, one-day licenses are not intended as an alternative to an
annual license.
B.  Acceptance of Conditions. Acceptance of a one-day license under this policy will be deemed to be an
acceptance of the following conditions of the license and an agreement with the City of Framingham
to be bound thereby:
1. Certification of Servers: 
Page 11 of 21
Page 75
All persons engaged in furnishing alcoholic beverages at a licensed function, whether by sale or
without charge, are required to be certified servers. All servers must be certified as having 
completed an approved alcoholic beverage training program and have evidence of such valid 
certification in their possession. Commercial caterers and accommodators must be registered with
the Framingham Police Department.
2. Number of Service Providers:
The number of bartenders and servers shall be recommended to the Board by the officer of the
Framingham Police Department designated to review applications for one day licenses and shall be
determined by the Board as appropriate for the number of persons estimated to be in attendance
and the nature of the event. For functions at which attendance is by invitation only, the number of
persons included in the invitations shall be used.
3. Hours of Service of Alcoholic Beverages:
The hours of sale and service for all one-day licenses shall be no later than 1:00 a.m. The “last call”
for all such licenses shall be no later than 12:30 a.m. The function shall conclude at 1:00 a.m., at
the same hour as the license. Entertainment licenses shall state that the function shall conclude at
1:00 a.m.
4. Number of Persons on Premises:
The number of persons may not exceed the occupancy limits allowed by law for the premises on
which the license will be exercised.
5. Police Detail:
The number of officers, if any, and the hours during which a police detail will be required within the
Licensed Premises and, if required, for orderly parking and traffic control will be recommended by
the Police Department. Generally, those hours will include the entire duration of the function, 
including after service hours. The factors to be considered include the location of the premises, 
availability of on-site parking, the number of persons estimated to be in attendance and the time and
duration of the function.
6. Insurance:
When a one-day license is granted to be exercised on City-owned land or a City-owned
facility, the Licensee shall procure policies of insurance as provided herein. The Licensee shall
furnish certificates in form and substance satisfactory to the City evidencing each such insurance
coverage to the City prior to the issuance of the license.
(a) A Comprehensive General Liability policy on an occurrence basis endorsed to include
broad form comprehensive general liability including coverage for service of alcoholic
beverages with a combined single limit of liability of not less than
$1,000,000.00. The policy shall name the City, and its officers, agents, servants,
Page 12 of 21
Page 76
officials, representatives, employees, and consultants as additionally insured parties.
(b) The Licensee shall provide Workers’ Compensation Insurance as required by law.
(c) An Umbrella/Excess Liability insurance policy on an occurrence basis “following form”
of the primary coverage with a limit of liability of $5,000,000.00. The Umbrella/Excess
Liability insurance policy shall include but not be limited to the following coverage for
bodily injury, property damage and personal injury: (i) Premises - Operations Liability; 
(ii) Contractual Liability; (iii) Automobile Liability for owned, non-owned and hired
vehicles. The City, its officers, agents, servants, officials, representatives, consultants, 
and employees shall be named as additional insureds.
(d) All insurance shall be issued by insurance companies authorized to do insurance 
business in Massachusetts and rated not less than A-VIII in Best’s Insurance Guide and
will not be subject to cancellation or modification without thirty days prior written
notice to the City.
(e) Each policy of insurance obtained by Licensee hereunder shall contain a clause
denying the insurer any right of subrogation against the City.
C.  Additional Provisions. The following additional provisions shall apply to one day
licenses.
1. Departmental Approvals:
The Board of Health and the Inspectional Services Department must approve the Licensed 
Premises, including, where applicable, food service equipment. For any function to which the
general public will be admitted, the Inspectional Services Department must approve the Licensed
Premises as meeting handicap accessibility requirements.
2. Neighborhood Impact:
The applicant or such other person designated by name, address and local telephone number in the
application will be responsible for the orderly conduct of the function for which the license is issued.
Consumption of alcoholic beverage outside of the structure within which the Licensed Premises, i.e.,
where the function is held will not be permitted. Music, noise, or other function- related activities
must not create an undue imposition upon any adjacent residences. Police detail officers will be
instructed to respond appropriately to complaints. Such response may include an order to terminate
the event or otherwise limit the offending activity.
3. Submission of Applications:
One-day License applications must be complete and submitted to the Licensing Office no later than
noon fourteen days prior to the date of the function Applicants should note that if an application is
denied by the Board Chair, and review by the Board is sought, the application
Page 13 of 21
Page 77
must have been submitted sufficiently in advance of the event to allow review of the denial at a
regular meeting of the Board as provided below.
After submission, each application will be reviewed by the Health Department, Inspectional 
Services (including issues of handicap accessibility, if required), the Treasurer Collectors Office, 
Fire Department, and the Police Department (as to police detail required and number recommended
of bar tenders and servers). The Board Chair, or delegate(s), is hereby authorized to approve on
behalf of the Board one-day licenses meeting the requirements of this policy.
Applications that are not approved by the Board Chair may be brought to the Board for approval
and shall be accompanied by the Board Chair’s summary of reasons for declining approval. The
office of the Licensing Board must receive such requests for Board approval not later than noon on
the Tuesday of the calendar week before the day on which the licensed function is to begin.
4. License Application Fee:
a. No fee will be charged for one-day licenses for charitable fundraisers whether
or not the application is submitted by the real party in interest or by a caterer or
accommodator or other commercial provider.
b. One-day licenses for events associated with commercial activities such as
business promotional activities, business meetings, conventions, trade
association events, etc., will be charged a fee of
$50.00 for each license application.
XIV. Penalties, Procedure and Structure for Violations of the Ordinance and Regulations
A.  Purpose
The purpose of this penalty structure is to improve the ability of the Board to prevent alcohol abuse
and violation of the Laws. This Article XIV will help to achieve reasonable uniformity in the imposition of
penalties and to avoid confusion in the minds of the public, patrons, and Licensees due to a lack of
understanding of the consequences of violating the Laws and License terms. This Article XIV is intended to
empower the Board to consider the circumstances of each case and provide a mechanism by which
Licensees can improve their compliance with the Laws in the future.
B.  General Provisions
1. No Illegality on Premises. No Licensee shall permit any illegality to occur on the Licensed
Premises, regardless of whether such illegality relates to the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages. The Manager of Record shall at all times maintain order and decorum on the
premises and in the immediately surrounding area of the premises and shall cooperate with
City officials in ensuring safe and orderly facilities.
2. Reporting of Incidents. All violations of the Laws are to be reported to the Framingham
Page 14 of 21
Page 78
Police Department by the owner, Manager, Assistant Manager, or any employee of the Licensee
that becomes aware of an offense involving the Licensed Premises within twenty-four hours of
said violation unless the incident is serious enough to comprise public safety and needs
immediate attention at which time Framingham Police shall be notified forthwith. Failure to
report a violation involving the Licensed Premises constitutes a violation of these Regulations
and will subject the Licensee to appropriate discipline in accordance with the procedure set
forth herein.
3. Penalties; Generally. Penalties for offenses shall be in line with the City’s general goals of
protecting public safety and the general welfare. Penalties will also be imposed with the goal of
preventing future offenses. A violation of these Regulations alone (rather than state law or the
Ordinances) may give rise to the issuance of penalties pursuant to this Article to the extent
permitted under law. The nature and severity of the penalties imposed will be decided
according to the nature of the offense and the presence of mitigating or aggravating
circumstances as further described herein. All offenses by Licensees will result in the
imposition of a penalty of some degree. This will impress upon Licensees, managers, and
servers their responsibility for ensuring compliance with these Regulations, for prevention of
offenses and for compliance with the terms of licenses and the liquor laws of the
Commonwealth.
a. Types/Categories of License Penalties. Penalties by the Board may consist of any
one or more of the following as appropriate: (a) Revocation of License; (b) 
Suspension of License; (c) Modification of License; (d) Imposition of New 
Conditions on the License; (e) Imposition of Monetary Fines; (f) Mandatory 
Participation in Alcohol Abuse and Offense Prevention Programs; and/or (g) any
other reasonable penalty, in the Board’s reasonable discretion.
b. Penalty Guidelines. The penalty guidelines stated in these Regulations are intended
to provide indication of the range of penalties the Board will impose if a hearing is
held on any offense. The Board will refer to these guidelines by deciding whether to
approve a negotiated recommended resolution.
4. Police Department Recommendation; Negotiation Procedure; Record Keeping. The Police
Department is authorized to negotiate with any authorized representative of the Licensee the
terms upon which the Police Department will recommend to the Board that an offense be
resolved. 
a. Any such negotiated recommended resolution must be in writing, signed by the
Manager of Record or designated representative of the Licensee charged with the
offense and approved by the Police Chief. The recommendation must include a
statement detailing the facts determined in the Police Department investigation. The
recommended resolution is not binding upon the City unless and until approved by the
Board.
b. If the Police Department and the Manager of Record and/or an authorized
representative of the Licensee cannot agree on a recommended resolution, the
Page 15 of 21
Page 79
c. Police Department will make any additional investigation it deems necessary for a
complete presentation of the facts and will file a written report with the Board.
d. The Board may consider, but is not required to accept, a negotiated resolution
recommended by the Police Department. The Board is empowered to consider
alternative penalties consistent with this Article XIV and the Laws.
e. The Police Department and the Board will maintain a public record of offenses and
their disposition that will be indexed according to the Licensee, Manager or Assistant
Manager, server and purchaser involved.
5. Notice to Licensee. Written notice shall be provided to a Licensee of an alleged violation of the
Laws. The notice provided to Licensee may contain the Police Department's recommendation to
the Board concerning the punishment for the alleged violation. The notice will include the date of
the event giving rise to the possible disciplinary action, a description of the event, and a clear
identification of the Laws that are alleged to have been violated as a result of the event. Said
notice will also provide Licensee with the date upon which the Board will hold a hearing
concerning the Licensee's  alleged violation. A notice containing the above-mentioned
information shall be sent to Licensee via certified mail return receipt requested no less than ten
(10) days prior to the date of the hearing before the Board. Licensees are entitled to retain
counsel to represent them at the hearing if they so desire.
6. Written Statement of Disciplinary Action. If the Board decides to take disciplinary action against
the Licensee for a violation of the Laws, the Board will provide the Licensee with a statement of
reasons why disciplinary action was taken against Licensee. The above-mentioned statement of
reasons will be included with the notice of the Board’s disciplinary action.
C.  Determination of Penalties
Penalties will be determined according to the following procedure.
1.  The base level offense(s) will be determined from those offenses described in Article XIV,
Section D.
2.  Adjustments according to the presence of factors that warrant an increase in the penalty
described in Article XIV, Section E ("aggravating factors") or decrease described in Article
XIV, Section F (“mitigating factors") will be considered.
3.  Adjustments according to the number of violations involved in the particular offense will be
considered.
4.  Adjustments according to the offender's acceptance of responsibility described in Article XIV,
Section F will be considered. 
Page 16 of 21
Page 80
5.  Increases according to the number and circumstances of prior violations and penalties
previously imposed upon the offender described in Article XIV, Section G will be 
considered. The Board is entitled to consider fines or suspensions issued by the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission in evaluating said prior violations and penalties.
6.  Increases based on any previous written warnings given by the City to the Licensee will be
considered. Such increases will consider the date(s) of the written warning(s), the reasons
therefore, and the similarity of the incident resulting in the warning with the incident at
issue.
7.  Adjustments according to the consequential misconduct described in Article XIV, 
Section H that is related to the base level violation will be considered.
D. Base level offenses
All references in this subsection are to sections of Chapter 138 unless otherwise noted.
1. Sale outside of permitted hours (Chapter 138, Sections 12 and 15;
2. Purchase by person under age 21 (Chapter 138, Section 34A);
3. Employment by Licensee of person under age 18 for direct handling or selling of
alcohol;
4. Sale or delivery to a person under age 21 for own use or for use of another (Chapter 138, 
Section 34);
5. Sale to an intoxicated person (Chapter 138, Section 69);
6. Hindering or delaying investigation (Chapter 138, Section 63A);
7. Failure to post notice of penalty for driving under the influence and driving while
drinking from open container of alcoholic beverage (Chapter 138, Section 34D);
8. Failure to comply with section 204 CMR 4.03 (“Prohibition Against Happy Hours and
Discounted Sales”) of the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission regulations;
E.  Aggravating Factors
1. Failure to request identification card, operator's license, or passport;
2. Juvenile appearance of purchaser;
3. Use of altered identification; 
Page 17 of 21
Page 81
4. Refusal to cooperate in investigation;
5. Multiple sales on same occasion;
6. Quantity of beverage sold;
7. Staff not suitably trained;
8. Unregistered server;
9. Server unable to provide Server ID card upon request;
10. Underage server;
11. Violations of other laws such as: prostitution, solicitation, drugs
gambling, disorderly conduct, cigarette sales to minor;
12. Concealing violation(s);
13. Furnishing false information to investigator;
14. Exceeding lawful capacity of premises;
15. Intimidating or coercing witnesses or attempting to do so;
16. Offense occurring while under suspension of penalty;
17. Sale occurring while license suspended; and/or
18. The occurrence of any personal injuries or fatalities related to the underlying
violation.
F.  Mitigating Factors
1. Reasonable reliance upon an identification card or operator's license for proof of
identity or age. (Chapter 138, Section 34B);
2. Acceptance of responsibility as shown by:
a. Substantial and voluntary assistance offered in investigation
b. Public acknowledgment of responsibility
c. Agreement to participate in training program by Licensee, manager, and
servers
d. Prompt notice of decision not to contest charge and agreement to proposed
recommended resolution.
e. Agreement to participate in an effective program to detect and prevent future
Page 18 of 21
Page 82
offenses.
3. Attendance at the City’s Annual Alcohol Education Seminar.
4. Successful passing of alcohol compliance stings.
5. Random compliance checks without violations.
G. Previous Violations
1.  Same offense.
2.  Different offense.
3.  Recent prior offense.
4.  Same Manager.
5.  Same server.
6.  Severity of prior penalty.
7.  Offense while under suspension of prior penalty.
H. Consequential Misconduct Related to an Underlying Violation
1.  Operating under the influence.
2.  Causing personal injury or death.
3.  Causing property damage.
4.  Disturbance of the peace.
5.  Domestic violence.
I.  Imposition of Penalties or Other Outcomes
The Board will impose penalties for offenses consistent with this policy.
Offenders may expect one or more of the following consequences as appropriate in the
judgment of the Board.
1. Suspension of license for a stated number of days and specified dates. Licensees are advised
that the following chart only represents guidelines for use by the Chief of Police and the Board
when making their respective recommendation and decision in response to aLicense violation. 
The Board, in accordance with the mitigating and aggravating factors presented above, retain
the authority to deviate from these penalty guidelines where the circumstances are appropriate.
First violation: 1 to 3-day suspension, regardless of amount of penalty suspended, if any;
Second violation: 4 to 6-day suspension, regardless of amount of penalty suspended, if any;
Third violation: 7 to 15-day suspension, regardless of amount of
Page 19 of 21
Page 83
penalty suspended, if any;
Fourth violation: 16 to 30-day suspension, regardless of amount of
penalty suspended, if any;
Fifth violation: 31 days to one year suspension, or revocation, regardless of
amount of penalty suspended, if any:
Sixth violation: Revocation of license for remaining period of current
license and one year beyond.
The Board will consider the longevity of a Licensee when determining suspensions and
penalties based on the following chart:
Years Without a Violation
Less than 3 Years
3 to 5 years
5 to 7 years
7 or more years 
Relief
Subject to the Rules and Regulations of the Board
One day relief (i.e., from three days to two)
Two days’ relief (i.e., from three days to one)
Three or more days’ relief
1. Suspension of License for a stated number of days and specified dates, with a portion of the
suspension deferred upon condition that no further offenses occur within a specified period
of time and that Licensee waives right to hearing upon such further offense.
2. Revocation of License or suspension of registration of server for a specified period of time after
a due process hearing for cause, and thereby limiting or preventing the employment of a server
by a Licensee within the City.
3. Mandatory participation in prevention programs by Licensee, Manager, Assistant
Manager, and server as appropriate.
4. Appropriate publicity of offense and disposition.
While the Board will endeavor to impose penalties upon Licensees in a manner consistent with these
Regulations and this Article XIV, where exigent or special circumstances warrant, such as a
violation of these regulations resulting in serious personal injury or death, the Board retains the
authority in such circumstances to immediately order a full hearing, provide a Licensee an 
opportunity to present evidence, and to revoke a license where the evidence so warrants a
revocation.
J.  Reporting of Violations and Penalties Imposed
The Board shall receive semiannual reports from the Police Department and/or Licensing Administrator
Page 20 of 21
Page 84
detailing violations of these Regulations from the date of the previous reporting period, and the penalties
imposed by the Board for said violations. Reports shall be submitted to the Board no later than May 1 and
November 1 of each year. The Board will use these reports to analyze the factors are commonly associated
with violations, such as over serving, underage serving, failure of serving training or registration, etc. This
process will allow the Board to periodically review this policy and recommend any areas of the policy that
need to be amended, and/or updated. 
# # #
Page 21 of 21
Page 85
LICENSING DEPARTMENT 
Diane R. Willoughby
Licensing Coordinator 
o 508-532-5402
f  508-532-5769
e drw@framinghamma.gov
w www.framinghamma.gov
Agenda Item 3.b. 
Alleged Alcohol Violation Hearing 
MEMORIAL BUILDING
150 Concord Street, Room 203
Framingham, MA 01702 
Mall Liquors, Inc. 
d/b/a Lincoln Liquors
1 Nicholas Road
Hearing Date: April 25, 2022
1. Lt. McCarthy’s Power Point
2. Hearing Notice to Ms. Braga dated April 5, 2022
3. Framingham Rules and Regulations Governing Alcoholic Beverages 7th Revision,
September 1, 2021 (amended and restated December 13, 2021)
Page 1 of 1 
Page 86
Framingham Police Department
April 25, 2022
Lincoln Liquors Violation Hearing
Lieutenant Thomas McCarthy
Licensing Bureau Commander
Page 87
Mall liquors, Inc.
DBA: Lincoln Liquors
1 Nicholas Road
All Alcohol Package Store
Manager of Record: Suzanne Braga
Assistant Manager: Katie Crowley 
Photo courtesy of Google Maps
Page 88
Alcohol compliance check:
• The alcohol compliance checks are conducted on an annual basis
• An underage operative under police supervision enters the establishments without
identification and attempts to purchase alcohol with police issued money
• The process was conducted on various weekdays over a several week period
• Pursuant to ABCC regulations and FPD policy, a notification announcement was
provided to local media outlets and posted on social media approximately four (4) 
weeks in advance
• At the time of the operation, eighty (80) alcohol licenses were active
• All establishments were visited and fifty-two (52) active attempts were conducted
• Ten (10) establishments failed the operation
Page 89
circumstances:
• Monday, December 20, 2021
• At 4:09 p.m. an underage operative entered Lincoln Liquors and purchased a six (6) 
pack of Bud Light Platinum beer
• Identification was never requested by the cashier
• The cashier of four (4) years displayed current alcohol training
Page 90
Violations:
• Violation of MGL Chapter 138 s34 - Sale to an underage person
• Violation of 204 CMR 2.05 (2) - Permitting an illegality (underage sale) 
Page 91
RECORD HISTORY:
• No previous documented violations since the ABCC approved the license in 2012
• The establishment is eligible for three (3) days of relief based on having no violations
for over seven (7) years
• A disposition negotiation meeting was held on February 18, 2022 and an agreement
was reached
Page 92
PENALTY FACTORS:
AGGRAVATING FACTORS:
• Failure to request identification
• Failure to attend the 2022 Annual Alcohol Seminar
MITIGATING FACTORS:
• Establishment cooperated with investigation and accepted responsibility
• Based on strict company policy, the violating cashier was terminated
• Company policies reviewed and internal sting operations planned
Page 93
Agreed upon recommendation:
• One (1) day suspension of the All Alcohol Package Store license to be held in
abeyance for six (6) months
• $300 reimbursement cost payable to the city within thirty (30) days of BOLC decision
• Mall Liquors, Inc. agrees to waive rights to appeal the disposition agreement
Page 94
Page 95
Page 96
Page 97
Page 98
Page 99
Page 100
Page 101
Page 102
Page 103
Page 104
Page 105
Page 106
CITY OF FRAMINGHAM RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Effective Date: September 1, 2008 1st.
Revision: October 2, 2008 2nd.
Revision: December 16, 2008 3rd.
Revision: November 3, 2009 4th 
Revision: May 4, 2011
5th Revision: September 17, 2013
6th Revision: January 1, 2016
7th Revision: September 1, 2021 (amended and restated on December 13, 2021)
By virtue of the authority contained in Chapter 138 of the Massachusetts General Laws (“Chapter
138”), and Article V, Section 1 of the City of Framingham General Ordinances (the “Ordinances”), the
Board of License Commissioners of the City of Framingham, serving as the City’sLiquor Licensing
Authority (the “Board”) hereby promulgates these Rules and Regulations Governing Alcoholic Beverages
(“Regulations”). The Regulations shall supersede all previous regulations or policies issued by the City of
Framingham (the “City”), or, collectively as the preceding licensing authority, the Town of Framingham
and/or Board of Selectmen. The Board has the power under the Ordinances and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts to amend these Regulations periodically from time to time as it sees fit. 
For the purposes hereof, the Regulations, Ordinances, and Chapter 138 shall be collectively referred to as
the “Laws”.
Any license issued for the sale in any manner of any alcoholic beverages (a “License”) shall be
issued on the condition of full compliance with these Regulations. The failure to comply with the Laws and
other Ordinances or rules issued by the City and/or the Board shall constitute sufficient cause or grounds for
refusing to grant the license, or for suspending, canceling, modifying, or revoking such license or permit
already granted, in accordance with Article XIV herein. Any individual, organization, or company licensed
by the Board pursuant to the Laws shall be referred to herein as a “Licensee”.
Any premises licensed by the Board pursuant to the Laws shall be referred to as the “Licensed
Premises”.
I.  Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
Public consumption of alcoholic beverages as defined in Chapter 138, Section 1 is permitted only in
accordance with an appropriate License issued by the Board. Absent an appropriate License issued by the
Board, it is prohibited to drink any alcoholic beverage while on, in or upon any public way or upon any way
to which the public has a right of access; any place to which members of the public have access as invitees
or licensees; a park or playground. It is prohibited to drink any alcoholic beverage while on, in or upon or
private land or place without consent of the owner or person in control thereof. All alcoholic beverages used
in violation of this shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of the charge against the person or
persons arrested or summoned before the court, at which time they shall be returned to the person entitled to
lawful possession.
Page 107
II.  General Provisions Regarding the Administration of Licensed Premises
1.  Licensure Requirements. The applicant for any type of License must meet the
requirements of the Laws.
2.  Alcohol Training Program. The Licensee shall require all employees serving alcohol or
viewing identifications cards to determine age to successfully complete an alcoholic 
beverage server training program which has been approved by the Board (the “Alcohol
Training Program”). The requirement set forth in the preceding sentence shall include and
apply to the Manager (as defined below), Assistant Manager, and all persons responsible for
viewing identification cards to determine the age of patrons for service of alcoholic
beverages.
The Alcohol Training Program may be completed on-line. The Licensee shall require all
employees engaged in serving alcoholic beverages and/or viewing of identification cards to
obtain Alcohol Training Program certification within thirty (30) days of employment and
the Manager shall maintain a list of employee certifications. To the extent an employee
serves alcohol or views identification cards prior to obtaining Alcohol Training Program
certification, the Manager of Record, as defined by Chapter 138, Section 26 (the
“Manager”), will be personally responsible for that employee, and any violation of these
regulations committed by the employee will be treated as if the Manager and/or Licensee
had committed the violation. Managers and Assistant Managers shall obtain Alcohol
Training Program certification prior to assuming the duties of Manager or Assistant
Manager. The Licensee shall strongly encourage all alcohol servers to attend periodic
retraining programs at least bi-annually that reinforce the certification training described
herein. The retraining programs underscore the importance of proper server training on the
dangers associated with alcohol abuse on Licensed Premises.
3.  Management ID Cards. City of Framingham Alcohol Management Identification Cards
(the “Management ID Card”) shall be required for all Managers and Assistant Managers, 
who shall be registered with the Framingham Police Department prior to assuming the
duties as Manager or Assistant Manager. The Management ID Card shall be carried on the
Manager and Assistant Manager’s person or shall be otherwise be available for inspection at
the Licensed Premises. The Licensee shall keep on file at the Licensed Premises photocopies
of the Management ID Cards. Any Manager or Assistant Manager who allegedly violates
any provision of the Laws is required to attend the Board hearing conducted in accordance
with Article XIV herein. Failure to attend said hearing may result in the revocation of the
Manager or Assistant Manager’sID Card by the Framingham Police Department. Violation
of this section shall further subject Licensees and management to penalties under Article
XIV as may be imposed by the Board.
4.  Identification of Patrons. Licensees shall ensure that the identification of persons 
purchasing alcoholic beverages occurs at the point of sale or service. Wristbands, stickers,
or any other kind of markings/marking devices are prohibited as a method of
Page 2 of 21
Page 108
identifying persons to be served alcoholic beverages.
5.  Prohibition Against Happy Hours and Discounted Sales. “Happy Hours” are prohibited
at any Licensed Premises. As used herein, Happy Hours shall be defined as the sale of
alcoholic beverages at a “two-for-one” price or any promotion or discount on the sale of
alcoholic beverages. Further:
A.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for less than the actual cost of the beverage to
the licensee. An admission charge shall not be credited towards the purchase price of
any alcoholic beverage.
B.  All licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks to be
served and drunk on the licensed premises. Prices shall be effective for not less than
one calendar week.
C.  No licensee, employee or agent of a licensee shall:
i.  Offer or deliver any free drinks to any person or group.
ii.  Deliver more than two drinks to one person at one time.
iii.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group any drinks at a price less
than the price regularly charged during the same calendar week, except at a
private function that is not open to the general public.
iv.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person an unlimited number of drinks
during a set period of time for a fixed price, except at private function
that is not open to the general public.
v.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver drinks to any person or group of persons on
any one day at prices less than those charged to the general public on that
day, except at a private function this is not open to the public.
vi.  Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink without
increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for the drink during
the same calendar week.
vii. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
viii. No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or
without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this
section.
6.  Nothing contained in this Section II.5 shall be construed to prohibit Licensees from 
offering free food or entertainment at any time; including a drink as part of a meal package;
the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one
person; or to prohibit those licensed under Chapter 138, Section 15, from offering free
tastings as allowed under Chapter 138.
Page 3 of 21
Page 109
7.  Cover Charges. Cover charges are not permitted except in compliance with 
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 140, Section 183D and Alcoholic Beverages
Control Commission 204 CMR 2.16.
8.  Public Need; Discretion of the Board. The licensing of establishments and vendors
serving and selling alcoholic beverages, and the determination of public need and 
convenience in the City is subject to the informed discretion of the Board, consistent with
the Laws.
9.  Inspection of Licensed Premises.
9.1.  The Licensed Premises shall be subject, at all times, to inspection by the Mayor or
his/her designee(s), the Board of Health or its designee, the City Health Agent, the 
Department of Public Works, Police, Fire, or any other department or official of the City of
Framingham.
9.2.  The Police Department shall have the authority to investigate potential violations
of the Laws on or about the Licensed Premises on behalf of the Board, and to conduct other
such enforcement as the Chief of Police deems appropriate, including the use of plainclothes
police officers for the purposes of ensuring compliance with the Laws.
9.3  The Board shall have the authority to refer potential violations of any Laws to the
Framingham Police Department, which shall be handled in accordance with subsection 9.2
above.
10. No Employee Consumption of Alcohol. No employee or person holding an ownership
interest in the Licensee, or any employee acting in any type of management capacity shall
consume alcohol on the Licensed Premises prior to going on duty or during their respective
on duty hours.
11. Common Victualer; Prohibition Against Keeping Alcoholic Beverages Onsite. 
Common Victualer Licensees operating without a duly authorized alcoholic beverages
license are not permitted to keep alcoholic beverages on its Licensed Premises, except for a
commercially reasonable quantity used exclusively in preparation of certain specialty
foods.
12. Annual Education Seminar. The City shall conduct an annual Alcohol Education Seminar. 
Notice of said seminar will be provided to each Licensee no less than ten (10) days prior to
the date of said seminar and shall be posted at City Hall at least ten (10) days prior to the date
of the seminar. Each Licensee is strongly encouraged to attend the Annual Education 
Seminar. Failure to attend the seminar shall not constitute a defense to any alleged violation
of the Laws. Each Licensee is required to have knowledge of the requirements of the Laws, 
and such knowledge will be imputed to Licensees regardless of their attendance or non-
attendance at the annual Alcohol Education Seminar sponsored by the City.
Page 4 of 21
Page 110
III. Hours of Operation
1. In accordance with Chapter 138, Section 12 the “Official Opening and Closing Hours” are
those which are designated on the Licensee’s alcoholic beverages License. “Last call” for 
alcoholic beverages shall be at least fifteen (15) minutes before the Licensee’s “Official 
Closing Hour.”
2. No alcoholic beverages may be served after the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
3. With the exception of any Licensee primarily operating as a movie theater, all tables and bars
must be cleared of all glasses, bottles, and containers of alcoholic beverages within thirty (30) 
minutes after the “Official Closing Hour” and all customers must be off the Licensed Premises
by the “Official Closing Hour”. Subject to Article III Section 5 of these Regulations, owners
and employees of the Licensee must be off the Licensed Premises no later than sixty (60) 
minutes after the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
4. For any Licensee primarily operating as a movie theater, all tables and bars must be cleared of
all glasses, bottles and containers of alcoholic beverages and all customers must be off the
Licensed Premises within thirty (30) minutes after the conclusion of any movies in progress at
the time of the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
5. Owners and their employees and contractors may be on the Licensed Premises at any time for
the purpose of cleaning, making emergency repairs, providing security for the Licensed
Premises, or preparing food for the next day’s business, or opening or closing the business in an
orderly manner.
6. No alcoholic beverage shall be served or consumed on the Licensed Premise before the 
Licensee’s approved and official opening hours or after approved and “Official Closing 
Hours.” Patrons of any Licensed Premises are not permitted to bring alcoholic beverages on
the Licensed Premises.
7. A violation of any of the restrictions contained in this Article III shall constitute a violation of
the Regulations and shall subject the Licensee to possible discipline and/or penalties by the
Board in accordance with the procedure set forth in Article XIV herein.
IV. Change of Manager
1.  Timeline Requirements for Filing a Change of Manager Application. An application for
Change of Manager of Record or Assistant Manager must be filed with the Board at least two (2) weeks
before the proposed effective date of the change (“Change of Management Notice Deadline”), unless the
Manager of Record has terminated his or her employment without prior notice to the Licensee or is
terminated by Licensee under circumstances which do not reasonably allow for advance Change of 
Management Deadline Notice (“Early Management Termination”). In the event of Early Management
Termination, the Licensee must, within thirty (30) days of such termination, notify the Board of: (a) the
basic facts surrounding such termination; (ii) the name of the person who will discharge the duties of
Manager pending selection and approval of a new Manager of Record; and
Page 5 of 21
Page 111
(iii) shall file the application for a Change of Manager no more than thirty (30) days after the departure of
the approved Manager of Record. If the Board finds that the circumstances justify the noncompliance with
the Change of Manager Notice Timeline, no penalty will be imposed so long as the Licensee complies with
subsections (i) through (iii) above. If the circumstances for the delay are not found to be sufficient, or if the
application for a Change of Manager is filed more than thirty (30) days after the departure of the Manager of
Record, the Board may impose a penalty or suspension of up to one (1) day of suspension for each day of 
unjustified non-compliance or for each day that passes beyond the passage of thirty (30) days after departure
of the Manager of Record before the application for a new manager is filed, or such other penalty permitted
by Article XIV herein. In addition to the foregoing, the Board shall also have the right to impose penalties
for the failure to provide timely notification of the departure of an Assistant Manager. When submitting an
application for change of Manager or Assistant Manager, the Manager or Assistant Manager shall be certified
as an alcohol server and registered with the Police Department prior to submitting the application. Further, 
approval of a change in Manager may be conditioned upon proof of payment of all outstanding local, state, 
and federal taxes and fees.
2.  Manager Background Checks. Upon receipt of an application for an original License, or, in
the case of a new Manager of Record or Assistant Manager, upon being advised of the new Manager of
Record or Assistant Manager’s identity, the Framingham Police Department will conduct a background
check of any proposed Licensee, Manager of Record or Assistant Manager, and such check will include a
review of any existing criminal record. The Board may reject any application where the Licensee’s, 
Manager of Record’s or Assistant Manager’s criminal record indicates, theft, unlawful drug offense(s) (with
the exception of any criminal arrest or conviction relating to possession of marijuana which predate the
enactment of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G), alcohol-related offenses, a propensity for violence,
or other behavior, that, in the opinion of the Board, might disqualify the individual from responsibly
carrying out their duties as Manager of Record or would otherwise put the public at risk.
3.  Violations. A violation of any of subsection 1 regarding change of Manager shall 
constitute a violation of these Regulations and shall subject the Licensee to possible discipline and/or
penalties in accordance with this section or with Article XIV herein.
V.  Responsibilities of Manager of Record:
1.  Authority & Control of Licensed Premises. The Board regards the Manager of Record of
Licensed Premises as the principal representative of the Licensee and as having full authority and control of
the Licensed Premises and of the conduct of all business therein relative to alcoholic beverages, all as
provided in the Laws. An Assistant Manager or other suitable managerial employee capable of fulfilling the
duties of Manager of Record must be listed on the License by the Licensee. This will allow for continuity of
the Manager position should either the Manager of Record or Assistant Manager positions become vacant
during the course of the year.
2.  Responsibilities. Without limiting the scope of the previous subsection, the Board will hold
the Manager of Record responsible for the following:
a. Careful selection of qualified employees of the licensed business, including servers, 
clerks and persons who are engaged with the public in any capacity;
Page 6 of 21
Page 112
b. Training of employees in all matters relating to the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages;
c. Assuring that employees serving alcohol to the public have successfully completed an
alcoholic beverage training program for serving alcohol responsibly and strongly
encourage continual training of employees engaged in serving and selling alcoholic
beverages;
d. Ensuring that no criminal activity, including the sale and distribution of narcotic
drugs, takes place on the Licensed Premises, including within any parking area 
ancillary to or serving the Licensed Premises;
e. Promptly reporting to the Police Department all instances of attempted purchases or
procurement of service of alcoholic beverages by minors, including attempts to gain
access to premises upon which alcoholic beverages are served and from which minors
are excluded, and appropriate action taken by the Licensee in response thereto. Such
appropriate action shall include (1) Reporting to the Registry of Motor Vehicles
instances involving possession or use of a false, forged, or counterfeit license to operate
motor vehicles or identification card issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles; (2) 
confiscation of liquor identification cards or motor vehicle operator’s license presented
by the minor; and (3) if a purchase was made or service was procured, the name of the 
Licensee’s employee participating therein;
f. Enforcement of the Laws with respect to the operation of the licensed business;
g. Ensuring that the Licensed Premises, including the exterior, are kept clean, neat, and
sanitary at all times; and
h. The Board strongly encourages the Manager of Record and/or Assistant Manager to
attend the recommended Annual Alcohol Education Seminar. Failure to attend such
seminar shall not constitute a defense to any violation of the Laws.
3.  Hours on Licensed Premises. Except as provided herein, the Manager of Record must be
a full-time employee or a corporate officer of the Licensee, must be engaged exclusively in the
management of the licensed business, and must be a qualified seller or server of alcoholic beverages
registered with the Framingham Police Department. The Manager of Record shall not undertake any non-
managerial position(s) (i.e., bartender, server, cook) or any other role which interferes with the Manager of
Record’s oversight of the Licensed Premises. The Manager of Record must be on the Licensed Premises at
least forty (40) hours per week in the course of business, consistent with the permitted hours of operation.
When the Manager of Record is not upon the Licensed Premises, the person in charge of the business must
be an Assistant Manager or a qualified seller or server of alcoholic beverages registered with the
Framingham Police Department and designated by the approved Manager of Record to have charge of the
business in the Manager’s absence. The Manager of Record shall be responsible for the operation of the
business whether or not on the Licensed Premises. When the Manager of Record is not upon the Licensed
Premises, a method 
Page 7 of 21
Page 113
of contacting the Manager of Record promptly must be arranged so that the Manager of Record can be
reached at all times by the person designated to be in charge of the Licensed Premises. The provisions of
the first sentence of this subsection shall not apply to any Licensee holding a license issued under Chapter
138, Section 12 to a veterans’ organization or to a Licensee holding a license issued to a club under
Chapter 138, Section 17.
4.  Failure of the Manager of Record to comply with this policy or to properly discharge the
duties of manager may result in removal as Manager or suspension or revocation of the License as may be
appropriate to the circumstances.
VI. Procedure for Obtaining Liquor Licenses
The applicant for a License of any type should submit a letter to the Board outlining the proposal
with a completed application and include a request for a hearing with the Board. The applicant should
request to be placed on the agenda and publish a public notice of the date selected for the hearing in
accordance with Chapter 138. At a duly noticed public hearing, the Board will consider the application for a
License and the input of any interested members of the public. The Board will then consider the application
and respond in a timely manner to the applicant. The Board shall provide a copy of these Regulations to
each Licensee at the time when they pick up their annual license. The Licensee shall sign a receipt to be
maintained by the Board evidencing their receipt of a copy of these Regulations.
Pursuant to Chapter 138, Section 15A, where there are no premises actually in existence at the time
the application for a License is made, the applicant shall file a plan showing the actual dimensions of
premises which are to be constructed on which the License is to be exercised. A License granted under this
provision shall be upon the condition that such License shall not be issued until completion of the Licensed
Premises in accordance with the plan, and the decision of the Board as to whether the plan has been
complied with shall be final. The Board may include as a condition of such License that the Licensed
Premises be completed in accordance with the plan by a date certain or the License shall be deemed null and
void. Said specified completion date may be extended by the Board in its sole discretion upon written
request by the applicant submitted to the Board at least 45 days prior to the expiration of the initial
anticipated completion date as stated in the License.
VII. Considerations for Approval of New License or Transfer:
The Board will consider any or all of the following that can be reasonably offered in support of a
particular License application:
1. The applicant is a qualified Veterans’ organization and seeks a club license.
2. Subject to applicable zoning requirements, the applicant proposes an establishment that offers
a regular forum for music and musicians to play and obtain exposure for their work.
3. The applicant offers variety, or uniqueness, in its proposed establishment or shop, in
contrast to what exists in the City of Framingham at the time of the application.
4. The applicant demonstrates the elements for public need for the License particular location.
5. The applicant proposes an establishment that offers a substantial economic benefit to the City
of Framingham. 
Page 8 of 21
Page 114
6. Where the application pertains to a License to be issued pursuant to Chapter 138, Section 12, the
applicant offers, in addition to alcoholic beverages, a variety of non-alcoholic beverages (or
beverages containing only trace amounts of alcohol), such as mocktails, craft sodas, teas, 
kombucha, and non-alcoholic beer and wine, which are distinct from traditional non-alcoholic
beverages (water, soda, juice, etc.).
7. Proposals for off-premises retail establishments to be located in shopping malls or high-
density retail areas, either as new Licenses or transfers, are discouraged if the applicant’s
proposed License application duplicates or is similar to Licensed Premises presently located
in the area.
VIII. Modifications to Licensed Premises
Once a License is issued, no material physical changes to the Licensed Premises shall be made without the
prior approval of the Board. For the purpose of these Regulations, a material physical change shall be
considered a change in location or number of seats, location of bar, addition or reduction in square footage,
or any other change sufficient to require a building permit from the City of Framingham.
IX. Transfers of License
Licensees may request that their License be transferred to a third party. A $500 fee shall accompany each
application for ownership or transfer of location. Applications for transfer of ownership or location shall be
processed similarly to an original License application and the Board is not required to grant such transfer
requests. Approval of a transfer of majority ownership further may be conditioned upon the proof of
payment of all outstanding local, state, and federal taxes including, without limiting, the following: receipts
showing remittance to the proper taxing authorities of sales taxes, excise taxes and withheld federal and state
income taxes. Transfers of ownership to trustees in Bankruptcy, court- appointed receivers, or to assignees 
for the benefit of the creditors and those taking title or possession of the Licensed Premises by, through or
under them will not be deemed to transfer or convey any rights to the license or the renewal or transfer of
such license, unless provided by contrary superior law. Bona fide mortgagees in possession who are listed in
the application as holding such interest shall be treated in the same manner as the original majority
ownership license. A public hearing shall be required for any transfers of ownership or location, including, 
but not limited to transfers to mortgagees.
X.  Distribution of Regulations
These Regulations, in their most updated form, shall be provided to all Licensees upon issuance of
their License and, further, shall be regularly available at the City of Framingham Licensing Department and
online at the City of Framingham Board of License Commissioner’s webpage. These Regulations shall be
appended to each annual license issued by the Board. The Licensee may not pick up his/her annual license
until the Licensee has signed a receipt acknowledging that a copy of these Regulations has been received. A
copy of the most updated Regulations shall be maintained on the Licensed Premises at all times and shall be
available for inspection upon request. 
Page 9 of 21
Page 115
XI. Filing Fees and Annual Licensing Fees
Filing Fees and Annual Licensing Fees shall be determined by the Board and made publicly available at the
administrative offices of the Board at City Hall and online at the Board’s webpage at 
 www.framingamma.gov.
XII. Miscellaneous Operating Provisions
1.  Exterior Doors. Exterior doors to the Licensed Premises must remain closed, but not
locked, during all times that the Licensed Premises are open for business.
2.  Access to Licensed Premises. The Licensee shall ensure that the Framingham Police 
Department, the Framingham Fire Department, and authorized agents of the Board shall have
immediate access to the Licensed Premises at all times and under all circumstances.
3.  Underage Service. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold to anyone under the age of 21
years. It shall be a defense to any alleged claim of sale of alcohol to a minor if the Licensee
can show that the patron produced a valid Massachusetts driver’s license, a valid
Massachusetts Liquor Identification Card, a valid Passport issued by the United States or
by a government of a foreign country recognized by the United States government, or a
valid U.S. issued Military ID card or a valid U.S. Passport Card. Licensees may accept out
of state licenses as proof of age but Licensees shall bear the risk that such licenses are real
and valid.
4.  Responsible Operations. The Licensee shall ensure that all business within the Licensed
Premises, and within areas under the Licensee’s control that abut the Licensed Premises, is
conducted in a responsible manner so that no activity shall detract from the quality of life in
the City generally, or in the neighborhood in which the Licensed Premises is located. This
shall include, but not be limited to, ensuring that there shall be no disorder, unlawful use or
sale of drugs, indecency, prostitution, assaults, lewdness, or gambling on or about the
Licensed Premises.
5.  Sale to Intoxicated Persons. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or delivered to an
intoxicated person.
6.  Off-Premises Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. No patron may remove any alcoholic
beverage from Chapter 138, Section 12 on-premises Licensed Premises, unless the patron is
taking off the premises of a restaurant or hotel a resealed bottle of partially consumed wine
as regulated by Chapter 138, Section 12 and the Rules and Regulations of the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission.
7.  Entertainment. No Licensee shall provide or allow entertainment unless an 
entertainment license has been obtained from the Board (or Mayor of Framingham, if on a
Sunday).
8.  No Discrimination. No Licensee shall make any distinction, discrimination, or
Page 10 of 21
Page 116
restriction on account of race, color, creed, sex, sexual/gender orientation or designation, or
ancestry relative to the admission or treatment of any person.
9.  Bottle Service. “Bottle Service” (i.e., the sale and/or service of an entire bottle of hard
alcohol or spirits) shall be strictly prohibited unless expressly authorized in advance by the
Board. Any licensee authorized for Bottle Service shall have the term “Bottle Service,”
along with any relevant conditions included on the physical License displayed at the
Licensed Premises. The Board shall have the authority to deny or condition an application
for Bottle Service in its sole discretion.
XIII. One-Day Licenses
Individuals holding social events and the following types of organizations are eligible for one-day
alcoholic beverage licenses under these Regulations:
1.  Civic or municipal organizations;
2.  Commercial establishments;
3.  Fraternal organizations;
4.  Non-profit organizations;
5.  Non-profit unincorporated associations;
6.  Unincorporated groups or organizations not engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages
forprofit;
7.  Service clubs; and
8.  Veteran’s organizations
Other organizations or individuals may submit applications for consideration.
Criteria for Approval for One-Day Licenses:
A. The following matters will be taken into account in approving one-day licenses:
1. ADMISSION AGE: The Board will not deny a one-day license for a function at which individuals
to whom alcoholic beverages may not be supplied are present, but the Board will require that a
sufficient number of trained servers be present to assure compliance with the laws governing the sale
of furnishing of alcoholic beverages to such persons.
2. FREQUENCY: One-day licenses are to be issued primarily to applicants sponsoring functions that
are not held more than once annually. Except for applicants that are in the business of catering or
accommodating individual functions, one-day licenses are not intended as an alternative to an
annual license.
B.  Acceptance of Conditions. Acceptance of a one-day license under this policy will be deemed to be an
acceptance of the following conditions of the license and an agreement with the City of Framingham
to be bound thereby:
1. Certification of Servers: 
Page 11 of 21
Page 117
All persons engaged in furnishing alcoholic beverages at a licensed function, whether by sale or
without charge, are required to be certified servers. All servers must be certified as having 
completed an approved alcoholic beverage training program and have evidence of such valid 
certification in their possession. Commercial caterers and accommodators must be registered with
the Framingham Police Department.
2. Number of Service Providers:
The number of bartenders and servers shall be recommended to the Board by the officer of the
Framingham Police Department designated to review applications for one day licenses and shall be
determined by the Board as appropriate for the number of persons estimated to be in attendance
and the nature of the event. For functions at which attendance is by invitation only, the number of
persons included in the invitations shall be used.
3. Hours of Service of Alcoholic Beverages:
The hours of sale and service for all one-day licenses shall be no later than 1:00 a.m. The “last call”
for all such licenses shall be no later than 12:30 a.m. The function shall conclude at 1:00 a.m., at
the same hour as the license. Entertainment licenses shall state that the function shall conclude at
1:00 a.m.
4. Number of Persons on Premises:
The number of persons may not exceed the occupancy limits allowed by law for the premises on
which the license will be exercised.
5. Police Detail:
The number of officers, if any, and the hours during which a police detail will be required within the
Licensed Premises and, if required, for orderly parking and traffic control will be recommended by
the Police Department. Generally, those hours will include the entire duration of the function, 
including after service hours. The factors to be considered include the location of the premises, 
availability of on-site parking, the number of persons estimated to be in attendance and the time and
duration of the function.
6. Insurance:
When a one-day license is granted to be exercised on City-owned land or a City-owned
facility, the Licensee shall procure policies of insurance as provided herein. The Licensee shall
furnish certificates in form and substance satisfactory to the City evidencing each such insurance
coverage to the City prior to the issuance of the license.
(a) A Comprehensive General Liability policy on an occurrence basis endorsed to include
broad form comprehensive general liability including coverage for service of alcoholic
beverages with a combined single limit of liability of not less than
$1,000,000.00. The policy shall name the City, and its officers, agents, servants,
Page 12 of 21
Page 118
officials, representatives, employees, and consultants as additionally insured parties.
(b) The Licensee shall provide Workers’ Compensation Insurance as required by law.
(c) An Umbrella/Excess Liability insurance policy on an occurrence basis “following form”
of the primary coverage with a limit of liability of $5,000,000.00. The Umbrella/Excess
Liability insurance policy shall include but not be limited to the following coverage for
bodily injury, property damage and personal injury: (i) Premises - Operations Liability; 
(ii) Contractual Liability; (iii) Automobile Liability for owned, non-owned and hired
vehicles. The City, its officers, agents, servants, officials, representatives, consultants, 
and employees shall be named as additional insureds.
(d) All insurance shall be issued by insurance companies authorized to do insurance 
business in Massachusetts and rated not less than A-VIII in Best’s Insurance Guide and
will not be subject to cancellation or modification without thirty days prior written
notice to the City.
(e) Each policy of insurance obtained by Licensee hereunder shall contain a clause
denying the insurer any right of subrogation against the City.
C.  Additional Provisions. The following additional provisions shall apply to one day
licenses.
1. Departmental Approvals:
The Board of Health and the Inspectional Services Department must approve the Licensed 
Premises, including, where applicable, food service equipment. For any function to which the
general public will be admitted, the Inspectional Services Department must approve the Licensed
Premises as meeting handicap accessibility requirements.
2. Neighborhood Impact:
The applicant or such other person designated by name, address and local telephone number in the
application will be responsible for the orderly conduct of the function for which the license is issued.
Consumption of alcoholic beverage outside of the structure within which the Licensed Premises, i.e.,
where the function is held will not be permitted. Music, noise, or other function- related activities
must not create an undue imposition upon any adjacent residences. Police detail officers will be
instructed to respond appropriately to complaints. Such response may include an order to terminate
the event or otherwise limit the offending activity.
3. Submission of Applications:
One-day License applications must be complete and submitted to the Licensing Office no later than
noon fourteen days prior to the date of the function Applicants should note that if an application is
denied by the Board Chair, and review by the Board is sought, the application
Page 13 of 21
Page 119
must have been submitted sufficiently in advance of the event to allow review of the denial at a
regular meeting of the Board as provided below.
After submission, each application will be reviewed by the Health Department, Inspectional 
Services (including issues of handicap accessibility, if required), the Treasurer Collectors Office, 
Fire Department, and the Police Department (as to police detail required and number recommended
of bar tenders and servers). The Board Chair, or delegate(s), is hereby authorized to approve on
behalf of the Board one-day licenses meeting the requirements of this policy.
Applications that are not approved by the Board Chair may be brought to the Board for approval
and shall be accompanied by the Board Chair’s summary of reasons for declining approval. The
office of the Licensing Board must receive such requests for Board approval not later than noon on
the Tuesday of the calendar week before the day on which the licensed function is to begin.
4. License Application Fee:
a. No fee will be charged for one-day licenses for charitable fundraisers whether
or not the application is submitted by the real party in interest or by a caterer or
accommodator or other commercial provider.
b. One-day licenses for events associated with commercial activities such as
business promotional activities, business meetings, conventions, trade
association events, etc., will be charged a fee of
$50.00 for each license application.
XIV. Penalties, Procedure and Structure for Violations of the Ordinance and Regulations
A.  Purpose
The purpose of this penalty structure is to improve the ability of the Board to prevent alcohol abuse
and violation of the Laws. This Article XIV will help to achieve reasonable uniformity in the imposition of
penalties and to avoid confusion in the minds of the public, patrons, and Licensees due to a lack of
understanding of the consequences of violating the Laws and License terms. This Article XIV is intended to
empower the Board to consider the circumstances of each case and provide a mechanism by which
Licensees can improve their compliance with the Laws in the future.
B.  General Provisions
1. No Illegality on Premises. No Licensee shall permit any illegality to occur on the Licensed
Premises, regardless of whether such illegality relates to the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages. The Manager of Record shall at all times maintain order and decorum on the
premises and in the immediately surrounding area of the premises and shall cooperate with
City officials in ensuring safe and orderly facilities.
2. Reporting of Incidents. All violations of the Laws are to be reported to the Framingham
Page 14 of 21
Page 120
Police Department by the owner, Manager, Assistant Manager, or any employee of the Licensee
that becomes aware of an offense involving the Licensed Premises within twenty-four hours of
said violation unless the incident is serious enough to comprise public safety and needs
immediate attention at which time Framingham Police shall be notified forthwith. Failure to
report a violation involving the Licensed Premises constitutes a violation of these Regulations
and will subject the Licensee to appropriate discipline in accordance with the procedure set
forth herein.
3. Penalties; Generally. Penalties for offenses shall be in line with the City’s general goals of
protecting public safety and the general welfare. Penalties will also be imposed with the goal of
preventing future offenses. A violation of these Regulations alone (rather than state law or the
Ordinances) may give rise to the issuance of penalties pursuant to this Article to the extent
permitted under law. The nature and severity of the penalties imposed will be decided
according to the nature of the offense and the presence of mitigating or aggravating
circumstances as further described herein. All offenses by Licensees will result in the
imposition of a penalty of some degree. This will impress upon Licensees, managers, and
servers their responsibility for ensuring compliance with these Regulations, for prevention of
offenses and for compliance with the terms of licenses and the liquor laws of the
Commonwealth.
a. Types/Categories of License Penalties. Penalties by the Board may consist of any
one or more of the following as appropriate: (a) Revocation of License; (b) 
Suspension of License; (c) Modification of License; (d) Imposition of New 
Conditions on the License; (e) Imposition of Monetary Fines; (f) Mandatory 
Participation in Alcohol Abuse and Offense Prevention Programs; and/or (g) any
other reasonable penalty, in the Board’s reasonable discretion.
b. Penalty Guidelines. The penalty guidelines stated in these Regulations are intended
to provide indication of the range of penalties the Board will impose if a hearing is
held on any offense. The Board will refer to these guidelines by deciding whether to
approve a negotiated recommended resolution.
4. Police Department Recommendation; Negotiation Procedure; Record Keeping. The Police
Department is authorized to negotiate with any authorized representative of the Licensee the
terms upon which the Police Department will recommend to the Board that an offense be
resolved. 
a. Any such negotiated recommended resolution must be in writing, signed by the
Manager of Record or designated representative of the Licensee charged with the
offense and approved by the Police Chief. The recommendation must include a
statement detailing the facts determined in the Police Department investigation. The
recommended resolution is not binding upon the City unless and until approved by the
Board.
b. If the Police Department and the Manager of Record and/or an authorized
representative of the Licensee cannot agree on a recommended resolution, the
Page 15 of 21
Page 121
c. Police Department will make any additional investigation it deems necessary for a
complete presentation of the facts and will file a written report with the Board.
d. The Board may consider, but is not required to accept, a negotiated resolution
recommended by the Police Department. The Board is empowered to consider
alternative penalties consistent with this Article XIV and the Laws.
e. The Police Department and the Board will maintain a public record of offenses and
their disposition that will be indexed according to the Licensee, Manager or Assistant
Manager, server and purchaser involved.
5. Notice to Licensee. Written notice shall be provided to a Licensee of an alleged violation of the
Laws. The notice provided to Licensee may contain the Police Department's recommendation to
the Board concerning the punishment for the alleged violation. The notice will include the date of
the event giving rise to the possible disciplinary action, a description of the event, and a clear
identification of the Laws that are alleged to have been violated as a result of the event. Said
notice will also provide Licensee with the date upon which the Board will hold a hearing
concerning the Licensee's  alleged violation. A notice containing the above-mentioned
information shall be sent to Licensee via certified mail return receipt requested no less than ten
(10) days prior to the date of the hearing before the Board. Licensees are entitled to retain
counsel to represent them at the hearing if they so desire.
6. Written Statement of Disciplinary Action. If the Board decides to take disciplinary action against
the Licensee for a violation of the Laws, the Board will provide the Licensee with a statement of
reasons why disciplinary action was taken against Licensee. The above-mentioned statement of
reasons will be included with the notice of the Board’s disciplinary action.
C.  Determination of Penalties
Penalties will be determined according to the following procedure.
1.  The base level offense(s) will be determined from those offenses described in Article XIV,
Section D.
2.  Adjustments according to the presence of factors that warrant an increase in the penalty
described in Article XIV, Section E ("aggravating factors") or decrease described in Article
XIV, Section F (“mitigating factors") will be considered.
3.  Adjustments according to the number of violations involved in the particular offense will be
considered.
4.  Adjustments according to the offender's acceptance of responsibility described in Article XIV,
Section F will be considered. 
Page 16 of 21
Page 122
5.  Increases according to the number and circumstances of prior violations and penalties
previously imposed upon the offender described in Article XIV, Section G will be 
considered. The Board is entitled to consider fines or suspensions issued by the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission in evaluating said prior violations and penalties.
6.  Increases based on any previous written warnings given by the City to the Licensee will be
considered. Such increases will consider the date(s) of the written warning(s), the reasons
therefore, and the similarity of the incident resulting in the warning with the incident at
issue.
7.  Adjustments according to the consequential misconduct described in Article XIV, 
Section H that is related to the base level violation will be considered.
D. Base level offenses
All references in this subsection are to sections of Chapter 138 unless otherwise noted.
1. Sale outside of permitted hours (Chapter 138, Sections 12 and 15;
2. Purchase by person under age 21 (Chapter 138, Section 34A);
3. Employment by Licensee of person under age 18 for direct handling or selling of
alcohol;
4. Sale or delivery to a person under age 21 for own use or for use of another (Chapter 138, 
Section 34);
5. Sale to an intoxicated person (Chapter 138, Section 69);
6. Hindering or delaying investigation (Chapter 138, Section 63A);
7. Failure to post notice of penalty for driving under the influence and driving while
drinking from open container of alcoholic beverage (Chapter 138, Section 34D);
8. Failure to comply with section 204 CMR 4.03 (“Prohibition Against Happy Hours and
Discounted Sales”) of the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission regulations;
E.  Aggravating Factors
1. Failure to request identification card, operator's license, or passport;
2. Juvenile appearance of purchaser;
3. Use of altered identification; 
Page 17 of 21
Page 123
4. Refusal to cooperate in investigation;
5. Multiple sales on same occasion;
6. Quantity of beverage sold;
7. Staff not suitably trained;
8. Unregistered server;
9. Server unable to provide Server ID card upon request;
10. Underage server;
11. Violations of other laws such as: prostitution, solicitation, drugs
gambling, disorderly conduct, cigarette sales to minor;
12. Concealing violation(s);
13. Furnishing false information to investigator;
14. Exceeding lawful capacity of premises;
15. Intimidating or coercing witnesses or attempting to do so;
16. Offense occurring while under suspension of penalty;
17. Sale occurring while license suspended; and/or
18. The occurrence of any personal injuries or fatalities related to the underlying
violation.
F.  Mitigating Factors
1. Reasonable reliance upon an identification card or operator's license for proof of
identity or age. (Chapter 138, Section 34B);
2. Acceptance of responsibility as shown by:
a. Substantial and voluntary assistance offered in investigation
b. Public acknowledgment of responsibility
c. Agreement to participate in training program by Licensee, manager, and
servers
d. Prompt notice of decision not to contest charge and agreement to proposed
recommended resolution.
e. Agreement to participate in an effective program to detect and prevent future
Page 18 of 21
Page 124
offenses.
3. Attendance at the City’s Annual Alcohol Education Seminar.
4. Successful passing of alcohol compliance stings.
5. Random compliance checks without violations.
G. Previous Violations
1.  Same offense.
2.  Different offense.
3.  Recent prior offense.
4.  Same Manager.
5.  Same server.
6.  Severity of prior penalty.
7.  Offense while under suspension of prior penalty.
H. Consequential Misconduct Related to an Underlying Violation
1.  Operating under the influence.
2.  Causing personal injury or death.
3.  Causing property damage.
4.  Disturbance of the peace.
5.  Domestic violence.
I.  Imposition of Penalties or Other Outcomes
The Board will impose penalties for offenses consistent with this policy.
Offenders may expect one or more of the following consequences as appropriate in the
judgment of the Board.
1. Suspension of license for a stated number of days and specified dates. Licensees are advised
that the following chart only represents guidelines for use by the Chief of Police and the Board
when making their respective recommendation and decision in response to aLicense violation. 
The Board, in accordance with the mitigating and aggravating factors presented above, retain
the authority to deviate from these penalty guidelines where the circumstances are appropriate.
First violation: 1 to 3-day suspension, regardless of amount of penalty suspended, if any;
Second violation: 4 to 6-day suspension, regardless of amount of penalty suspended, if any;
Third violation: 7 to 15-day suspension, regardless of amount of
Page 19 of 21
Page 125
penalty suspended, if any;
Fourth violation: 16 to 30-day suspension, regardless of amount of
penalty suspended, if any;
Fifth violation: 31 days to one year suspension, or revocation, regardless of
amount of penalty suspended, if any:
Sixth violation: Revocation of license for remaining period of current
license and one year beyond.
The Board will consider the longevity of a Licensee when determining suspensions and
penalties based on the following chart:
Years Without a Violation
Less than 3 Years
3 to 5 years
5 to 7 years
7 or more years 
Relief
Subject to the Rules and Regulations of the Board
One day relief (i.e., from three days to two)
Two days’ relief (i.e., from three days to one)
Three or more days’ relief
1. Suspension of License for a stated number of days and specified dates, with a portion of the
suspension deferred upon condition that no further offenses occur within a specified period
of time and that Licensee waives right to hearing upon such further offense.
2. Revocation of License or suspension of registration of server for a specified period of time after
a due process hearing for cause, and thereby limiting or preventing the employment of a server
by a Licensee within the City.
3. Mandatory participation in prevention programs by Licensee, Manager, Assistant
Manager, and server as appropriate.
4. Appropriate publicity of offense and disposition.
While the Board will endeavor to impose penalties upon Licensees in a manner consistent with these
Regulations and this Article XIV, where exigent or special circumstances warrant, such as a
violation of these regulations resulting in serious personal injury or death, the Board retains the
authority in such circumstances to immediately order a full hearing, provide a Licensee an 
opportunity to present evidence, and to revoke a license where the evidence so warrants a
revocation.
J.  Reporting of Violations and Penalties Imposed
The Board shall receive semiannual reports from the Police Department and/or Licensing Administrator
Page 20 of 21
Page 126
detailing violations of these Regulations from the date of the previous reporting period, and the penalties
imposed by the Board for said violations. Reports shall be submitted to the Board no later than May 1 and
November 1 of each year. The Board will use these reports to analyze the factors are commonly associated
with violations, such as over serving, underage serving, failure of serving training or registration, etc. This
process will allow the Board to periodically review this policy and recommend any areas of the policy that
need to be amended, and/or updated. 
# # #
Page 21 of 21
Page 127
LICENSING DEPARTMENT 
Diane R. Willoughby
Licensing Coordinator 
o 508-532-5402
f  508-532-5769
e drw@framinghamma.gov
w www.framinghamma.gov
Agenda Item 3.c.
Alleged Alcohol Violation Hearing 
MEMORIAL BUILDING
150 Concord Street, Room 203
Framingham, MA 01702 
Tropical Island, Inc. 
d/b/a Tropical Café
85 Hollis Street
Hearing Date: April 25, 2022
1. Lt. McCarthy’s Power Point
2. Hearing Notice to Ms. Moura dated April 5, 2022
3. Framingham Rules and Regulations Governing Alcoholic Beverages 7th Revision,
September 1, 2021 (amended and restated December 13, 2021)
Page 1 of 1 
Page 128
Framingham Police Department
April 25, 2022
Tropical Island, Inc. Violation
Lieutenant Thomas McCarthy
Licensing Bureau Commander
Page 129
Tropical Island, Inc.
DBA: Tropical Cafe
85 Hollis Street, Framingham
All Alcohol Pouring License
Manager of Record: Solange Moura
Assistant Manager: Luciano Lima
Page 130
Alcohol compliance check:
• The alcohol compliance checks are conducted on an annual basis
• An underage operative under police supervision enters the establishments without
identification and attempts to purchase alcohol with police issued money
• The process was conducted on various weekdays over a several week period
• Pursuant to ABCC regulations and FPD policy, a notification announcement was
provided to local media outlets and posted on social media approximately four (4) 
weeks in advance
• At the time of the operation, eighty (80) alcohol licenses were active
• All establishments were visited and fifty-two (52) active attempts were conducted
• Ten (10) establishments failed the operation
Page 131
circumstances:
• Tuesday, December 28, 2021
• At 2:22 p.m. an underage operative entered Tropical Cafe and ordered a Corona
bottled beer
• Identification was never requested by the waitress
• The waitress displayed current alcohol training
Page 132
Violations:
• Violation of MGL Chapter 138 s34 - Sale to an underage person
• Violation of 204 CMR 2.05 (2) - Permitting an illegality (underage sale) 
Page 133
RECORD HISTORY:
• Two (2) previous documented violations (2017 compliance check failure, September
2021 assault)
• A disposition negotiation meeting was held on February 14, 2022 and an agreement
was reached
Page 134
PENALTY FACTORS:
AGGRAVATING FACTORS:
• Failure to request identification
• Failure to attend the 2022 Annual Alcohol Seminar
MITIGATING FACTORS:
• Establishment cooperated with investigation and accepted responsibility
• Company policies were reviewed with all employees
• Managers conduct weekly meetings with employees to reinforce regulations
• The violating server was suspended for three (3) weeks
Page 135
Agreed upon recommendation:
• Four (4) day suspension of the All Alcohol Pouring License
• Three consecutive (3) days to be served to include a Tuesday with one (1) day held in
abeyance for one (1) year for this violation
• The remaining one (1) day held in abeyance for the previous September violation will
also be served for a total of four (4) consecutive days suspended
• The suspension will be served within thirty (30) days of BOLC decision
• During the suspension period the disposition agreement will be prominently displayed
• If the establishment remains open all alcohol will be covered or removed
• $300 reimbursement cost payable to the city
• Tropical Island, Inc. agrees to waive rights to appeal the disposition agreement
Page 136
Page 137
Page 138
Page 139
Page 140
Page 141
Page 142
Page 143
Page 144
Page 145
Page 146
CITY OF FRAMINGHAM RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Effective Date: September 1, 2008 1st.
Revision: October 2, 2008 2nd.
Revision: December 16, 2008 3rd.
Revision: November 3, 2009 4th 
Revision: May 4, 2011
5th Revision: September 17, 2013
6th Revision: January 1, 2016
7th Revision: September 1, 2021 (amended and restated on December 13, 2021)
By virtue of the authority contained in Chapter 138 of the Massachusetts General Laws (“Chapter
138”), and Article V, Section 1 of the City of Framingham General Ordinances (the “Ordinances”), the
Board of License Commissioners of the City of Framingham, serving as the City’sLiquor Licensing
Authority (the “Board”) hereby promulgates these Rules and Regulations Governing Alcoholic Beverages
(“Regulations”). The Regulations shall supersede all previous regulations or policies issued by the City of
Framingham (the “City”), or, collectively as the preceding licensing authority, the Town of Framingham
and/or Board of Selectmen. The Board has the power under the Ordinances and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts to amend these Regulations periodically from time to time as it sees fit. 
For the purposes hereof, the Regulations, Ordinances, and Chapter 138 shall be collectively referred to as
the “Laws”.
Any license issued for the sale in any manner of any alcoholic beverages (a “License”) shall be
issued on the condition of full compliance with these Regulations. The failure to comply with the Laws and
other Ordinances or rules issued by the City and/or the Board shall constitute sufficient cause or grounds for
refusing to grant the license, or for suspending, canceling, modifying, or revoking such license or permit
already granted, in accordance with Article XIV herein. Any individual, organization, or company licensed
by the Board pursuant to the Laws shall be referred to herein as a “Licensee”.
Any premises licensed by the Board pursuant to the Laws shall be referred to as the “Licensed
Premises”.
I.  Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
Public consumption of alcoholic beverages as defined in Chapter 138, Section 1 is permitted only in
accordance with an appropriate License issued by the Board. Absent an appropriate License issued by the
Board, it is prohibited to drink any alcoholic beverage while on, in or upon any public way or upon any way
to which the public has a right of access; any place to which members of the public have access as invitees
or licensees; a park or playground. It is prohibited to drink any alcoholic beverage while on, in or upon or
private land or place without consent of the owner or person in control thereof. All alcoholic beverages used
in violation of this shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of the charge against the person or
persons arrested or summoned before the court, at which time they shall be returned to the person entitled to
lawful possession.
Page 147
II.  General Provisions Regarding the Administration of Licensed Premises
1.  Licensure Requirements. The applicant for any type of License must meet the
requirements of the Laws.
2.  Alcohol Training Program. The Licensee shall require all employees serving alcohol or
viewing identifications cards to determine age to successfully complete an alcoholic 
beverage server training program which has been approved by the Board (the “Alcohol
Training Program”). The requirement set forth in the preceding sentence shall include and
apply to the Manager (as defined below), Assistant Manager, and all persons responsible for
viewing identification cards to determine the age of patrons for service of alcoholic
beverages.
The Alcohol Training Program may be completed on-line. The Licensee shall require all
employees engaged in serving alcoholic beverages and/or viewing of identification cards to
obtain Alcohol Training Program certification within thirty (30) days of employment and
the Manager shall maintain a list of employee certifications. To the extent an employee
serves alcohol or views identification cards prior to obtaining Alcohol Training Program
certification, the Manager of Record, as defined by Chapter 138, Section 26 (the
“Manager”), will be personally responsible for that employee, and any violation of these
regulations committed by the employee will be treated as if the Manager and/or Licensee
had committed the violation. Managers and Assistant Managers shall obtain Alcohol
Training Program certification prior to assuming the duties of Manager or Assistant
Manager. The Licensee shall strongly encourage all alcohol servers to attend periodic
retraining programs at least bi-annually that reinforce the certification training described
herein. The retraining programs underscore the importance of proper server training on the
dangers associated with alcohol abuse on Licensed Premises.
3.  Management ID Cards. City of Framingham Alcohol Management Identification Cards
(the “Management ID Card”) shall be required for all Managers and Assistant Managers, 
who shall be registered with the Framingham Police Department prior to assuming the
duties as Manager or Assistant Manager. The Management ID Card shall be carried on the
Manager and Assistant Manager’s person or shall be otherwise be available for inspection at
the Licensed Premises. The Licensee shall keep on file at the Licensed Premises photocopies
of the Management ID Cards. Any Manager or Assistant Manager who allegedly violates
any provision of the Laws is required to attend the Board hearing conducted in accordance
with Article XIV herein. Failure to attend said hearing may result in the revocation of the
Manager or Assistant Manager’sID Card by the Framingham Police Department. Violation
of this section shall further subject Licensees and management to penalties under Article
XIV as may be imposed by the Board.
4.  Identification of Patrons. Licensees shall ensure that the identification of persons 
purchasing alcoholic beverages occurs at the point of sale or service. Wristbands, stickers,
or any other kind of markings/marking devices are prohibited as a method of
Page 2 of 21
Page 148
identifying persons to be served alcoholic beverages.
5.  Prohibition Against Happy Hours and Discounted Sales. “Happy Hours” are prohibited
at any Licensed Premises. As used herein, Happy Hours shall be defined as the sale of
alcoholic beverages at a “two-for-one” price or any promotion or discount on the sale of
alcoholic beverages. Further:
A.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for less than the actual cost of the beverage to
the licensee. An admission charge shall not be credited towards the purchase price of
any alcoholic beverage.
B.  All licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks to be
served and drunk on the licensed premises. Prices shall be effective for not less than
one calendar week.
C.  No licensee, employee or agent of a licensee shall:
i.  Offer or deliver any free drinks to any person or group.
ii.  Deliver more than two drinks to one person at one time.
iii.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group any drinks at a price less
than the price regularly charged during the same calendar week, except at a
private function that is not open to the general public.
iv.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person an unlimited number of drinks
during a set period of time for a fixed price, except at private function
that is not open to the general public.
v.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver drinks to any person or group of persons on
any one day at prices less than those charged to the general public on that
day, except at a private function this is not open to the public.
vi.  Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink without
increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for the drink during
the same calendar week.
vii. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
viii. No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or
without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this
section.
6.  Nothing contained in this Section II.5 shall be construed to prohibit Licensees from 
offering free food or entertainment at any time; including a drink as part of a meal package;
the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one
person; or to prohibit those licensed under Chapter 138, Section 15, from offering free
tastings as allowed under Chapter 138.
Page 3 of 21
Page 149
7.  Cover Charges. Cover charges are not permitted except in compliance with 
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 140, Section 183D and Alcoholic Beverages
Control Commission 204 CMR 2.16.
8.  Public Need; Discretion of the Board. The licensing of establishments and vendors
serving and selling alcoholic beverages, and the determination of public need and 
convenience in the City is subject to the informed discretion of the Board, consistent with
the Laws.
9.  Inspection of Licensed Premises.
9.1.  The Licensed Premises shall be subject, at all times, to inspection by the Mayor or
his/her designee(s), the Board of Health or its designee, the City Health Agent, the 
Department of Public Works, Police, Fire, or any other department or official of the City of
Framingham.
9.2.  The Police Department shall have the authority to investigate potential violations
of the Laws on or about the Licensed Premises on behalf of the Board, and to conduct other
such enforcement as the Chief of Police deems appropriate, including the use of plainclothes
police officers for the purposes of ensuring compliance with the Laws.
9.3  The Board shall have the authority to refer potential violations of any Laws to the
Framingham Police Department, which shall be handled in accordance with subsection 9.2
above.
10. No Employee Consumption of Alcohol. No employee or person holding an ownership
interest in the Licensee, or any employee acting in any type of management capacity shall
consume alcohol on the Licensed Premises prior to going on duty or during their respective
on duty hours.
11. Common Victualer; Prohibition Against Keeping Alcoholic Beverages Onsite. 
Common Victualer Licensees operating without a duly authorized alcoholic beverages
license are not permitted to keep alcoholic beverages on its Licensed Premises, except for a
commercially reasonable quantity used exclusively in preparation of certain specialty
foods.
12. Annual Education Seminar. The City shall conduct an annual Alcohol Education Seminar. 
Notice of said seminar will be provided to each Licensee no less than ten (10) days prior to
the date of said seminar and shall be posted at City Hall at least ten (10) days prior to the date
of the seminar. Each Licensee is strongly encouraged to attend the Annual Education 
Seminar. Failure to attend the seminar shall not constitute a defense to any alleged violation
of the Laws. Each Licensee is required to have knowledge of the requirements of the Laws, 
and such knowledge will be imputed to Licensees regardless of their attendance or non-
attendance at the annual Alcohol Education Seminar sponsored by the City.
Page 4 of 21
Page 150
III. Hours of Operation
1. In accordance with Chapter 138, Section 12 the “Official Opening and Closing Hours” are
those which are designated on the Licensee’s alcoholic beverages License. “Last call” for 
alcoholic beverages shall be at least fifteen (15) minutes before the Licensee’s “Official 
Closing Hour.”
2. No alcoholic beverages may be served after the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
3. With the exception of any Licensee primarily operating as a movie theater, all tables and bars
must be cleared of all glasses, bottles, and containers of alcoholic beverages within thirty (30) 
minutes after the “Official Closing Hour” and all customers must be off the Licensed Premises
by the “Official Closing Hour”. Subject to Article III Section 5 of these Regulations, owners
and employees of the Licensee must be off the Licensed Premises no later than sixty (60) 
minutes after the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
4. For any Licensee primarily operating as a movie theater, all tables and bars must be cleared of
all glasses, bottles and containers of alcoholic beverages and all customers must be off the
Licensed Premises within thirty (30) minutes after the conclusion of any movies in progress at
the time of the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
5. Owners and their employees and contractors may be on the Licensed Premises at any time for
the purpose of cleaning, making emergency repairs, providing security for the Licensed
Premises, or preparing food for the next day’s business, or opening or closing the business in an
orderly manner.
6. No alcoholic beverage shall be served or consumed on the Licensed Premise before the 
Licensee’s approved and official opening hours or after approved and “Official Closing 
Hours.” Patrons of any Licensed Premises are not permitted to bring alcoholic beverages on
the Licensed Premises.
7. A violation of any of the restrictions contained in this Article III shall constitute a violation of
the Regulations and shall subject the Licensee to possible discipline and/or penalties by the
Board in accordance with the procedure set forth in Article XIV herein.
IV. Change of Manager
1.  Timeline Requirements for Filing a Change of Manager Application. An application for
Change of Manager of Record or Assistant Manager must be filed with the Board at least two (2) weeks
before the proposed effective date of the change (“Change of Management Notice Deadline”), unless the
Manager of Record has terminated his or her employment without prior notice to the Licensee or is
terminated by Licensee under circumstances which do not reasonably allow for advance Change of 
Management Deadline Notice (“Early Management Termination”). In the event of Early Management
Termination, the Licensee must, within thirty (30) days of such termination, notify the Board of: (a) the
basic facts surrounding such termination; (ii) the name of the person who will discharge the duties of
Manager pending selection and approval of a new Manager of Record; and
Page 5 of 21
Page 151
(iii) shall file the application for a Change of Manager no more than thirty (30) days after the departure of
the approved Manager of Record. If the Board finds that the circumstances justify the noncompliance with
the Change of Manager Notice Timeline, no penalty will be imposed so long as the Licensee complies with
subsections (i) through (iii) above. If the circumstances for the delay are not found to be sufficient, or if the
application for a Change of Manager is filed more than thirty (30) days after the departure of the Manager of
Record, the Board may impose a penalty or suspension of up to one (1) day of suspension for each day of 
unjustified non-compliance or for each day that passes beyond the passage of thirty (30) days after departure
of the Manager of Record before the application for a new manager is filed, or such other penalty permitted
by Article XIV herein. In addition to the foregoing, the Board shall also have the right to impose penalties
for the failure to provide timely notification of the departure of an Assistant Manager. When submitting an
application for change of Manager or Assistant Manager, the Manager or Assistant Manager shall be certified
as an alcohol server and registered with the Police Department prior to submitting the application. Further, 
approval of a change in Manager may be conditioned upon proof of payment of all outstanding local, state, 
and federal taxes and fees.
2.  Manager Background Checks. Upon receipt of an application for an original License, or, in
the case of a new Manager of Record or Assistant Manager, upon being advised of the new Manager of
Record or Assistant Manager’s identity, the Framingham Police Department will conduct a background
check of any proposed Licensee, Manager of Record or Assistant Manager, and such check will include a
review of any existing criminal record. The Board may reject any application where the Licensee’s, 
Manager of Record’s or Assistant Manager’s criminal record indicates, theft, unlawful drug offense(s) (with
the exception of any criminal arrest or conviction relating to possession of marijuana which predate the
enactment of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G), alcohol-related offenses, a propensity for violence,
or other behavior, that, in the opinion of the Board, might disqualify the individual from responsibly
carrying out their duties as Manager of Record or would otherwise put the public at risk.
3.  Violations. A violation of any of subsection 1 regarding change of Manager shall 
constitute a violation of these Regulations and shall subject the Licensee to possible discipline and/or
penalties in accordance with this section or with Article XIV herein.
V.  Responsibilities of Manager of Record:
1.  Authority & Control of Licensed Premises. The Board regards the Manager of Record of
Licensed Premises as the principal representative of the Licensee and as having full authority and control of
the Licensed Premises and of the conduct of all business therein relative to alcoholic beverages, all as
provided in the Laws. An Assistant Manager or other suitable managerial employee capable of fulfilling the
duties of Manager of Record must be listed on the License by the Licensee. This will allow for continuity of
the Manager position should either the Manager of Record or Assistant Manager positions become vacant
during the course of the year.
2.  Responsibilities. Without limiting the scope of the previous subsection, the Board will hold
the Manager of Record responsible for the following:
a. Careful selection of qualified employees of the licensed business, including servers, 
clerks and persons who are engaged with the public in any capacity;
Page 6 of 21
Page 152
b. Training of employees in all matters relating to the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages;
c. Assuring that employees serving alcohol to the public have successfully completed an
alcoholic beverage training program for serving alcohol responsibly and strongly
encourage continual training of employees engaged in serving and selling alcoholic
beverages;
d. Ensuring that no criminal activity, including the sale and distribution of narcotic
drugs, takes place on the Licensed Premises, including within any parking area 
ancillary to or serving the Licensed Premises;
e. Promptly reporting to the Police Department all instances of attempted purchases or
procurement of service of alcoholic beverages by minors, including attempts to gain
access to premises upon which alcoholic beverages are served and from which minors
are excluded, and appropriate action taken by the Licensee in response thereto. Such
appropriate action shall include (1) Reporting to the Registry of Motor Vehicles
instances involving possession or use of a false, forged, or counterfeit license to operate
motor vehicles or identification card issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles; (2) 
confiscation of liquor identification cards or motor vehicle operator’s license presented
by the minor; and (3) if a purchase was made or service was procured, the name of the 
Licensee’s employee participating therein;
f. Enforcement of the Laws with respect to the operation of the licensed business;
g. Ensuring that the Licensed Premises, including the exterior, are kept clean, neat, and
sanitary at all times; and
h. The Board strongly encourages the Manager of Record and/or Assistant Manager to
attend the recommended Annual Alcohol Education Seminar. Failure to attend such
seminar shall not constitute a defense to any violation of the Laws.
3.  Hours on Licensed Premises. Except as provided herein, the Manager of Record must be
a full-time employee or a corporate officer of the Licensee, must be engaged exclusively in the
management of the licensed business, and must be a qualified seller or server of alcoholic beverages
registered with the Framingham Police Department. The Manager of Record shall not undertake any non-
managerial position(s) (i.e., bartender, server, cook) or any other role which interferes with the Manager of
Record’s oversight of the Licensed Premises. The Manager of Record must be on the Licensed Premises at
least forty (40) hours per week in the course of business, consistent with the permitted hours of operation.
When the Manager of Record is not upon the Licensed Premises, the person in charge of the business must
be an Assistant Manager or a qualified seller or server of alcoholic beverages registered with the
Framingham Police Department and designated by the approved Manager of Record to have charge of the
business in the Manager’s absence. The Manager of Record shall be responsible for the operation of the
business whether or not on the Licensed Premises. When the Manager of Record is not upon the Licensed
Premises, a method 
Page 7 of 21
Page 153
of contacting the Manager of Record promptly must be arranged so that the Manager of Record can be
reached at all times by the person designated to be in charge of the Licensed Premises. The provisions of
the first sentence of this subsection shall not apply to any Licensee holding a license issued under Chapter
138, Section 12 to a veterans’ organization or to a Licensee holding a license issued to a club under
Chapter 138, Section 17.
4.  Failure of the Manager of Record to comply with this policy or to properly discharge the
duties of manager may result in removal as Manager or suspension or revocation of the License as may be
appropriate to the circumstances.
VI. Procedure for Obtaining Liquor Licenses
The applicant for a License of any type should submit a letter to the Board outlining the proposal
with a completed application and include a request for a hearing with the Board. The applicant should
request to be placed on the agenda and publish a public notice of the date selected for the hearing in
accordance with Chapter 138. At a duly noticed public hearing, the Board will consider the application for a
License and the input of any interested members of the public. The Board will then consider the application
and respond in a timely manner to the applicant. The Board shall provide a copy of these Regulations to
each Licensee at the time when they pick up their annual license. The Licensee shall sign a receipt to be
maintained by the Board evidencing their receipt of a copy of these Regulations.
Pursuant to Chapter 138, Section 15A, where there are no premises actually in existence at the time
the application for a License is made, the applicant shall file a plan showing the actual dimensions of
premises which are to be constructed on which the License is to be exercised. A License granted under this
provision shall be upon the condition that such License shall not be issued until completion of the Licensed
Premises in accordance with the plan, and the decision of the Board as to whether the plan has been
complied with shall be final. The Board may include as a condition of such License that the Licensed
Premises be completed in accordance with the plan by a date certain or the License shall be deemed null and
void. Said specified completion date may be extended by the Board in its sole discretion upon written
request by the applicant submitted to the Board at least 45 days prior to the expiration of the initial
anticipated completion date as stated in the License.
VII. Considerations for Approval of New License or Transfer:
The Board will consider any or all of the following that can be reasonably offered in support of a
particular License application:
1. The applicant is a qualified Veterans’ organization and seeks a club license.
2. Subject to applicable zoning requirements, the applicant proposes an establishment that offers
a regular forum for music and musicians to play and obtain exposure for their work.
3. The applicant offers variety, or uniqueness, in its proposed establishment or shop, in
contrast to what exists in the City of Framingham at the time of the application.
4. The applicant demonstrates the elements for public need for the License particular location.
5. The applicant proposes an establishment that offers a substantial economic benefit to the City
of Framingham. 
Page 8 of 21
Page 154
6. Where the application pertains to a License to be issued pursuant to Chapter 138, Section 12, the
applicant offers, in addition to alcoholic beverages, a variety of non-alcoholic beverages (or
beverages containing only trace amounts of alcohol), such as mocktails, craft sodas, teas, 
kombucha, and non-alcoholic beer and wine, which are distinct from traditional non-alcoholic
beverages (water, soda, juice, etc.).
7. Proposals for off-premises retail establishments to be located in shopping malls or high-
density retail areas, either as new Licenses or transfers, are discouraged if the applicant’s
proposed License application duplicates or is similar to Licensed Premises presently located
in the area.
VIII. Modifications to Licensed Premises
Once a License is issued, no material physical changes to the Licensed Premises shall be made without the
prior approval of the Board. For the purpose of these Regulations, a material physical change shall be
considered a change in location or number of seats, location of bar, addition or reduction in square footage,
or any other change sufficient to require a building permit from the City of Framingham.
IX. Transfers of License
Licensees may request that their License be transferred to a third party. A $500 fee shall accompany each
application for ownership or transfer of location. Applications for transfer of ownership or location shall be
processed similarly to an original License application and the Board is not required to grant such transfer
requests. Approval of a transfer of majority ownership further may be conditioned upon the proof of
payment of all outstanding local, state, and federal taxes including, without limiting, the following: receipts
showing remittance to the proper taxing authorities of sales taxes, excise taxes and withheld federal and state
income taxes. Transfers of ownership to trustees in Bankruptcy, court- appointed receivers, or to assignees 
for the benefit of the creditors and those taking title or possession of the Licensed Premises by, through or
under them will not be deemed to transfer or convey any rights to the license or the renewal or transfer of
such license, unless provided by contrary superior law. Bona fide mortgagees in possession who are listed in
the application as holding such interest shall be treated in the same manner as the original majority
ownership license. A public hearing shall be required for any transfers of ownership or location, including, 
but not limited to transfers to mortgagees.
X.  Distribution of Regulations
These Regulations, in their most updated form, shall be provided to all Licensees upon issuance of
their License and, further, shall be regularly available at the City of Framingham Licensing Department and
online at the City of Framingham Board of License Commissioner’s webpage. These Regulations shall be
appended to each annual license issued by the Board. The Licensee may not pick up his/her annual license
until the Licensee has signed a receipt acknowledging that a copy of these Regulations has been received. A
copy of the most updated Regulations shall be maintained on the Licensed Premises at all times and shall be
available for inspection upon request. 
Page 9 of 21
Page 155
XI. Filing Fees and Annual Licensing Fees
Filing Fees and Annual Licensing Fees shall be determined by the Board and made publicly available at the
administrative offices of the Board at City Hall and online at the Board’s webpage at 
 www.framingamma.gov.
XII. Miscellaneous Operating Provisions
1.  Exterior Doors. Exterior doors to the Licensed Premises must remain closed, but not
locked, during all times that the Licensed Premises are open for business.
2.  Access to Licensed Premises. The Licensee shall ensure that the Framingham Police 
Department, the Framingham Fire Department, and authorized agents of the Board shall have
immediate access to the Licensed Premises at all times and under all circumstances.
3.  Underage Service. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold to anyone under the age of 21
years. It shall be a defense to any alleged claim of sale of alcohol to a minor if the Licensee
can show that the patron produced a valid Massachusetts driver’s license, a valid
Massachusetts Liquor Identification Card, a valid Passport issued by the United States or
by a government of a foreign country recognized by the United States government, or a
valid U.S. issued Military ID card or a valid U.S. Passport Card. Licensees may accept out
of state licenses as proof of age but Licensees shall bear the risk that such licenses are real
and valid.
4.  Responsible Operations. The Licensee shall ensure that all business within the Licensed
Premises, and within areas under the Licensee’s control that abut the Licensed Premises, is
conducted in a responsible manner so that no activity shall detract from the quality of life in
the City generally, or in the neighborhood in which the Licensed Premises is located. This
shall include, but not be limited to, ensuring that there shall be no disorder, unlawful use or
sale of drugs, indecency, prostitution, assaults, lewdness, or gambling on or about the
Licensed Premises.
5.  Sale to Intoxicated Persons. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or delivered to an
intoxicated person.
6.  Off-Premises Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. No patron may remove any alcoholic
beverage from Chapter 138, Section 12 on-premises Licensed Premises, unless the patron is
taking off the premises of a restaurant or hotel a resealed bottle of partially consumed wine
as regulated by Chapter 138, Section 12 and the Rules and Regulations of the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission.
7.  Entertainment. No Licensee shall provide or allow entertainment unless an 
entertainment license has been obtained from the Board (or Mayor of Framingham, if on a
Sunday).
8.  No Discrimination. No Licensee shall make any distinction, discrimination, or
Page 10 of 21
Page 156
restriction on account of race, color, creed, sex, sexual/gender orientation or designation, orancestry relative to the admission or treatment of any person.
9.  Bottle Service. “Bottle Service” (i.e., the sale and/or service of an entire bottle of hard
alcohol or spirits) shall be strictly prohibited unless expressly authorized in advance by the
Board. Any licensee authorized for Bottle Service shall have the term “Bottle Service,”
along with any relevant conditions included on the physical License displayed at the
Licensed Premises. The Board shall have the authority to deny or condition an application
for Bottle Service in its sole discretion.
XIII. One-Day Licenses
Individuals holding social events and the following types of organizations are eligible for one-day
alcoholic beverage licenses under these Regulations:
1.  Civic or municipal organizations;
2.  Commercial establishments;
3.  Fraternal organizations;
4.  Non-profit organizations;
5.  Non-profit unincorporated associations;
6.  Unincorporated groups or organizations not engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages
forprofit;
7.  Service clubs; and
8.  Veteran’s organizations
Other organizations or individuals may submit applications for consideration.
Criteria for Approval for One-Day Licenses:
A. The following matters will be taken into account in approving one-day licenses:
1. ADMISSION AGE: The Board will not deny a one-day license for a function at which individuals
to whom alcoholic beverages may not be supplied are present, but the Board will require that a
sufficient number of trained servers be present to assure compliance with the laws governing the sale
of furnishing of alcoholic beverages to such persons.
2. FREQUENCY: One-day licenses are to be issued primarily to applicants sponsoring functions that
are not held more than once annually. Except for applicants that are in the business of catering or
accommodating individual functions, one-day licenses are not intended as an alternative to an
annual license.
B.  Acceptance of Conditions. Acceptance of a one-day license under this policy will be deemed to be an
acceptance of the following conditions of the license and an agreement with the City of Framingham
to be bound thereby:
1. Certification of Servers: 
Page 11 of 21
Page 157
All persons engaged in furnishing alcoholic beverages at a licensed function, whether by sale or
without charge, are required to be certified servers. All servers must be certified as having 
completed an approved alcoholic beverage training program and have evidence of such valid 
certification in their possession. Commercial caterers and accommodators must be registered with
the Framingham Police Department.
2. Number of Service Providers:
The number of bartenders and servers shall be recommended to the Board by the officer of the
Framingham Police Department designated to review applications for one day licenses and shall be
determined by the Board as appropriate for the number of persons estimated to be in attendance
and the nature of the event. For functions at which attendance is by invitation only, the number of
persons included in the invitations shall be used.
3. Hours of Service of Alcoholic Beverages:
The hours of sale and service for all one-day licenses shall be no later than 1:00 a.m. The “last call”
for all such licenses shall be no later than 12:30 a.m. The function shall conclude at 1:00 a.m., at
the same hour as the license. Entertainment licenses shall state that the function shall conclude at
1:00 a.m.
4. Number of Persons on Premises:
The number of persons may not exceed the occupancy limits allowed by law for the premises on
which the license will be exercised.
5. Police Detail:
The number of officers, if any, and the hours during which a police detail will be required within the
Licensed Premises and, if required, for orderly parking and traffic control will be recommended by
the Police Department. Generally, those hours will include the entire duration of the function, 
including after service hours. The factors to be considered include the location of the premises, 
availability of on-site parking, the number of persons estimated to be in attendance and the time and
duration of the function.
6. Insurance:
When a one-day license is granted to be exercised on City-owned land or a City-owned
facility, the Licensee shall procure policies of insurance as provided herein. The Licensee shall
furnish certificates in form and substance satisfactory to the City evidencing each such insurance
coverage to the City prior to the issuance of the license.
(a) A Comprehensive General Liability policy on an occurrence basis endorsed to include
broad form comprehensive general liability including coverage for service of alcoholic
beverages with a combined single limit of liability of not less than
$1,000,000.00. The policy shall name the City, and its officers, agents, servants,
Page 12 of 21
Page 158
officials, representatives, employees, and consultants as additionally insured parties.
(b) The Licensee shall provide Workers’ Compensation Insurance as required by law.
(c) An Umbrella/Excess Liability insurance policy on an occurrence basis “following form”
of the primary coverage with a limit of liability of $5,000,000.00. The Umbrella/Excess
Liability insurance policy shall include but not be limited to the following coverage for
bodily injury, property damage and personal injury: (i) Premises - Operations Liability; 
(ii) Contractual Liability; (iii) Automobile Liability for owned, non-owned and hired
vehicles. The City, its officers, agents, servants, officials, representatives, consultants, 
and employees shall be named as additional insureds.
(d) All insurance shall be issued by insurance companies authorized to do insurance 
business in Massachusetts and rated not less than A-VIII in Best’s Insurance Guide and
will not be subject to cancellation or modification without thirty days prior written
notice to the City.
(e) Each policy of insurance obtained by Licensee hereunder shall contain a clause
denying the insurer any right of subrogation against the City.
C.  Additional Provisions. The following additional provisions shall apply to one day
licenses.
1. Departmental Approvals:
The Board of Health and the Inspectional Services Department must approve the Licensed 
Premises, including, where applicable, food service equipment. For any function to which the
general public will be admitted, the Inspectional Services Department must approve the Licensed
Premises as meeting handicap accessibility requirements.
2. Neighborhood Impact:
The applicant or such other person designated by name, address and local telephone number in the
application will be responsible for the orderly conduct of the function for which the license is issued.
Consumption of alcoholic beverage outside of the structure within which the Licensed Premises, i.e.,
where the function is held will not be permitted. Music, noise, or other function- related activities
must not create an undue imposition upon any adjacent residences. Police detail officers will be
instructed to respond appropriately to complaints. Such response may include an order to terminate
the event or otherwise limit the offending activity.
3. Submission of Applications:
One-day License applications must be complete and submitted to the Licensing Office no later than
noon fourteen days prior to the date of the function Applicants should note that if an application is
denied by the Board Chair, and review by the Board is sought, the application
Page 13 of 21
Page 159
must have been submitted sufficiently in advance of the event to allow review of the denial at a
regular meeting of the Board as provided below.
After submission, each application will be reviewed by the Health Department, Inspectional 
Services (including issues of handicap accessibility, if required), the Treasurer Collectors Office, 
Fire Department, and the Police Department (as to police detail required and number recommended
of bar tenders and servers). The Board Chair, or delegate(s), is hereby authorized to approve on
behalf of the Board one-day licenses meeting the requirements of this policy.
Applications that are not approved by the Board Chair may be brought to the Board for approval
and shall be accompanied by the Board Chair’s summary of reasons for declining approval. The
office of the Licensing Board must receive such requests for Board approval not later than noon on
the Tuesday of the calendar week before the day on which the licensed function is to begin.
4. License Application Fee:
a. No fee will be charged for one-day licenses for charitable fundraisers whether
or not the application is submitted by the real party in interest or by a caterer or
accommodator or other commercial provider.
b. One-day licenses for events associated with commercial activities such as
business promotional activities, business meetings, conventions, trade
association events, etc., will be charged a fee of
$50.00 for each license application.
XIV. Penalties, Procedure and Structure for Violations of the Ordinance and Regulations
A.  Purpose
The purpose of this penalty structure is to improve the ability of the Board to prevent alcohol abuse
and violation of the Laws. This Article XIV will help to achieve reasonable uniformity in the imposition of
penalties and to avoid confusion in the minds of the public, patrons, and Licensees due to a lack of
understanding of the consequences of violating the Laws and License terms. This Article XIV is intended to
empower the Board to consider the circumstances of each case and provide a mechanism by which
Licensees can improve their compliance with the Laws in the future.
B.  General Provisions
1. No Illegality on Premises. No Licensee shall permit any illegality to occur on the Licensed
Premises, regardless of whether such illegality relates to the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages. The Manager of Record shall at all times maintain order and decorum on the
premises and in the immediately surrounding area of the premises and shall cooperate with
City officials in ensuring safe and orderly facilities.
2. Reporting of Incidents. All violations of the Laws are to be reported to the Framingham
Page 14 of 21
Page 160
Police Department by the owner, Manager, Assistant Manager, or any employee of the Licensee
that becomes aware of an offense involving the Licensed Premises within twenty-four hours of
said violation unless the incident is serious enough to comprise public safety and needs
immediate attention at which time Framingham Police shall be notified forthwith. Failure to
report a violation involving the Licensed Premises constitutes a violation of these Regulations
and will subject the Licensee to appropriate discipline in accordance with the procedure set
forth herein.
3. Penalties; Generally. Penalties for offenses shall be in line with the City’s general goals of
protecting public safety and the general welfare. Penalties will also be imposed with the goal of
preventing future offenses. A violation of these Regulations alone (rather than state law or the
Ordinances) may give rise to the issuance of penalties pursuant to this Article to the extent
permitted under law. The nature and severity of the penalties imposed will be decided
according to the nature of the offense and the presence of mitigating or aggravating
circumstances as further described herein. All offenses by Licensees will result in the
imposition of a penalty of some degree. This will impress upon Licensees, managers, and
servers their responsibility for ensuring compliance with these Regulations, for prevention of
offenses and for compliance with the terms of licenses and the liquor laws of the
Commonwealth.
a. Types/Categories of License Penalties. Penalties by the Board may consist of any
one or more of the following as appropriate: (a) Revocation of License; (b) 
Suspension of License; (c) Modification of License; (d) Imposition of New 
Conditions on the License; (e) Imposition of Monetary Fines; (f) Mandatory 
Participation in Alcohol Abuse and Offense Prevention Programs; and/or (g) any
other reasonable penalty, in the Board’s reasonable discretion.
b. Penalty Guidelines. The penalty guidelines stated in these Regulations are intended
to provide indication of the range of penalties the Board will impose if a hearing is
held on any offense. The Board will refer to these guidelines by deciding whether to
approve a negotiated recommended resolution.
4. Police Department Recommendation; Negotiation Procedure; Record Keeping. The Police
Department is authorized to negotiate with any authorized representative of the Licensee the
terms upon which the Police Department will recommend to the Board that an offense be
resolved. 
a. Any such negotiated recommended resolution must be in writing, signed by the
Manager of Record or designated representative of the Licensee charged with the
offense and approved by the Police Chief. The recommendation must include a
statement detailing the facts determined in the Police Department investigation. The
recommended resolution is not binding upon the City unless and until approved by the
Board.
b. If the Police Department and the Manager of Record and/or an authorized
representative of the Licensee cannot agree on a recommended resolution, the
Page 15 of 21
Page 161
c. Police Department will make any additional investigation it deems necessary for a
complete presentation of the facts and will file a written report with the Board.
d. The Board may consider, but is not required to accept, a negotiated resolution
recommended by the Police Department. The Board is empowered to consider
alternative penalties consistent with this Article XIV and the Laws.
e. The Police Department and the Board will maintain a public record of offenses and
their disposition that will be indexed according to the Licensee, Manager or Assistant
Manager, server and purchaser involved.
5. Notice to Licensee. Written notice shall be provided to a Licensee of an alleged violation of the
Laws. The notice provided to Licensee may contain the Police Department's recommendation to
the Board concerning the punishment for the alleged violation. The notice will include the date of
the event giving rise to the possible disciplinary action, a description of the event, and a clear
identification of the Laws that are alleged to have been violated as a result of the event. Said
notice will also provide Licensee with the date upon which the Board will hold a hearing
concerning the Licensee's  alleged violation. A notice containing the above-mentioned
information shall be sent to Licensee via certified mail return receipt requested no less than ten
(10) days prior to the date of the hearing before the Board. Licensees are entitled to retain
counsel to represent them at the hearing if they so desire.
6. Written Statement of Disciplinary Action. If the Board decides to take disciplinary action against
the Licensee for a violation of the Laws, the Board will provide the Licensee with a statement of
reasons why disciplinary action was taken against Licensee. The above-mentioned statement of
reasons will be included with the notice of the Board’s disciplinary action.
C.  Determination of Penalties
Penalties will be determined according to the following procedure.
1.  The base level offense(s) will be determined from those offenses described in Article XIV,
Section D.
2.  Adjustments according to the presence of factors that warrant an increase in the penalty
described in Article XIV, Section E ("aggravating factors") or decrease described in Article
XIV, Section F (“mitigating factors") will be considered.
3.  Adjustments according to the number of violations involved in the particular offense will be
considered.
4.  Adjustments according to the offender's acceptance of responsibility described in Article XIV,
Section F will be considered. 
Page 16 of 21
Page 162
5.  Increases according to the number and circumstances of prior violations and penalties
previously imposed upon the offender described in Article XIV, Section G will be 
considered. The Board is entitled to consider fines or suspensions issued by the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission in evaluating said prior violations and penalties.
6.  Increases based on any previous written warnings given by the City to the Licensee will be
considered. Such increases will consider the date(s) of the written warning(s), the reasons
therefore, and the similarity of the incident resulting in the warning with the incident at
issue.
7.  Adjustments according to the consequential misconduct described in Article XIV, 
Section H that is related to the base level violation will be considered.
D. Base level offenses
All references in this subsection are to sections of Chapter 138 unless otherwise noted.
1. Sale outside of permitted hours (Chapter 138, Sections 12 and 15;
2. Purchase by person under age 21 (Chapter 138, Section 34A);
3. Employment by Licensee of person under age 18 for direct handling or selling of
alcohol;
4. Sale or delivery to a person under age 21 for own use or for use of another (Chapter 138, 
Section 34);
5. Sale to an intoxicated person (Chapter 138, Section 69);
6. Hindering or delaying investigation (Chapter 138, Section 63A);
7. Failure to post notice of penalty for driving under the influence and driving while
drinking from open container of alcoholic beverage (Chapter 138, Section 34D);
8. Failure to comply with section 204 CMR 4.03 (“Prohibition Against Happy Hours and
Discounted Sales”) of the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission regulations;
E.  Aggravating Factors
1. Failure to request identification card, operator's license, or passport;
2. Juvenile appearance of purchaser;
3. Use of altered identification; 
Page 17 of 21
Page 163
4. Refusal to cooperate in investigation;
5. Multiple sales on same occasion;
6. Quantity of beverage sold;
7. Staff not suitably trained;
8. Unregistered server;
9. Server unable to provide Server ID card upon request;
10. Underage server;
11. Violations of other laws such as: prostitution, solicitation, drugs
gambling, disorderly conduct, cigarette sales to minor;
12. Concealing violation(s);
13. Furnishing false information to investigator;
14. Exceeding lawful capacity of premises;
15. Intimidating or coercing witnesses or attempting to do so;
16. Offense occurring while under suspension of penalty;
17. Sale occurring while license suspended; and/or
18. The occurrence of any personal injuries or fatalities related to the underlying
violation.
F.  Mitigating Factors
1. Reasonable reliance upon an identification card or operator's license for proof of
identity or age. (Chapter 138, Section 34B);
2. Acceptance of responsibility as shown by:
a. Substantial and voluntary assistance offered in investigation
b. Public acknowledgment of responsibility
c. Agreement to participate in training program by Licensee, manager, and
servers
d. Prompt notice of decision not to contest charge and agreement to proposed
recommended resolution.
e. Agreement to participate in an effective program to detect and prevent future
Page 18 of 21
Page 164
offenses.
3. Attendance at the City’s Annual Alcohol Education Seminar.
4. Successful passing of alcohol compliance stings.
5. Random compliance checks without violations.
G. Previous Violations
1.  Same offense.
2.  Different offense.
3.  Recent prior offense.
4.  Same Manager.
5.  Same server.
6.  Severity of prior penalty.
7.  Offense while under suspension of prior penalty.
H. Consequential Misconduct Related to an Underlying Violation
1.  Operating under the influence.
2.  Causing personal injury or death.
3.  Causing property damage.
4.  Disturbance of the peace.
5.  Domestic violence.
I.  Imposition of Penalties or Other Outcomes
The Board will impose penalties for offenses consistent with this policy.
Offenders may expect one or more of the following consequences as appropriate in the
judgment of the Board.
1. Suspension of license for a stated number of days and specified dates. Licensees are advised
that the following chart only represents guidelines for use by the Chief of Police and the Board
when making their respective recommendation and decision in response to aLicense violation. 
The Board, in accordance with the mitigating and aggravating factors presented above, retain
the authority to deviate from these penalty guidelines where the circumstances are appropriate.
First violation: 1 to 3-day suspension, regardless of amount of penalty suspended, if any;
Second violation: 4 to 6-day suspension, regardless of amount of penalty suspended, if any;
Third violation: 7 to 15-day suspension, regardless of amount of
Page 19 of 21
Page 165
penalty suspended, if any;
Fourth violation: 16 to 30-day suspension, regardless of amount of
penalty suspended, if any;
Fifth violation: 31 days to one year suspension, or revocation, regardless of
amount of penalty suspended, if any:
Sixth violation: Revocation of license for remaining period of current
license and one year beyond.
The Board will consider the longevity of a Licensee when determining suspensions and
penalties based on the following chart:
Years Without a Violation
Less than 3 Years
3 to 5 years
5 to 7 years
7 or more years 
Relief
Subject to the Rules and Regulations of the Board
One day relief (i.e., from three days to two)
Two days’ relief (i.e., from three days to one)
Three or more days’ relief
1. Suspension of License for a stated number of days and specified dates, with a portion of the
suspension deferred upon condition that no further offenses occur within a specified period
of time and that Licensee waives right to hearing upon such further offense.
2. Revocation of License or suspension of registration of server for a specified period of time after
a due process hearing for cause, and thereby limiting or preventing the employment of a server
by a Licensee within the City.
3. Mandatory participation in prevention programs by Licensee, Manager, Assistant
Manager, and server as appropriate.
4. Appropriate publicity of offense and disposition.
While the Board will endeavor to impose penalties upon Licensees in a manner consistent with these
Regulations and this Article XIV, where exigent or special circumstances warrant, such as a
violation of these regulations resulting in serious personal injury or death, the Board retains the
authority in such circumstances to immediately order a full hearing, provide a Licensee an 
opportunity to present evidence, and to revoke a license where the evidence so warrants a
revocation.
J.  Reporting of Violations and Penalties Imposed
The Board shall receive semiannual reports from the Police Department and/or Licensing Administrator
Page 20 of 21
Page 166
detailing violations of these Regulations from the date of the previous reporting period, and the penalties
imposed by the Board for said violations. Reports shall be submitted to the Board no later than May 1 and
November 1 of each year. The Board will use these reports to analyze the factors are commonly associated
with violations, such as over serving, underage serving, failure of serving training or registration, etc. This
process will allow the Board to periodically review this policy and recommend any areas of the policy that
need to be amended, and/or updated. 
# # #
Page 21 of 21
Page 167
LICENSING DEPARTMENT 
Diane R. Willoughby
Licensing Coordinator 
o 508-532-5402
f  508-532-5769
e drw@framinghamma.gov
w www.framinghamma.gov
Agenda Item 3.d. 
Alleged Alcohol Violation Hearing 
MEMORIAL BUILDING
150 Concord Street, Room 203
Framingham, MA 01702 
Yogivinodp, Inc. 
d/b/a AV’s Market II
888 Waverly Street 
Hearing Date: April 25, 2022
1. Lt. McCarthy’s Power Point 
2. Hearing Notice to Mr. Patel dated April 8, 2022
3. Final Signed Disposition Agreement Received April 13, 2022
4. Framingham Rules and Regulations Governing Alcoholic Beverages 7th Revision, 
September 1, 2021 (amended and restated December 13, 2021) 
Page 1 of 1 
Page 168
Framingham Police Department
April 25, 2022
Av’s II Violation Hearing
Lieutenant Thomas McCarthy
Licensing Bureau Commander
Page 169
yogivinodp, Inc.
DBA: AV’S Market II
888 Waverly Street
Malt & Wine Package Store
Manager of Record: Parin Patel
Assistant Manager: Vinod Patel 
Photo courtesy of Google Maps
Page 170
Alcohol compliance check:
• The alcohol compliance checks are conducted on an annual basis
• An underage operative under police supervision enters the establishments without
identification and attempts to purchase alcohol with police issued money
• The process was conducted on various weekdays over a several week period
• Pursuant to ABCC regulations and FPD policy, a notification announcement was
provided to local media outlets and posted on social media approximately four (4) 
weeks in advance
• At the time of the operation, eighty (80) alcohol licenses were active
• All establishments were visited and fifty-two (52) active attempts were conducted
• Ten (10) establishments failed the operation
Page 171
circumstances:
• Monday, December 27, 2021
• At 3:25 p.m. an underage operative entered AV’s Market II and purchased an eighteen
(18) pack of Bud Light beer 
• Identification was never requested from the operative
• The cashier had been working at the store for over thirty (30) days and did not have
current alcohol training
Page 172
Violations:
• Violation of MGL Chapter 138 s34 - Sale to an underage person
• Violation of 204 CMR 2.05 (2) - Permitting an illegality (underage sale) 
• Policy Violation Article II (2) – No alcohol training program for cashier
Page 173
RECORD HISTORY:
• No previous documented violations since the ABCC approved the license in 2018
• The establishment is eligible for one (1) day of relief based on having no violations
for over three (3) years
• A disposition negotiation meeting was held on February 17, 2022 and an agreement
was reached
Page 174
PENALTY FACTORS:
AGGRAVATING FACTORS:
• Failure to request identification
• Failure to attend the 2022 Annual Alcohol Seminar
MITIGATING FACTORS:
• Cashier completed the alcohol server training
• Establishment cooperated with investigation and accepted responsibility
• Internal policies were reviewed and retraining was conducted
Page 175
Agreed upon recommendation:
• One (1) day suspension of the Wine and Malt Package Store license to be held in
abeyance for one (1) year
• $300 reimbursement cost payable to the city within thirty (30) days of BOLC decision
• Yogivinodp, Inc. agrees to waive rights to appeal the disposition agreement
Page 176
Page 177
Page 178
Page 179
Page 180
Page 181
Page 182
Page 183
Page 184
Page 185
Page 186
Page 187
Page 188
Page 189
Page 190
CITY OF FRAMINGHAM RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Effective Date: September 1, 2008 1st.
Revision: October 2, 2008 2nd.
Revision: December 16, 2008 3rd.
Revision: November 3, 2009 4th 
Revision: May 4, 2011
5th Revision: September 17, 2013
6th Revision: January 1, 2016
7th Revision: September 1, 2021 (amended and restated on December 13, 2021)
By virtue of the authority contained in Chapter 138 of the Massachusetts General Laws (“Chapter
138”), and Article V, Section 1 of the City of Framingham General Ordinances (the “Ordinances”), the
Board of License Commissioners of the City of Framingham, serving as the City’sLiquor Licensing
Authority (the “Board”) hereby promulgates these Rules and Regulations Governing Alcoholic Beverages
(“Regulations”). The Regulations shall supersede all previous regulations or policies issued by the City of
Framingham (the “City”), or, collectively as the preceding licensing authority, the Town of Framingham
and/or Board of Selectmen. The Board has the power under the Ordinances and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts to amend these Regulations periodically from time to time as it sees fit. 
For the purposes hereof, the Regulations, Ordinances, and Chapter 138 shall be collectively referred to as
the “Laws”.
Any license issued for the sale in any manner of any alcoholic beverages (a “License”) shall be
issued on the condition of full compliance with these Regulations. The failure to comply with the Laws and
other Ordinances or rules issued by the City and/or the Board shall constitute sufficient cause or grounds for
refusing to grant the license, or for suspending, canceling, modifying, or revoking such license or permit
already granted, in accordance with Article XIV herein. Any individual, organization, or company licensed
by the Board pursuant to the Laws shall be referred to herein as a “Licensee”.
Any premises licensed by the Board pursuant to the Laws shall be referred to as the “Licensed
Premises”.
I.  Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
Public consumption of alcoholic beverages as defined in Chapter 138, Section 1 is permitted only in
accordance with an appropriate License issued by the Board. Absent an appropriate License issued by the
Board, it is prohibited to drink any alcoholic beverage while on, in or upon any public way or upon any way
to which the public has a right of access; any place to which members of the public have access as invitees
or licensees; a park or playground. It is prohibited to drink any alcoholic beverage while on, in or upon or
private land or place without consent of the owner or person in control thereof. All alcoholic beverages used
in violation of this shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of the charge against the person or
persons arrested or summoned before the court, at which time they shall be returned to the person entitled to
lawful possession.
Page 191
II.  General Provisions Regarding the Administration of Licensed Premises
1.  Licensure Requirements. The applicant for any type of License must meet the
requirements of the Laws.
2.  Alcohol Training Program. The Licensee shall require all employees serving alcohol or
viewing identifications cards to determine age to successfully complete an alcoholic 
beverage server training program which has been approved by the Board (the “Alcohol
Training Program”). The requirement set forth in the preceding sentence shall include and
apply to the Manager (as defined below), Assistant Manager, and all persons responsible for
viewing identification cards to determine the age of patrons for service of alcoholic
beverages.
The Alcohol Training Program may be completed on-line. The Licensee shall require all
employees engaged in serving alcoholic beverages and/or viewing of identification cards to
obtain Alcohol Training Program certification within thirty (30) days of employment and
the Manager shall maintain a list of employee certifications. To the extent an employee
serves alcohol or views identification cards prior to obtaining Alcohol Training Program
certification, the Manager of Record, as defined by Chapter 138, Section 26 (the
“Manager”), will be personally responsible for that employee, and any violation of these
regulations committed by the employee will be treated as if the Manager and/or Licensee
had committed the violation. Managers and Assistant Managers shall obtain Alcohol
Training Program certification prior to assuming the duties of Manager or Assistant
Manager. The Licensee shall strongly encourage all alcohol servers to attend periodic
retraining programs at least bi-annually that reinforce the certification training described
herein. The retraining programs underscore the importance of proper server training on the
dangers associated with alcohol abuse on Licensed Premises.
3.  Management ID Cards. City of Framingham Alcohol Management Identification Cards
(the “Management ID Card”) shall be required for all Managers and Assistant Managers, 
who shall be registered with the Framingham Police Department prior to assuming the
duties as Manager or Assistant Manager. The Management ID Card shall be carried on the
Manager and Assistant Manager’s person or shall be otherwise be available for inspection at
the Licensed Premises. The Licensee shall keep on file at the Licensed Premises photocopies
of the Management ID Cards. Any Manager or Assistant Manager who allegedly violates
any provision of the Laws is required to attend the Board hearing conducted in accordance
with Article XIV herein. Failure to attend said hearing may result in the revocation of the
Manager or Assistant Manager’sID Card by the Framingham Police Department. Violation
of this section shall further subject Licensees and management to penalties under Article
XIV as may be imposed by the Board.
4.  Identification of Patrons. Licensees shall ensure that the identification of persons 
purchasing alcoholic beverages occurs at the point of sale or service. Wristbands, stickers,
or any other kind of markings/marking devices are prohibited as a method of
Page 2 of 21
Page 192
identifying persons to be served alcoholic beverages.
5.  Prohibition Against Happy Hours and Discounted Sales. “Happy Hours” are prohibited
at any Licensed Premises. As used herein, Happy Hours shall be defined as the sale of
alcoholic beverages at a “two-for-one” price or any promotion or discount on the sale of
alcoholic beverages. Further:
A.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for less than the actual cost of the beverage to
the licensee. An admission charge shall not be credited towards the purchase price of
any alcoholic beverage.
B.  All licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks to be
served and drunk on the licensed premises. Prices shall be effective for not less than
one calendar week.
C.  No licensee, employee or agent of a licensee shall:
i.  Offer or deliver any free drinks to any person or group.
ii.  Deliver more than two drinks to one person at one time.
iii.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group any drinks at a price less
than the price regularly charged during the same calendar week, except at a
private function that is not open to the general public.
iv.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person an unlimited number of drinks
during a set period of time for a fixed price, except at private function
that is not open to the general public.
v.  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver drinks to any person or group of persons on
any one day at prices less than those charged to the general public on that
day, except at a private function this is not open to the public.
vi.  Increase the volume of alcoholic beverages contained in a drink without
increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for the drink during
the same calendar week.
vii. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking or the awarding of drinks as prizes.
viii. No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or
without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this
section.
6.  Nothing contained in this Section II.5 shall be construed to prohibit Licensees from 
offering free food or entertainment at any time; including a drink as part of a meal package;
the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one
person; or to prohibit those licensed under Chapter 138, Section 15, from offering free
tastings as allowed under Chapter 138.
Page 3 of 21
Page 193
7.  Cover Charges. Cover charges are not permitted except in compliance with 
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 140, Section 183D and Alcoholic Beverages
Control Commission 204 CMR 2.16.
8.  Public Need; Discretion of the Board. The licensing of establishments and vendors
serving and selling alcoholic beverages, and the determination of public need and 
convenience in the City is subject to the informed discretion of the Board, consistent with
the Laws.
9.  Inspection of Licensed Premises.
9.1.  The Licensed Premises shall be subject, at all times, to inspection by the Mayor or
his/her designee(s), the Board of Health or its designee, the City Health Agent, the 
Department of Public Works, Police, Fire, or any other department or official of the City of
Framingham.
9.2.  The Police Department shall have the authority to investigate potential violations
of the Laws on or about the Licensed Premises on behalf of the Board, and to conduct other
such enforcement as the Chief of Police deems appropriate, including the use of plainclothes
police officers for the purposes of ensuring compliance with the Laws.
9.3  The Board shall have the authority to refer potential violations of any Laws to the
Framingham Police Department, which shall be handled in accordance with subsection 9.2
above.
10. No Employee Consumption of Alcohol. No employee or person holding an ownership
interest in the Licensee, or any employee acting in any type of management capacity shall
consume alcohol on the Licensed Premises prior to going on duty or during their respective
on duty hours.
11. Common Victualer; Prohibition Against Keeping Alcoholic Beverages Onsite. 
Common Victualer Licensees operating without a duly authorized alcoholic beverages
license are not permitted to keep alcoholic beverages on its Licensed Premises, except for a
commercially reasonable quantity used exclusively in preparation of certain specialty
foods.
12. Annual Education Seminar. The City shall conduct an annual Alcohol Education Seminar. 
Notice of said seminar will be provided to each Licensee no less than ten (10) days prior to
the date of said seminar and shall be posted at City Hall at least ten (10) days prior to the date
of the seminar. Each Licensee is strongly encouraged to attend the Annual Education 
Seminar. Failure to attend the seminar shall not constitute a defense to any alleged violation
of the Laws. Each Licensee is required to have knowledge of the requirements of the Laws, 
and such knowledge will be imputed to Licensees regardless of their attendance or non-
attendance at the annual Alcohol Education Seminar sponsored by the City.
Page 4 of 21
Page 194
III. Hours of Operation
1. In accordance with Chapter 138, Section 12 the “Official Opening and Closing Hours” are
those which are designated on the Licensee’s alcoholic beverages License. “Last call” for 
alcoholic beverages shall be at least fifteen (15) minutes before the Licensee’s “Official 
Closing Hour.”
2. No alcoholic beverages may be served after the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
3. With the exception of any Licensee primarily operating as a movie theater, all tables and bars
must be cleared of all glasses, bottles, and containers of alcoholic beverages within thirty (30) 
minutes after the “Official Closing Hour” and all customers must be off the Licensed Premises
by the “Official Closing Hour”. Subject to Article III Section 5 of these Regulations, owners
and employees of the Licensee must be off the Licensed Premises no later than sixty (60) 
minutes after the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
4. For any Licensee primarily operating as a movie theater, all tables and bars must be cleared of
all glasses, bottles and containers of alcoholic beverages and all customers must be off the
Licensed Premises within thirty (30) minutes after the conclusion of any movies in progress at
the time of the Licensee’s “Official Closing Hour.”
5. Owners and their employees and contractors may be on the Licensed Premises at any time for
the purpose of cleaning, making emergency repairs, providing security for the Licensed
Premises, or preparing food for the next day’s business, or opening or closing the business in an
orderly manner.
6. No alcoholic beverage shall be served or consumed on the Licensed Premise before the 
Licensee’s approved and official opening hours or after approved and “Official Closing 
Hours.” Patrons of any Licensed Premises are not permitted to bring alcoholic beverages on
the Licensed Premises.
7. A violation of any of the restrictions contained in this Article III shall constitute a violation of
the Regulations and shall subject the Licensee to possible discipline and/or penalties by the
Board in accordance with the procedure set forth in Article XIV herein.
IV. Change of Manager
1.  Timeline Requirements for Filing a Change of Manager Application. An application for
Change of Manager of Record or Assistant Manager must be filed with the Board at least two (2) weeks
before the proposed effective date of the change (“Change of Management Notice Deadline”), unless the
Manager of Record has terminated his or her employment without prior notice to the Licensee or is
terminated by Licensee under circumstances which do not reasonably allow for advance Change of 
Management Deadline Notice (“Early Management Termination”). In the event of Early Management
Termination, the Licensee must, within thirty (30) days of such termination, notify the Board of: (a) the
basic facts surrounding such termination; (ii) the name of the person who will discharge the duties of
Manager pending selection and approval of a new Manager of Record; and
Page 5 of 21
Page 195
(iii) shall file the application for a Change of Manager no more than thirty (30) days after the departure of
the approved Manager of Record. If the Board finds that the circumstances justify the noncompliance with
the Change of Manager Notice Timeline, no penalty will be imposed so long as the Licensee complies with
subsections (i) through (iii) above. If the circumstances for the delay are not found to be sufficient, or if the
application for a Change of Manager is filed more than thirty (30) days after the departure of the Manager of
Record, the Board may impose a penalty or suspension of up to one (1) day of suspension for each day of 
unjustified non-compliance or for each day that passes beyond the passage of thirty (30) days after departure
of the Manager of Record before the application for a new manager is filed, or such other penalty permitted
by Article XIV herein. In addition to the foregoing, the Board shall also have the right to impose penalties
for the failure to provide timely notification of the departure of an Assistant Manager. When submitting an
application for change of Manager or Assistant Manager, the Manager or Assistant Manager shall be certified
as an alcohol server and registered with the Police Department prior to submitting the application. Further, 
approval of a change in Manager may be conditioned upon proof of payment of all outstanding local, state, 
and federal taxes and fees.
2.  Manager Background Checks. Upon receipt of an application for an original License, or, in
the case of a new Manager of Record or Assistant Manager, upon being advised of the new Manager of
Record or Assistant Manager’s identity, the Framingham Police Department will conduct a background
check of any proposed Licensee, Manager of Record or Assistant Manager, and such check will include a
review of any existing criminal record. The Board may reject any application where the Licensee’s, 
Manager of Record’s or Assistant Manager’s criminal record indicates, theft, unlawful drug offense(s) (with
the exception of any criminal arrest or conviction relating to possession of marijuana which predate the
enactment of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G), alcohol-related offenses, a propensity for violence,
or other behavior, that, in the opinion of the Board, might disqualify the individual from responsibly
carrying out their duties as Manager of Record or would otherwise put the public at risk.
3.  Violations. A violation of any of subsection 1 regarding change of Manager shall 
constitute a violation of these Regulations and shall subject the Licensee to possible discipline and/or
penalties in accordance with this section or with Article XIV herein.
V.  Responsibilities of Manager of Record:
1.  Authority & Control of Licensed Premises. The Board regards the Manager of Record of
Licensed Premises as the principal representative of the Licensee and as having full authority and control of
the Licensed Premises and of the conduct of all business therein relative to alcoholic beverages, all as
provided in the Laws. An Assistant Manager or other suitable managerial employee capable of fulfilling the
duties of Manager of Record must be listed on the License by the Licensee. This will allow for continuity of
the Manager position should either the Manager of Record or Assistant Manager positions become vacant
during the course of the year.
2.  Responsibilities. Without limiting the scope of the previous subsection, the Board will hold
the Manager of Record responsible for the following:
a. Careful selection of qualified employees of the licensed business, including servers, 
clerks and persons who are engaged with the public in any capacity;
Page 6 of 21
Page 196
b. Training of employees in all matters relating to the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages;
c. Assuring that employees serving alcohol to the public have successfully completed an
alcoholic beverage training program for serving alcohol responsibly and strongly
encourage continual training of employees engaged in serving and selling alcoholic
beverages;
d. Ensuring that no criminal activity, including the sale and distribution of narcotic
drugs, takes place on the Licensed Premises, including within any parking area 
ancillary to or serving the Licensed Premises;
e. Promptly reporting to the Police Department all instances of attempted purchases or
procurement of service of alcoholic beverages by minors, including attempts to gain
access to premises upon which alcoholic beverages are served and from which minors
are excluded, and appropriate action taken by the Licensee in response thereto. Such
appropriate action shall include (1) Reporting to the Registry of Motor Vehicles
instances involving possession or use of a false, forged, or counterfeit license to operate
motor vehicles or identification card issued by the Registry of Motor Vehicles; (2) 
confiscation of liquor identification cards or motor vehicle operator’s license presented
by the minor; and (3) if a purchase was made or service was procured, the name of the 
Licensee’s employee participating therein;
f. Enforcement of the Laws with respect to the operation of the licensed business;
g. Ensuring that the Licensed Premises, including the exterior, are kept clean, neat, and
sanitary at all times; and
h. The Board strongly encourages the Manager of Record and/or Assistant Manager to
attend the recommended Annual Alcohol Education Seminar. Failure to attend such
seminar shall not constitute a defense to any violation of the Laws.
3.  Hours on Licensed Premises. Except as provided herein, the Manager of Record must be
a full-time employee or a corporate officer of the Licensee, must be engaged exclusively in the
management of the licensed business, and must be a qualified seller or server of alcoholic beverages
registered with the Framingham Police Department. The Manager of Record shall not undertake any non-
managerial position(s) (i.e., bartender, server, cook) or any other role which interferes with the Manager of
Record’s oversight of the Licensed Premises. The Manager of Record must be on the Licensed Premises at
least forty (40) hours per week in the course of business, consistent with the permitted hours of operation.
When the Manager of Record is not upon the Licensed Premises, the person in charge of the business must
be an Assistant Manager or a qualified seller or server of alcoholic beverages registered with the
Framingham Police Department and designated by the approved Manager of Record to have charge of the
business in the Manager’s absence. The Manager of Record shall be responsible for the operation of the
business whether or not on the Licensed Premises. When the Manager of Record is not upon the Licensed
Premises, a method 
Page 7 of 21
Page 197
of contacting the Manager of Record promptly must be arranged so that the Manager of Record can be
reached at all times by the person designated to be in charge of the Licensed Premises. The provisions of
the first sentence of this subsection shall not apply to any Licensee holding a license issued under Chapter
138, Section 12 to a veterans’ organization or to a Licensee holding a license issued to a club under
Chapter 138, Section 17.
4.  Failure of the Manager of Record to comply with this policy or to properly discharge the
duties of manager may result in removal as Manager or suspension or revocation of the License as may be
appropriate to the circumstances.
VI. Procedure for Obtaining Liquor Licenses
The applicant for a License of any type should submit a letter to the Board outlining the proposal
with a completed application and include a request for a hearing with the Board. The applicant should
request to be placed on the agenda and publish a public notice of the date selected for the hearing in
accordance with Chapter 138. At a duly noticed public hearing, the Board will consider the application for a
License and the input of any interested members of the public. The Board will then consider the application
and respond in a timely manner to the applicant. The Board shall provide a copy of these Regulations to
each Licensee at the time when they pick up their annual license. The Licensee shall sign a receipt to be
maintained by the Board evidencing their receipt of a copy of these Regulations.
Pursuant to Chapter 138, Section 15A, where there are no premises actually in existence at the time
the application for a License is made, the applicant shall file a plan showing the actual dimensions of
premises which are to be constructed on which the License is to be exercised. A License granted under this
provision shall be upon the condition that such License shall not be issued until completion of the Licensed
Premises in accordance with the plan, and the decision of the Board as to whether the plan has been
complied with shall be final. The Board may include as a condition of such License that the Licensed
Premises be completed in accordance with the plan by a date certain or the License shall be deemed null and
void. Said specified completion date may be extended by the Board in its sole discretion upon written
request by the applicant submitted to the Board at least 45 days prior to the expiration of the initial
anticipated completion date as stated in the License.
VII. Considerations for Approval of New License or Transfer:
The Board will consider any or all of the following that can be reasonably offered in support of a
particular License application:
1. The applicant is a qualified Veterans’ organization and seeks a club license.
2. Subject to applicable zoning requirements, the applicant proposes an establishment that offers
a regular forum for music and musicians to play and obtain exposure for their work.
3. The applicant offers variety, or uniqueness, in its proposed establishment or shop, in
contrast to what exists in the City of Framingham at the time of the application.
4. The applicant demonstrates the elements for public need for the License particular location.
5. The applicant proposes an establishment that offers a substantial economic benefit to the City
of Framingham. 
Page 8 of 21
Page 198
6. Where the application pertains to a License to be issued pursuant to Chapter 138, Section 12, the
applicant offers, in addition to alcoholic beverages, a variety of non-alcoholic beverages (or
beverages containing only trace amounts of alcohol), such as mocktails, craft sodas, teas, 
kombucha, and non-alcoholic beer and wine, which are distinct from traditional non-alcoholic
beverages (water, soda, juice, etc.).
7. Proposals for off-premises retail establishments to be located in shopping malls or high-
density retail areas, either as new Licenses or transfers, are discouraged if the applicant’s
proposed License application duplicates or is similar to Licensed Premises presently located
in the area.
VIII. Modifications to Licensed Premises
Once a License is issued, no material physical changes to the Licensed Premises shall be made without the
prior approval of the Board. For the purpose of these Regulations, a material physical change shall be
considered a change in location or number of seats, location of bar, addition or reduction in square footage,
or any other change sufficient to require a building permit from the City of Framingham.
IX. Transfers of License
Licensees may request that their License be transferred to a third party. A $500 fee shall accompany each
application for ownership or transfer of location. Applications for transfer of ownership or location shall be
processed similarly to an original License application and the Board is not required to grant such transfer
requests. Approval of a transfer of majority ownership further may be conditioned upon the proof of
payment of all outstanding local, state, and federal taxes including, without limiting, the following: receipts
showing remittance to the proper taxing authorities of sales taxes, excise taxes and withheld federal and state
income taxes. Transfers of ownership to trustees in Bankruptcy, court- appointed receivers, or to assignees 
for the benefit of the creditors and those taking title or possession of the Licensed Premises by, through or
under them will not be deemed to transfer or convey any rights to the license or the renewal or transfer of
such license, unless provided by contrary superior law. Bona fide mortgagees in possession who are listed in
the application as holding such interest shall be treated in the same manner as the original majority
ownership license. A public hearing shall be required for any transfers of ownership or location, including, 
but not limited to transfers to mortgagees.
X.  Distribution of Regulations
These Regulations, in their most updated form, shall be provided to all Licensees upon issuance of
their License and, further, shall be regularly available at the City of Framingham Licensing Department and
online at the City of Framingham Board of License Commissioner’s webpage. These Regulations shall be
appended to each annual license issued by the Board. The Licensee may not pick up his/her annual license
until the Licensee has signed a receipt acknowledging that a copy of these Regulations has been received. A
copy of the most updated Regulations shall be maintained on the Licensed Premises at all times and shall be
available for inspection upon request. 
Page 9 of 21
Page 199
XI. Filing Fees and Annual Licensing Fees
Filing Fees and Annual Licensing Fees shall be determined by the Board and made publicly available at the
administrative offices of the Board at City Hall and online at the Board’s webpage at 
 www.framingamma.gov.
XII. Miscellaneous Operating Provisions
1.  Exterior Doors. Exterior doors to the Licensed Premises must remain closed, but not
locked, during all times that the Licensed Premises are open for business.
2.  Access to Licensed Premises. The Licensee shall ensure that the Framingham Police 
Department, the Framingham Fire Department, and authorized agents of the Board shall have
immediate access to the Licensed Premises at all times and under all circumstances.
3.  Underage Service. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold to anyone under the age of 21
years. It shall be a defense to any alleged claim of sale of alcohol to a minor if the Licensee
can show that the patron produced a valid Massachusetts driver’s license, a valid
Massachusetts Liquor Identification Card, a valid Passport issued by the United States or
by a government of a foreign country recognized by the United States government, or a
valid U.S. issued Military ID card or a valid U.S. Passport Card. Licensees may accept out
of state licenses as proof of age but Licensees shall bear the risk that such licenses are real
and valid.
4.  Responsible Operations. The Licensee shall ensure that all business within the Licensed
Premises, and within areas under the Licensee’s control that abut the Licensed Premises, is
conducted in a responsible manner so that no activity shall detract from the quality of life in
the City generally, or in the neighborhood in which the Licensed Premises is located. This
shall include, but not be limited to, ensuring that there shall be no disorder, unlawful use or
sale of drugs, indecency, prostitution, assaults, lewdness, or gambling on or about the
Licensed Premises.
5.  Sale to Intoxicated Persons. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or delivered to an
intoxicated person.
6.  Off-Premises Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. No patron may remove any alcoholic
beverage from Chapter 138, Section 12 on-premises Licensed Premises, unless the patron is
taking off the premises of a restaurant or hotel a resealed bottle of partially consumed wine
as regulated by Chapter 138, Section 12 and the Rules and Regulations of the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission.
7.  Entertainment. No Licensee shall provide or allow entertainment unless an 
entertainment license has been obtained from the Board (or Mayor of Framingham, if on a
Sunday).
8.  No Discrimination. No Licensee shall make any distinction, discrimination, or
Page 10 of 21
Page 200
restriction on account of race, color, creed, sex, sexual/gender orientation or designation, or
ancestry relative to the admission or treatment of any person.
9.  Bottle Service. “Bottle Service” (i.e., the sale and/or service of an entire bottle of hard
alcohol or spirits) shall be strictly prohibited unless expressly authorized in advance by the
Board. Any licensee authorized for Bottle Service shall have the term “Bottle Service,”
along with any relevant conditions included on the physical License displayed at the
Licensed Premises. The Board shall have the authority to deny or condition an application
for Bottle Service in its sole discretion.
XIII. One-Day Licenses
Individuals holding social events and the following types of organizations are eligible for one-day
alcoholic beverage licenses under these Regulations:
1.  Civic or municipal organizations;
2.  Commercial establishments;
3.  Fraternal organizations;
4.  Non-profit organizations;
5.  Non-profit unincorporated associations;
6.  Unincorporated groups or organizations not engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages
forprofit;
7.  Service clubs; and
8.  Veteran’s organizations
Other organizations or individuals may submit applications for consideration.
Criteria for Approval for One-Day Licenses:
A. The following matters will be taken into account in approving one-day licenses:
1. ADMISSION AGE: The Board will not deny a one-day license for a function at which individuals
to whom alcoholic beverages may not be supplied are present, but the Board will require that a
sufficient number of trained servers be present to assure compliance with the laws governing the sale
of furnishing of alcoholic beverages to such persons.
2. FREQUENCY: One-day licenses are to be issued primarily to applicants sponsoring functions that
are not held more than once annually. Except for applicants that are in the business of catering or
accommodating individual functions, one-day licenses are not intended as an alternative to an
annual license.
B.  Acceptance of Conditions. Acceptance of a one-day license under this policy will be deemed to be an
acceptance of the following conditions of the license and an agreement with the City of Framingham
to be bound thereby:
1. Certification of Servers: 
Page 11 of 21
Page 201
All persons engaged in furnishing alcoholic beverages at a licensed function, whether by sale or
without charge, are required to be certified servers. All servers must be certified as having 
completed an approved alcoholic beverage training program and have evidence of such valid 
certification in their possession. Commercial caterers and accommodators must be registered with
the Framingham Police Department.
2. Number of Service Providers:
The number of bartenders and servers shall be recommended to the Board by the officer of the
Framingham Police Department designated to review applications for one day licenses and shall be
determined by the Board as appropriate for the number of persons estimated to be in attendance
and the nature of the event. For functions at which attendance is by invitation only, the number of
persons included in the invitations shall be used.
3. Hours of Service of Alcoholic Beverages:
The hours of sale and service for all one-day licenses shall be no later than 1:00 a.m. The “last call”
for all such licenses shall be no later than 12:30 a.m. The function shall conclude at 1:00 a.m., at
the same hour as the license. Entertainment licenses shall state that the function shall conclude at
1:00 a.m.
4. Number of Persons on Premises:
The number of persons may not exceed the occupancy limits allowed by law for the premises on
which the license will be exercised.
5. Police Detail:
The number of officers, if any, and the hours during which a police detail will be required within the
Licensed Premises and, if required, for orderly parking and traffic control will be recommended by
the Police Department. Generally, those hours will include the entire duration of the function, 
including after service hours. The factors to be considered include the location of the premises, 
availability of on-site parking, the number of persons estimated to be in attendance and the time and
duration of the function.
6. Insurance:
When a one-day license is granted to be exercised on City-owned land or a City-owned
facility, the Licensee shall procure policies of insurance as provided herein. The Licensee shall
furnish certificates in form and substance satisfactory to the City evidencing each such insurance
coverage to the City prior to the issuance of the license.
(a) A Comprehensive General Liability policy on an occurrence basis endorsed to include
broad form comprehensive general liability including coverage for service of alcoholic
beverages with a combined single limit of liability of not less than
$1,000,000.00. The policy shall name the City, and its officers, agents, servants,
Page 12 of 21
Page 202
officials, representatives, employees, and consultants as additionally insured parties.
(b) The Licensee shall provide Workers’ Compensation Insurance as required by law.
(c) An Umbrella/Excess Liability insurance policy on an occurrence basis “following form”
of the primary coverage with a limit of liability of $5,000,000.00. The Umbrella/Excess
Liability insurance policy shall include but not be limited to the following coverage for
bodily injury, property damage and personal injury: (i) Premises - Operations Liability; 
(ii) Contractual Liability; (iii) Automobile Liability for owned, non-owned and hired
vehicles. The City, its officers, agents, servants, officials, representatives, consultants, 
and employees shall be named as additional insureds.
(d) All insurance shall be issued by insurance companies authorized to do insurance 
business in Massachusetts and rated not less than A-VIII in Best’s Insurance Guide and
will not be subject to cancellation or modification without thirty days prior written
notice to the City.
(e) Each policy of insurance obtained by Licensee hereunder shall contain a clause
denying the insurer any right of subrogation against the City.
C.  Additional Provisions. The following additional provisions shall apply to one day
licenses.
1. Departmental Approvals:
The Board of Health and the Inspectional Services Department must approve the Licensed 
Premises, including, where applicable, food service equipment. For any function to which the
general public will be admitted, the Inspectional Services Department must approve the Licensed
Premises as meeting handicap accessibility requirements.
2. Neighborhood Impact:
The applicant or such other person designated by name, address and local telephone number in the
application will be responsible for the orderly conduct of the function for which the license is issued.
Consumption of alcoholic beverage outside of the structure within which the Licensed Premises, i.e.,
where the function is held will not be permitted. Music, noise, or other function- related activities
must not create an undue imposition upon any adjacent residences. Police detail officers will be
instructed to respond appropriately to complaints. Such response may include an order to terminate
the event or otherwise limit the offending activity.
3. Submission of Applications:
One-day License applications must be complete and submitted to the Licensing Office no later than
noon fourteen days prior to the date of the function Applicants should note that if an application is
denied by the Board Chair, and review by the Board is sought, the application
Page 13 of 21Page 203
must have been submitted sufficiently in advance of the event to allow review of the denial at a
regular meeting of the Board as provided below.
After submission, each application will be reviewed by the Health Department, Inspectional 
Services (including issues of handicap accessibility, if required), the Treasurer Collectors Office, 
Fire Department, and the Police Department (as to police detail required and number recommended
of bar tenders and servers). The Board Chair, or delegate(s), is hereby authorized to approve on
behalf of the Board one-day licenses meeting the requirements of this policy.
Applications that are not approved by the Board Chair may be brought to the Board for approval
and shall be accompanied by the Board Chair’s summary of reasons for declining approval. The
office of the Licensing Board must receive such requests for Board approval not later than noon on
the Tuesday of the calendar week before the day on which the licensed function is to begin.
4. License Application Fee:
a. No fee will be charged for one-day licenses for charitable fundraisers whether
or not the application is submitted by the real party in interest or by a caterer or
accommodator or other commercial provider.
b. One-day licenses for events associated with commercial activities such as
business promotional activities, business meetings, conventions, trade
association events, etc., will be charged a fee of
$50.00 for each license application.
XIV. Penalties, Procedure and Structure for Violations of the Ordinance and Regulations
A.  Purpose
The purpose of this penalty structure is to improve the ability of the Board to prevent alcohol abuse
and violation of the Laws. This Article XIV will help to achieve reasonable uniformity in the imposition of
penalties and to avoid confusion in the minds of the public, patrons, and Licensees due to a lack of
understanding of the consequences of violating the Laws and License terms. This Article XIV is intended to
empower the Board to consider the circumstances of each case and provide a mechanism by which
Licensees can improve their compliance with the Laws in the future.
B.  General Provisions
1. No Illegality on Premises. No Licensee shall permit any illegality to occur on the Licensed
Premises, regardless of whether such illegality relates to the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages. The Manager of Record shall at all times maintain order and decorum on the
premises and in the immediately surrounding area of the premises and shall cooperate with
City officials in ensuring safe and orderly facilities.
2. Reporting of Incidents. All violations of the Laws are to be reported to the Framingham
Page 14 of 21
Page 204
Police Department by the owner, Manager, Assistant Manager, or any employee of the Licensee
that becomes aware of an offense involving the Licensed Premises within twenty-four hours of
said violation unless the incident is serious enough to comprise public safety and needs
immediate attention at which time Framingham Police shall be notified forthwith. Failure to
report a violation involving the Licensed Premises constitutes a violation of these Regulations
and will subject the Licensee to appropriate discipline in accordance with the procedure set
forth herein.
3. Penalties; Generally. Penalties for offenses shall be in line with the City’s general goals of
protecting public safety and the general welfare. Penalties will also be imposed with the goal of
preventing future offenses. A violation of these Regulations alone (rather than state law or the
Ordinances) may give rise to the issuance of penalties pursuant to this Article to the extent
permitted under law. The nature and severity of the penalties imposed will be decided
according to the nature of the offense and the presence of mitigating or aggravating
circumstances as further described herein. All offenses by Licensees will result in the
imposition of a penalty of some degree. This will impress upon Licensees, managers, and
servers their responsibility for ensuring compliance with these Regulations, for prevention of
offenses and for compliance with the terms of licenses and the liquor laws of the
Commonwealth.
a. Types/Categories of License Penalties. Penalties by the Board may consist of any
one or more of the following as appropriate: (a) Revocation of License; (b) 
Suspension of License; (c) Modification of License; (d) Imposition of New 
Conditions on the License; (e) Imposition of Monetary Fines; (f) Mandatory 
Participation in Alcohol Abuse and Offense Prevention Programs; and/or (g) any
other reasonable penalty, in the Board’s reasonable discretion.
b. Penalty Guidelines. The penalty guidelines stated in these Regulations are intended
to provide indication of the range of penalties the Board will impose if a hearing is
held on any offense. The Board will refer to these guidelines by deciding whether to
approve a negotiated recommended resolution.
4. Police Department Recommendation; Negotiation Procedure; Record Keeping. The Police
Department is authorized to negotiate with any authorized representative of the Licensee the
terms upon which the Police Department will recommend to the Board that an offense be
resolved. 
a. Any such negotiated recommended resolution must be in writing, signed by the
Manager of Record or designated representative of the Licensee charged with the
offense and approved by the Police Chief. The recommendation must include a
statement detailing the facts determined in the Police Department investigation. The
recommended resolution is not binding upon the City unless and until approved by the
Board.
b. If the Police Department and the Manager of Record and/or an authorized
representative of the Licensee cannot agree on a recommended resolution, the
Page 15 of 21
Page 205
c. Police Department will make any additional investigation it deems necessary for a
complete presentation of the facts and will file a written report with the Board.
d. The Board may consider, but is not required to accept, a negotiated resolution
recommended by the Police Department. The Board is empowered to consider
alternative penalties consistent with this Article XIV and the Laws.
e. The Police Department and the Board will maintain a public record of offenses and
their disposition that will be indexed according to the Licensee, Manager or Assistant
Manager, server and purchaser involved.
5. Notice to Licensee. Written notice shall be provided to a Licensee of an alleged violation of the
Laws. The notice provided to Licensee may contain the Police Department's recommendation to
the Board concerning the punishment for the alleged violation. The notice will include the date of
the event giving rise to the possible disciplinary action, a description of the event, and a clear
identification of the Laws that are alleged to have been violated as a result of the event. Said
notice will also provide Licensee with the date upon which the Board will hold a hearing
concerning the Licensee's  alleged violation. A notice containing the above-mentioned
information shall be sent to Licensee via certified mail return receipt requested no less than ten
(10) days prior to the date of the hearing before the Board. Licensees are entitled to retain
counsel to represent them at the hearing if they so desire.
6. Written Statement of Disciplinary Action. If the Board decides to take disciplinary action against
the Licensee for a violation of the Laws, the Board will provide the Licensee with a statement of
reasons why disciplinary action was taken against Licensee. The above-mentioned statement of
reasons will be included with the notice of the Board’s disciplinary action.
C.  Determination of Penalties
Penalties will be determined according to the following procedure.
1.  The base level offense(s) will be determined from those offenses described in Article XIV,
Section D.
2.  Adjustments according to the presence of factors that warrant an increase in the penalty
described in Article XIV, Section E ("aggravating factors") or decrease described in Article
XIV, Section F (“mitigating factors") will be considered.
3.  Adjustments according to the number of violations involved in the particular offense will be
considered.
4.  Adjustments according to the offender's acceptance of responsibility described in Article XIV,
Section F will be considered. 
Page 16 of 21
Page 206
5.  Increases according to the number and circumstances of prior violations and penalties
previously imposed upon the offender described in Article XIV, Section G will be 
considered. The Board is entitled to consider fines or suspensions issued by the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission in evaluating said prior violations and penalties.
6.  Increases based on any previous written warnings given by the City to the Licensee will be
considered. Such increases will consider the date(s) of the written warning(s), the reasons
therefore, and the similarity of the incident resulting in the warning with the incident at
issue.
7.  Adjustments according to the consequential misconduct described in Article XIV, 
Section H that is related to the base level violation will be considered.
D. Base level offenses
All references in this subsection are to sections of Chapter 138 unless otherwise noted.
1. Sale outside of permitted hours (Chapter 138, Sections 12 and 15;
2. Purchase by person under age 21 (Chapter 138, Section 34A);
3. Employment by Licensee of person under age 18 for direct handling or selling of
alcohol;
4. Sale or delivery to a person under age 21 for own use or for use of another (Chapter 138, 
Section 34);
5. Sale to an intoxicated person (Chapter 138, Section 69);
6. Hindering or delaying investigation (Chapter 138, Section 63A);
7. Failure to post notice of penalty for driving under the influence and driving while
drinking from open container of alcoholic beverage (Chapter 138, Section 34D);
8. Failure to comply with section 204 CMR 4.03 (“Prohibition Against Happy Hours and
Discounted Sales”) of the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission regulations;
E.  Aggravating Factors
1. Failure to request identification card, operator's license, or passport;
2. Juvenile appearance of purchaser;
3. Use of altered identification; 
Page 17 of 21
Page 207
4. Refusal to cooperate in investigation;
5. Multiple sales on same occasion;
6. Quantity of beverage sold;
7. Staff not suitably trained;
8. Unregistered server;
9. Server unable to provide Server ID card upon request;
10. Underage server;
11. Violations of other laws such as: prostitution, solicitation, drugs
gambling, disorderly conduct, cigarette sales to minor;
12. Concealing violation(s);
13. Furnishing false information to investigator;
14. Exceeding lawful capacity of premises;
15. Intimidating or coercing witnesses or attempting to do so;
16. Offense occurring while under suspension of penalty;
17. Sale occurring while license suspended; and/or
18. The occurrence of any personal injuries or fatalities related to the underlying
violation.
F.  Mitigating Factors
1. Reasonable reliance upon an identification card or operator's license for proof of
identity or age. (Chapter 138, Section 34B);
2. Acceptance of responsibility as shown by:
a. Substantial and voluntary assistance offered in investigation
b. Public acknowledgment of responsibility
c. Agreement to participate in training program by Licensee, manager, and
servers
d. Prompt notice of decision not to contest charge and agreement to proposed
recommended resolution.
e. Agreement to participate in an effective program to detect and prevent future
Page 18 of 21
Page 208
offenses.
3. Attendance at the City’s Annual Alcohol Education Seminar.
4. Successful passing of alcohol compliance stings.
5. Random compliance checks without violations.
G. Previous Violations
1.  Same offense.
2.  Different offense.
3.  Recent prior offense.
4.  Same Manager.
5.  Same server.
6.  Severity of prior penalty.
7.  Offense while under suspension of prior penalty.
H. Consequential Misconduct Related to an Underlying Violation
1.  Operating under the influence.
2.  Causing personal injury or death.
3.  Causing property damage.
4.  Disturbance of the peace.
5.  Domestic violence.
I.  Imposition of Penalties or Other Outcomes
The Board will impose penalties for offenses consistent with this policy.
Offenders may expect one or more of the following consequences as appropriate in the
judgment of the Board.
1. Suspension of license for a stated number of days and specified dates. Licensees are advised
that the following chart only represents guidelines for use by the Chief of Police and the Board
when making their respective recommendation and decision in response to aLicense violation. 
The Board, in accordance with the mitigating and aggravating factors presented above, retain
the authority to deviate from these penalty guidelines where the circumstances are appropriate.
First violation: 1 to 3-day suspension, regardless of amount of penalty suspended, if any;
Second violation: 4 to 6-day suspension, regardless of amount of penalty suspended, if any;
Third violation: 7 to 15-day suspension, regardless of amount of
Page 19 of 21
Page 209
penalty suspended, if any;
Fourth violation: 16 to 30-day suspension, regardless of amount of
penalty suspended, if any;
Fifth violation: 31 days to one year suspension, or revocation, regardless of
amount of penalty suspended, if any:
Sixth violation: Revocation of license for remaining period of current
license and one year beyond.
The Board will consider the longevity of a Licensee when determining suspensions and
penalties based on the following chart:
Years Without a Violation
Less than 3 Years
3 to 5 years
5 to 7 years
7 or more years 
Relief
Subject to the Rules and Regulations of the Board
One day relief (i.e., from three days to two)
Two days’ relief (i.e., from three days to one)
Three or more days’ relief
1. Suspension of License for a stated number of days and specified dates, with a portion of the
suspension deferred upon condition that no further offenses occur within a specified period
of time and that Licensee waives right to hearing upon such further offense.
2. Revocation of License or suspension of registration of server for a specified period of time after
a due process hearing for cause, and thereby limiting or preventing the employment of a server
by a Licensee within the City.
3. Mandatory participation in prevention programs by Licensee, Manager, Assistant
Manager, and server as appropriate.
4. Appropriate publicity of offense and disposition.
While the Board will endeavor to impose penalties upon Licensees in a manner consistent with these
Regulations and this Article XIV, where exigent or special circumstances warrant, such as a
violation of these regulations resulting in serious personal injury or death, the Board retains the
authority in such circumstances to immediately order a full hearing, provide a Licensee an 
opportunity to present evidence, and to revoke a license where the evidence so warrants a
revocation.
J.  Reporting of Violations and Penalties Imposed
The Board shall receive semiannual reports from the Police Department and/or Licensing Administrator
Page 20 of 21
Page 210
detailing violations of these Regulations from the date of the previous reporting period, and the penalties
imposed by the Board for said violations. Reports shall be submitted to the Board no later than May 1 and
November 1 of each year. The Board will use these reports to analyze the factors are commonly associated
with violations, such as over serving, underage serving, failure of serving training or registration, etc. This
process will allow the Board to periodically review this policy and recommend any areas of the policy that
need to be amended, and/or updated. 
# # #
Page 21 of 21
