MINUTES OF THE MEETING
OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
OF STRATEGIC FORECASTING, INC.
A regular meeting of the Board of Directors of Strategic Forecasting, Inc., a Delaware corporation was called to order at 1:00 p.m. EST on April 6, 2006.
Board members present in DC were Don R. Kuykendall, David Hoppmann and Stephen Feldhaus. Present via VTC in Austin were George Friedman and invited Secretary of the Board, Meredith Friedman.
I.	Call to Order.
Don R. Kuykendall called the meeting to order and noted that a quorum was present.
II.	Approval of the Minutes.
The Minutes of the meeting of the Board of Directors, held on February 6, 2006, were approved.
III.       Financial Review
Don Kuykendall reviewed the finances of the company, profit and loss statement. IRS agreement will start in May.  DK also reviewed the accounts receivable and accounts payable. 
lV.	Administration.
Opening remarks were made by George Friedman, CEO who reviewed the metrics from October 05-March 06. 
V.	CEO/Operations Review
George Friedman reviewed the revenue for individual and institutional sales.
Friedman reported that we have sold ten (10) Global Vantage contracts by March 31.
c.   Suggestion to add free institutional subscription to each CIS contract.
d. Discussed renewal process and need to build new database and have someone manually oversee transition to new database.
e.  Discussion on needing marketing money for publishing in next 2 quarters.
VII.     Other Business
Stephen Feldhaus led discussion on recapitalization, proposed numbers for Class A shares and value of publishing company.
VIII.	Next Meeting
Next board meeting is to be 1p.m. eastern on June 8.
IX.       Closing Remarks
           
           George Friedman made some closing remarks.
X.       Adjournment 
There being no further business to come before the meeting, upon motion duly made and seconded, the meeting was adjourned at 3:00 pm EST.
Respectfully submitted,
Meredith Friedman
Secretary
Approved:
Don Kuykendall, Chairman
Date:	2
