CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
March 1, 2022
Paid Internship 
RFP #22-098
March 1, 2022
POSITION: 4 Land Management Seasonal Crew Members
DEPARTMENT: Planning and Community Development Department/Conservation and 
Open Space Division
SALARY: $17.32 hourly 
HOURS: Monday – Friday 8:00am to 4:30pm 
Statement of Duties: Employee performs a range of land management duties including mowing, 
planting, management of invasive plant species, restoring plant and wildlife habitats, parking lot
maintenance, and trail clearing. Employee is required to perform all similar or related duties. The
Employee works with the Conservation Administrator as well as the Land Stewardship Coordinator, 
Land Management Supervisor, and other Crew Members. Additionally, the Employee engages the
public in educational and recreational affairs as well as works collaboratively with other Framingham
City Departments including Parks and Recreation and Department of Public Works. 
Supervision Required: Employee works under the direct supervision of the Land Management
Supervisor and collaborates with the Conservation Administrator and the Land Stewardship
Coordinator. The supervisor reviews the work in progress or upon completion. 
Supervisory Responsibility: Occasional supervision of volunteers may be needed. 
Essential Functions: 
The essential functions or duties listed below are intended only as illustrations of the various type of
work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them
from the position if the work is similar, related, or a logical assignment to the position. 
1. Performs a range of land management activities including but not limited to greeting and
interacting with visitors to conservation lands, mowing, planting, management of invasive
plant species, restoring plant and wildlife habitats, parking lot maintenance, trail clearing, 
and collaboratively working with other seasonal crew members. 
2. Performs a range of maintenance duties including, cleaning of equipment, parking lot
upkeep, and raking of gravel and dirt trails. 
3. Interacting with Crew Members, Land Management Supervisor and volunteers in an
outdoor setting. 
4. Collaborates with other departments within the City of Framingham such as the
Department of Public Works and the Department of Parks and Recreation on various
projects as needed. 
Page 2
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education and Experience: 
•  Preferred: Interest in a Bachelor’s degree in Environmental Sciences or equivalent. 
•  Experience working outside in all weather conditions with some experience in interacting with
the public in a professional setting. 
•  Preferred additional experience: Previous experience working collaboratively on group
projects in an outdoor setting under various weather conditions while performing Conservation
or Park Land Management tasks. 
Special Requirements: 
•  Valid Class D Motor Vehicle License. 
Knowledge, Abilities and Skill
Knowledge: General knowledge of conservation land management and of landscaping tools is
preferred for working with the Land Management Seasonal Crew Members. 
Abilities: Plan and prioritize work, and perform multiple tasks, work independently, and be self-
motivated. Must be able to interact effectively and appropriately within a fast-paced municipal
environment. 
Skills: Proficient customer service skills; proficient oral communication skills. Ability to engage a
member or an audience of the Public in meaningful interactions. Ability to motivate others in less
than ideal weather conditions. 
Physical and Mental Requirements 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee
to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made
to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the position’s essential functions. 
Physical Skills: Moderate physical demands are required to perform the essential functions of
the position. Work effort principally involves walking to perform work tasks, with intermittent
periods of stooping, sitting, kneeling, twisting, and reaching with hands and arms, and
significant periods of time either crouching or standing. There may also be some occasional
lifting and carrying of objects up to 30 pounds. Employee may be required to walk several
miles over uneven terrain during the course of the day to perform job duties. 
Motor Skills: Position requires the application of basic motor skills for activities including but
not limited to operating a motorized vehicle, lawn mower, weed whacker, vegetation pruning
tools, and watercrafts. 
Visual Skills: The employee is required to constantly be outside in all-weather which may
include instances of glare or harsh sunlight during the summer months. 
Confidentiality: In accordance with the State public relations law, employee has access to
confidential information of the department such as client and department records. 
Page 3
Accountability: Consequences of errors or poor judgment may include injury to persons or
equipment. Employee is accountable to the actions of him, her or their selves including health
and safety requirements. 
Judgment: Numerous standardized practices, procedures or general instructions govern the
work performed and, in some cases, may require additional interpretation. Judgment is
needed to locate, select and apply the most pertinent practice or procedure, regulation or
guideline. 
Complexity: The work consists of a variety of duties which generally follow standardized
practices, procedures, regulations or guidelines. The sequence of work and/or the procedures
followed vary according to the nature of the assignment and/or the information involved, or
sought, in a particular situation. 
Work Environment: Employee may be required to perform various field work in all weather
conditions, and may be required to work beyond normal business hours during special events. 
Nature and Purpose of Relationships: Relationships are primarily with co-workers and the
public. More than ordinary courtesy, tact and diplomacy may be required to resolve complaints
or deal with uncooperative or uninformed persons. 
Occupational Risk: Duties of the job present a small risk of injury to the employee. Risk
exposure is similar to that found in various field work tasks during the summer months
including exposure to extreme weather conditions, ticks, and poison ivy. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
