CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
February 25, 2022 
RFP#22-096
February 25, 2022
POSITION: 7 Summer Laborers 
DEPARTMENT: Parks and Recreation
SALARY RANGE: $14.98 - $17.21 Hourly 
HOURS: Monday – Friday 7:00am to 3:30pm 
Nights and Weekends as needed
Basic Purpose: 
Provides needed labor to maintain park facilities. Operates park maintenance equipment to perform
necessary maintenance to athletic fields, active and passive recreation areas, and park related areas. 
Major Responsibilities: 
Must be able to perform normal labor associated with park maintenance, including, but not limited to, 
painting, mowing, trimming, trash removal, ball field maintenance, raking, cleaning and general
landscaping type activities. 
Familiar with the operation of power equipment, including blowers, trimmers, mowers, leaf vacuums, 
paint machines, infield groomers, rollers, generators. Responsible for the proper care and
maintenance of equipment assigned. 
Familiar with safe operations of all equipment. 
May be asked to work independently under certain conditions with little supervision. Must be able to
work as a lead worker for certain assignments. 
Must be able to work shifts as required and work under varying weather conditions. Must be available
during all seasons as needed. 
Job Qualifications: 
Applicant must be at least eighteen (18) years of age, and have experience sufficient to indicate the
aptitude to do the work safely and efficiently. 
Must be licensed to operate a motor vehicle as provided under Chapter 90, Section 8, of the
Massachusetts General Laws with Class D license as designated by the Registrar. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
cap acit y to co nfid ent ly and co mp et ent ly eng ag e wit hin and acro ss difference. 
Page 2
Given an evolving national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our
city, the City of Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its
community climate, culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
