CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
May 11, 2022
POSITION: Assistant Director of Libraries
DEPARTMENT: Library
SALARY RANGE: $96,536.00 - $108,272.00 
HOURS: 37.5 hours per week, some evenings required 
RFP # 22-134
May 11, 2022
The Framingham Public Library, a recognized leader in collaborative programming, located 20 miles
west of Boston with a 53,000 sq. ft. Downtown Main Library, a 17,000 sq. ft. branch library, and a
Bookmobile, seeks a dynamic and energetic Assistant Director of Libraries with the creativity, 
flexibility, and enthusiasm to lead our staff in delivering exceptional library services focused on access
and equity. 
Position Purpose: 
▪  The Assistant Library Director is responsible for assisting the Director in the administration
of the Library operations. 
▪  Work includes supervising and scheduling the work of employees, assessing and
implementing policies and procedures, planning programs and events, and representing
the Library at various meetings. 
▪  Assumes responsibility as department head during temporary absences of the Director. 
Employee is required to perform all similar or related duties. 
Nature and Purpose of Relationships: Maintains collaborative, positive working relationships
with co-workers, the public, groups and/or individuals such as civic leaders, peers from other
organizations, and representatives of professional organizations. In close collaboration, with active
communication, and under the direction of the Director, the employee serves as a spokesperson
or recognized authority of the organization to advance and articulate library goals, policies, 
practices, procedures, regulations or guidelines in matters of substance or considerable
importance. May be required to discuss controversial matters where tact is required to avoid
friction and obtain cooperation. 
Essential Functions: 
(The essential functions or duties listed below are intended only as illustrations of the various type of
work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them from
the position if the work is similar, related, or a logical assignment to the position.)
▪  Assists Director by analyzing policies, procedures and services; suggests actions necessary to
achieve most efficient and effective results. 
Page 2
▪  Facilitates communication between Library administration, staff and patrons; assesses impact
of decisions on interdepartmental operations and relations. 
▪  With guidance from the Director, and in collaboration with Department Heads, community
partners, and supporting organizations, manages Library Volunteer Program, interviews
prospective volunteers, and creates and coordinates short-term youth job opportunities. 
▪  Schedules public service staff for summer hours and Sunday openings. 
▪  May author grants. Tracks and maintains library-wide grants and reports within the City
system. 
▪  Assists Director in compiling data for annual reports. Responsible for collecting and submitting
data for the ARIS (Annual Report Information Survey).
▪  In collaboration with Graphics Team, reviews monthly newsletter and other Library
publications. 
▪  Prepares weekly payroll for public service staff. 
▪  Works with Library Administrative staff, Human Resources, and other City staff to facilitate
hiring process, and complete and schedule necessary hiring paperwork and procedures. Works
with Director and other key staff to review applications and select candidates for interview. 
▪  Works with Library Administration and City staff to facilitate the onboarding of new personnel. 
▪  Reviews appropriate employees annually in collaboration with the Director. 
▪  Attends monthly meetings of Library Trustees and meetings of other City Boards and
Committees as required. 
▪  Serves as Library’s representative to and as a member of the board of various organizations
and committees. 
▪  Plans programs and events for the community based on needs or interests. 
▪  Responds to staff and patron suggestions, resolves patron complaints
Confidentiality: In accordance with public records law, employee has access to collective
bargaining negotiations, lawsuits, personnel files and confidential information of the department. 
Accountability: Consequences of errors or poor judgment may include missed deadlines, 
adverse public relations, monetary loss, labor/material costs and jeopardize programs. 
Judgment: The work requires examining, analyzing and evaluating facts and circumstances
surrounding individual problems, situations or transactions, and determining actions to be taken
within the limits of standard or accepted practices. Guidelines include a large body of policies, 
practices and precedents which may be complex or conflicting, at times. Judgment is used in
analyzing specific situations to determine appropriate actions. Employee is expected to weigh
efficiency and relative priorities in conjunction with procedural concerns in decision making. 
Page 3
Requires understanding, interpreting, and applying state and departmental policies, rules and
regulations. 
Complexity: The work consists of the practical application of a variety of concepts, practices
and specialized techniques relating to a professional or technical field. Assignments typically
involve evaluation and interpretation of factors, conditions or unusual circumstances; inspecting, 
testing or evaluating compliance with established standards or criteria; gathering, analyzing and
evaluating facts or data using specialized fact-finding techniques; or determining the methods to
accomplish the work. 
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education and Experience: Must have a Master’s Degree in Library Science, and five to seven 
(5-7) years of Library administration and supervisory experience; or an equivalent combination of
education and experience. 
Knowledge, Abilities and Skill
Knowledge: Working knowledge of Library science and information practices and procedures. 
Knowledge of personnel administration, grant writing, budgeting, purchasing, programming, and
computer operations. 
Abilities: Ability to oversee Library operations and supervise employees, communicate effectively
both orally and in writing, and to plan and prioritize tasks. Ability to access the internet to obtain
information in support of department operations. 
Skills: Skill in assessing the needs of the community, and developing programs and services to meet
the needs of the community. Skill in business administration, statistics, analysis, and budget
administration. 
Physical Requirements 
(The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee
to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made
to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the position’s essential functions.)
● Work is performed mostly in an office setting; hand-eye coordination is necessary to operate
computers and various pieces of office equipment. Specific vision abilities required by this job
include close vision and the ability to adjust focus. 
● While performing the duties of this job, the employee frequently is required to stand and talk
or hear; use hands and fingers to handle, feel, or operate objects, tools, or controls and reach
with hands and arms. 
● The employee is occasionally required to walk; sit; climb or balance; stoop, kneel, or crouch. 
● The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 40 pounds. 
Page 4
Supervision: 
Supervision Scope: Employee works under the general direction of the Director of Libraries. 
Employee plans and carries out the regular work in accordance with standard practices and
previous training, with substantial responsibility for determining the sequence and timing of action
and substantial independence in planning and organizing the work activities, including
determining the work methods. The employee is expected to solve, through experienced
judgment, most problems of detail or unusual situations by adapting methods or interpreting
instructions to resolve the particular problem. Instructions for new assignments or special projects
usually consist of statements of desired objectives, deadlines and priorities. Technical and policy
problems or changes in procedures are discussed with Director, but ordinarily the employee plans
the work, lays it out and carries it through to completion independently. Work is generally
reviewed only for technical adequacy, appropriateness of actions or decisions, and conformance
with policy or other requirements; the methods used in arriving at the end result are not usually
reviewed in detail. 
Supervision Received: Employee works under the general direction of the Director of Libraries. 
Supervision Given: In collaboration and communication with the Director, the employee is
responsible for the direct supervision of approximately (85) full time and part-time employees, 
with time spent assigning, checking and reviewing the work of subordinates. Supervisory
responsibility includes direct accountability for work results. Employee is also responsible for
assisting the Director in budget development and control for the department, and may act as the
department head during absences. A large number of employees are located in a separate
location than the supervisor, and the workload is subject to fluctuations that can be planned for in
advance. 
Job Environment: Work is performed in a Library setting. Noise or physical surroundings may
be distracting, but conditions are generally not unpleasant. The employee is required to work
beyond normal business hours in order to attend evening meetings and in accordance with the
Library’s hours of operation. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
