CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
April 20, 2022 
RFP #22-112
April 20, 2022 
POSITION: Assistant Head of Children’s Experience: Branch, L-11
DEPARTMENT: Library
SALARY: $26.16 - $35.70 per hour; $51,012 - $69,633 annually
HOURS: 37.5 hours/week; 2 evenings and alternating Fridays/Saturdays 
The Framingham Public Library, a recognized leader in collaborative programming, located 20 miles
west of Boston with a 53,000 sq. ft. Downtown Main Library, a 17,000 sq. ft. branch Library, and a
Bookmobile, seeks an innovative and dynamic Assistant Head of Children’s Experience with the
creativity, flexibility, and enthusiasm to provide exceptional Library services focused on access and
equity. 
Position Purpose: 
Serves as the Assistant Head of Children’s Experience for the Framingham Public Library’s McAuliffe
Branch. Promotes and provides exemplary customer service to a vibrant, multi-cultural population in
the city of Framingham, the premier resource for free inquiry, creative enrichment, and lifelong
learning. Exemplifies innovation, flexibility, collegiality and enthusiasm for all aspects of Library
customer service. 
Assists in leading a cohesive Children’s Department, fostering communication and collegiality between
the McAuliffe Branch Staff and Main Library Staff. Develops a unified team, focused on delivering
excellence in Children’s Services system-wide. 
The job functions listed herein are neither exclusive nor exhaustive, but are intended to be illustrative of
the types of tasks the employee will most likely be expected to perform on a regular basis. The employee
may be asked to perform different or additional tasks than the ones listed here, as the needs of the
employer and/or the requirements of the position change. 
•  Assists in leading a cohesive Children’s Department, fostering communication and collegiality
between the McAuliffe Branch Staff and Main Library Staff. Develops a unified team, focused on
delivering excellence in Children’s Services system-wide. 
•  Provides expert guidance, using print and electronic resources, to children and adults requesting
information in the Children’s Room. Assists patrons in borrowing and using all Library materials
and accessing digital resources. Provides information on Library policies and procedures. Assists
in the refinement of Library policies and procedures. 
•  Plans, prepares, and conducts story times and other programs, department tours and
orientations, school visits and other outreach activities in consultation with the Head of
Children’s Experience. 
•  Collaborates with Children’s Department colleagues and other departments actively to develop
children’s and family programming. 
Page 2
•  Has direct contact with vendors and performers. Participates in writing and administering
outreach, programming, community services, and grant proposals. 
•  Collaborates with Framingham School Department and Library Administration to advance
partnerships. Facilitates Library card creation for FPS school children. Works closely with
educators on curriculum and homework support; helps ensure student success through
Summer Reading Program. 
•  Works with the Head of Children’s Experience to develop and maintain Branch Children’s
collection. Manages budget for children’s materials. May generate custom reports to facilitate
maintenance of Library collections. 
•  Creates displays and marketing materials to showcase materials and programs. 
•  Performs an array of circulation duties, and provides a warm, welcoming, and accessible patron
experience for all Library users. 
•  Ensures the confidentiality of patron records according to Library policy and Mass General Law. 
•  Provides Reader’s Advisory. May plan and lead book discussions. 
•  Provides direction and training to other personnel as required. 
•  Is pro-active in bringing emerging technologies and visions for improvement and implementation
of children’s services to the public. 
•  Accurately collects and maintains Library statistics as required for the ARIS report or requested
by Library Administration. 
•  Participates on Library committees and Minuteman Library Network working groups. 
•  Monitors safety of the Library facility for employees and the public. Responds appropriately to
emergencies and keeps Library Administration informed of any problematic situation. 
•  May cover the Main Library or Bookmobile as needed or assigned. 
•  Follows safe work practices. 
•  Performs related duties as assigned. 
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education, Training and Experience: 
Master’s Degree in Library Science from an ALA accredited institution; one to three (1-3) years of
Library and supervisory experience; familiarity with collection development and children’s Library
services necessary; or any equivalent combination of education and experience. 
Knowledge, Ability and Skill: 
Knowledge of: 
•  Library procedures, including database searching and interlibrary loan
•  Integrated Library Systems (ILS), Innovative Sierra preferred
•  Library electronic collections and technologies
•  Exemplary customer service to ensure excellent patron experience
•  Children’s literature and current educational practices and trends 
Ability to: 
•  Work under pressure, prioritize projects and department operations efficiently 
•  Interface with the community and serve as a representative of the Library
•  Interact effectively with children and parents
•  Work in a fast paced environment
•  Exhibit humor, tact, flexibility, and initiative
Page 3
•  Learn new software and hardware quickly
•  Embrace change and contribute to the overall mission of the Library
Skill in: 
•  Leadership and supervisory skills
•  Social media applications
•  Familiarity with Spanish and Portuguese is desirable
Physical Requirements: 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an
employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations
may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to
enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. 
● Work is performed mostly in an office setting; hand-eye coordination is necessary to operate
computers and various pieces of office equipment. Specific vision abilities required by this job
include close vision and the ability to adjust focus. 
● While performing the duties of this job, the employee frequently is required to stand and talk
or hear; use hands and fingers to handle, feel, or operate objects, tools, or controls and reach
with hands and arms. 
● The employee is occasionally required to walk; sit; climb or balance; stoop, kneel, or crouch. 
● The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 40 pounds. 
Supervision: 
Supervision Received: Head of Children’s Experience 
Supervision Given: Up to four to six (4-6) full and part time staff
Job Environment: 
Work is performed primarily in an office environment with normal office noise and traffic. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
Page 4
