CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
March 30, 2022
POSITION: Bathhouse Attendants 
DEPARTMENT: Parks and Recreation
SALARY RANGE: $14.00 - $16.08 hourly 
HOURS: Monday – Sunday 10:00am to 7:00pm 
RFP # 22-114
March 30, 2022 
Basic Purpose: 
Responsible for cleaning of the bathhouse and checking beach passes of patrons of the beach
Organizational Scope: 
Bathhouse attendants work hours as assigned by Head Guard, works under the direction of the Head
Guard and/or Assistant Guard on duty. 
Major Responsibilities: 
•  Help in getting equipment ready for the day. 
•  Clean bathhouse and disinfect toilets twice daily. 
•  Make visual checks of toilets and dressing areas every 15 minutes. Clean when necessary. 
•  Prevent loitering in bathhouse. 
•  Keeps first aid equipment available and ready and full in an assigned area free of clutter. 
•  Keep emergency and diving equipment ready. If an emergency occurs, Call 911, put vest on and
wait on shore near the person who reported the incident. See additional procedures under the
EAP. 
•  Do any tasks related to maintenance and emergency as described by Head/Assistant Guards. 
•  Sweeps walkway and picks up trash along fence line. 
•  Stays at the gate to check beach tags or license for residency except when relieved by another
staff person. Gate should never be unattended! 
•  When selling tags, have person complete form (max 6 tags per family, max 2 adults per request) 
check residency and charge accordingly. Give receipt and tell them that the yellow copy will
expire in 7 days. Tags can be picked up at the beach
•  Completes daily log of entries by balancing money with #’s of people on beach 
Page 2
Job Qualifications: 
Applicant must be at least eighteen (18) years of age, and have experience sufficient to indicate the
aptitude to do the work safely and efficiently. 
Must be licensed to operate a motor vehicle as provided under Chapter 90, Section 8, of the
Massachusetts General Laws with Class D license as designated by the Registrar. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
