POSITION: 
DEPARTMENT: 
SALARY RANGE: 
HOURS: 
CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
March 31, 2022 
RFP#22-115
March 31, 2022 
Beach Director
Parks & Recreation
$21.17 - $24.31 hourly
Monday - Sunday 8:00 am – 7:00 pm/10 weeks
Beach Director works under the general supervision of the Superintendent of Recreation or designee. 
He/she works on own initiative and must exercise judgment in performing the various duties
associated with the operations of the City beaches. 
Must use tact, diplomacy and firmness when required in dealing with City residents. 
THE FOLLOWING IS A LIST OF DUTIES: 
•  Responsible for supervision of the activities and personnel of the three City beaches. 
•  Responsible for the proper operation of the beaches, enforcement of regulations, planning for and
insuring that all safety precautions, safety equipment and personnel are available at all times
when the beaches are open to the public. 
•  Providing ongoing training for lifeguard emergency procedures and general policies governing
beach procedures and operations. 
•  Responsible for weekly beach reports and time sheets. 
•  Providing ongoing training for lifeguard emergency procedures and general policies governing
beach procedures and operations. 
•  Making sure all beaches are supplied adequately with cleaning and first aid supplies, as well as
maintenance and emergency equipment. 
•  Reporting all maintenance problems to the Supt. of Recreation
•  Plans and supervises programs providing swimming lessons from elementary to advanced levels
given at the beaches. Arranges for refresher courses for Head lifeguards and lifeguards, first aid
instructions, periodic inspections, and drills. 
•  Maintain records and submits reports pertaining to instructional classes or accidents. 
•  Handles collection of Beach entrance money as needed. 
•  Applicants must be at least 25 years of age, certified in Lifeguard Training, CPR, First Aid and
have current Water Safety Instructor Certifications. Applicant must have a valid MA motor vehicles
operator’s license and reliable transportation. Must be available to work weekends. 
Page 2
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
