CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
May 2, 2022
POSITION: Benefits Assistant 
DEPARTMENT: Human Resources 
SALARY RANGE: $44,762.00 - $48,453.00
HOURS: Monday, Wednesday & Thursday 8:30am to 5:00pm
Tuesday 8:30am to 7:00pm
Friday 8:30am to 2:00pm 
RFP#22-125
May 2, 2022
Position Purpose: 
This role performs moderately complex administrative support related to the daily operations of the
Human Resources Benefits Department. This role assists with administer of benefits, including
medical, dental, retiree, wellness and other benefits for city, school employees, and retirees. Performs
all other related work as required. 
Essential Functions: 
(The essential functions or duties listed below are intended only as illustrations of the various types of
work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them
from the position if the work is similar, related or a logical assignment to the position.)
▪  Processes a range of monthly bills and prepares deposits not limited to balancing accounts, 
preparation of worksheets, batching and releasing payments through MUNIS. 
▪  Transfers benefits such as health, dental, life, supplemental life, and employees paying back
benefits owed on a regular basis. 
▪  Processes COBRA notices, prepares paperwork when employees have a change in insurance, or
termination of employment. 
▪  Coordinates new hire orientation: provides assistance to new hires and reviews City benefits
including: medical, dental and life insurance plans; enrolls them for any benefits they may want to
enroll in with proper completion of required payroll forms. 
▪  Assists employees on completion of all paperwork as well as reviews all policies when necessary. 
▪  Advises Retirement Board of changes made to retirees’ insurance. 
▪  Makes insurance changes in MTRS computer database for all school retirees. 
▪  Consults with Medicare eligible retirees on the steps that need to be taken when changing to
Medicare and how to choose a supplemental plan that meets their needs. 
▪  Administers the employee direct pay program in accordance with City policy. Monitors employees
and retirees, unpaid status due to LOA, workers compensation, and surviving spouse if eligible. 
Creates and maintains general billing database for Direct Pay program participants. Generates
monthly invoice through municipal financial software program and oversees the mailing of
generated invoices. 
Page 2
▪  Tracks Direct Pay payments received by collector and works with delinquent accounts by setting
up payment plans or terminating benefits. Perform monthly and yearly audits of Direct Pay
records. 
▪  Plans, coordinates and executes health fair for school/City employees. Consists of room location
and setup, contacting vendors, arranging for materials to be shipped ahead, provide snacks, 
drinks, etc. 
▪  Initiates, plans and executes a Wellness Program for City employees: bringing in speakers, 
initiating weight loss workshops, stress reduction, exercise programs, etc. 
▪  Meets potential vendors to see what benefit they could be to Framingham employees (wellness
vendors, financial vendors, mortgage specialists...etc.)
▪  Covers for other department personnel when away from their desks. 
▪  Assists in supporting other department personnel in major projects. 
▪  Performs similar or related work as required, directed or as situation dictates. 
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education, Training and Experience: 
Bachelor’s Degree in a business or related field, 5+ years of benefits or HR Administration experience; 
or any equivalent combination of education and experience. Shine certification helpful. 
Knowledge, Ability and Skill: 
Knowledge: Knowledge of word processing and spreadsheets. Knowledge of commonly used human
resources concepts, practices and procedures. 
Ability: Ability to maintain effective working relationships with others. Must be accurate, thorough
and well organized in working with detailed information; takes initiative to assure timely compliance
with deadlines and the resolution of pending matters. Ability to maintain tact and discretion in
challenging situations and interactions with employees and the public. Ability to maintain confidential
information and to respond quickly to unexpected project with short deadlines or changes in
important procedures. 
Skill: Strong organizational and interpersonal skills. Strong communication skills; demonstrates a
highly proficient use of computers, office automation, and other department specific computer
applications, skill in all of the above listed technologies, tools and equipment. 
Physical Requirements: 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee
to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made
to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. 
This position is works at a desk; moves around inside office to access file cabinets and office
machinery; and traverse stairs, occasionally lifts objects weighing up to 10 pounds, such as supplies, 
folders, and books, operates a keyboard and calculator at efficient speed and views computer screen
for extended periods of time. Requires the ability to recognize and identify differences between
colors, shapes and sounds associated with job-related objects, materials and tasks. 
Supervision: 
Supervision Scope: Follows established guidelines and procedures in order to perform routine
administrative functions. 
Page 3
Supervision Received: Works under the direct supervision of the Benefits Manager. 
Supervision Given: None. 
Job Environment: 
▪  Majority of work is performed under typical office conditions; the noise level is moderate. 
▪  Has frequent contact with city department heads, employees, retirees, elected officials, brokers, 
insurance representatives, vendors and other municipal Personnel/HR departments. Contacts are
in person, by telephone and in writing by email, fax or correspondence. 
▪  Has access to confidential employee records. 
▪  Errors could result in delays or loss of service, monetary loss, and legal ramifications. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
