CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
May 13, 2022 
RFP#22-150
May 13, 2022 
POSITION: City Solicitor
DEPARTMENT: Mayor 
SALARY RANGE: $160,920.00 - $188,000.00
HOURS: Monday, Wednesday & Thursday 8:30am to 5:00pm 
Tuesday 8:30am to 7:00pm 
Friday 8:30am to 2:00pm
Occasional after-hours meetings as requested by the Mayor
Essential Functions: 
It shall be the City Solicitor's duty, either personally or by such assistants as may be designated, to
perform all services incident to the legal department; to give advice in writing when so requested to
the Mayor, to prosecute or defend, as the case may be, all suits or cases to which the municipality
may be a party, and to provide other legal support as requested by the mayor or required by
ordinance. 
The essential functions or duties listed below are intended only as illustrations of the various type of
work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them
from the position if the work is similar, related, or a logical assignment to the position. 
•  Superintends the work of all Law Department staff, including Assistant City Solicitors, paralegals, 
and outside counsel. 
•  Meets with and advises the Mayor and other city departments as directed by the Mayor. 
•  Oversees the Law Department’s active litigation caseload from intake to conclusion before state
and federal courts, independent arbitrators, and various administrative agencies, including but
not limited to the Civil Service Commission, DLR, MCAD, JLMC, ABCC and DALA. 
•  Conducts legal research and drafts opinions on the Framingham Home Rule Charter and other
legal issues for the Mayor and other city departments as directed by the Mayor. 
•  Appears before the City Council and its committees, as well as City boards, committees and
commissions, as requested by the Mayor. 
•  Reviews and approves as to legal form on all City contracts. 
•  Provides legal risk assessment and management in all areas of City operations. 
•  Provides advice and opinions related to the compliance obligations of the City, its employees and
elected officials as required by the Mayor. 
•  Participates in the negotiation of all labor contracts, as well as grievances and arbitrations, for
the City with all city labor unions, as conducted by labor counsel, assistant city solicitors and/or
outside counsel. 
•  Manages claims against the City and seeks collection on claims on behalf of the City, in
conjunction with City divisions, departments, boards and commissions. 
•  Drafts or updates as necessary, ordinances, Home Rule Petitions, resolutions, rules and
regulations and policies and procedures. 
Page 2
•  Advocates for passage of the City’s state legislative initiatives. 
•  Interacts and works closely with City division and department heads to advise on legal aspects of
City work as directed by the Mayor. 
•  Prepares and oversees the administration of the legal department’s annual operating budget. 
•  Serves as the Legal Department’s Records Access Officer in responding to public records
requests. 
•  Upon Request of the Mayor, assists Departments and Boards and Commission in responding to
public records appeals to the Supervisor of Public Records and Open Meeting Law Complaints to
the Division of Open Government of the Office of Attorney General. 
•  Serves as the City’s Conflict of Interest Liaison to the State Ethics Commission pursuant to G.L. c. 
268A. 
•  Serves as the City’s official Keeper of Record for all documents in the Law Department. 
•  Must be reasonably available to respond to the Mayor and other appropriate city staff during
non-working days and hours. 
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
The City Solicitor shall have strong legal qualifications and shall be especially fitted by education, 
training and experience to perform the duties of the office. 
Education and Experience: 
Juris Doctor degree with more than ten (10) years prior work experience preferably in a municipal law
department or municipal law practice; or any equivalent combination of education, training and
experience which provides the required knowledge, skills and abilities to perform the essential
functions of the job. Must have experience in a fast-paced, high-volume environment, a
demonstrated ability to multitask and appropriately prioritize work amongst many high priority items
and experience advising executive leadership in complicated situations. 
Special Requirements: 
A member in good standing of the Massachusetts Bar and to the U.S. District Court for the District of
Massachusetts. Admission the U.S. First Circuit Court of Appeals is desirable but not required. 
Knowledge, Abilities and Skills: 
Knowledge: Thorough working knowledge of relevant city, state and federal laws, regulations, court
cases and administrative body decisions relevant to serving the needs of an urban municipality such
as Framingham. Working knowledge of municipal organization structure and municipal
services. Working knowledge of legislative processes. 
Abilities: Excellent abilities in organization, communication, both oral and written, as well as critical
analytical and managerial skills. Ability to manage multiple tasks in a detailed and accurate manner. 
Strong administrator with ability to manage law department budget, oversee/supervise employees
and develop, implement and monitor the effectiveness of a wide range of legal services. Ability to
work effectively with confidential information. Ability to work effectively with disgruntled employees
and members of the public. Ability to interact effectively with government officials at all levels. 
Page 3
Skill: Excellent people skills. Sensitivity to the political dynamics of the City. Effective data
processing skills including the application of word processing and spread sheet applications. Excellent
listening skills. Must possess necessary computer skills to function in a typical law office environment
as well as with software programs regularly used in Framingham city govern. 
Work Environment: 
The work environment involves everyday discomforts typical of indoor environments such as office
settings, with infrequent exposure to outside elements. Noise or physical surroundings may be
distracting, but conditions are generally not unpleasant. Employee may be required to work beyond
normal business hours to attend evening meetings. 
Physical and Mental Requirements: 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee
to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made
to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the position’s essential functions. 
Physical Skills: 
Little or no physical demands are required to perform the essential functions of this position. Work
effort principally involves sitting to perform work tasks, with intermittent periods of stooping, walking, 
and standing. There may also be some occasional lifting of objects such as office equipment or
photocopy paper (up to 30lbs.).
Motor Skills: 
Duties may involve assignments requiring application of hand and eye coordination with finger
dexterity and motor coordination. Examples include operating a phone system or a personal
computer. 
Visual Skills: 
Visual demands include constantly reading documents for general understanding and analytical
purposes. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Pease visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
