CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
May 18, 2022 
RFP#22-151
May 18, 2022
POSITION: Communications Intern
DEPARTMENT: Mayor 
SALARY: $17.00 Hourly
HOURS: Monday – Friday 
Flexible 20-30 hours per week 
Position Purpose: Working with the Public Information Officer and Chief of Staff, the
Communications Intern creates content for the city’s media platforms, with the goal of increasing
transparency, education, and community participation. 
Essential Functions: 
(The essential functions or duties listed below are intended only as illustrations of the various types of
work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them
from the position if the work is similar, related or a logical assignment to the position.)
•  Work with outside contractors (videographers and contracted webmaster) to produce such
content as videos, signage, and revamped webpages. 
•  Work with communications staff—in the mayor’s office or with other departments—to enhance
the city’s social media presence. 
•  Represent the city at community events and create appropriate social media content
•  Write press releases, web content, event prep materials, and constituent correspondence
•  Assist in revamping city newsletter
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education, Training and Experience: 
At least one year of college-level coursework, preferably with an emphasis on writing, 
communications, or similar. 
Knowledge, Ability and Skill: 
Knowledge: Knowledge of word processing and some social media platforms
Ability: Ability to meet deadlines and develop working relationships with others. Must be accurate, 
thorough, and well-organized. 
Physical Requirements: 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee
to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made
to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. This position primarily works
at a desk; occasionally goes offsite for meetings and events; occasionally lifts objects weighing up to
10 pounds, such as supplies, folders, and books, views computer screen for extended periods of time. 
Requires the ability to recognize and identify differences between colors, shapes and sounds
associated with job -related objects, materials and tasks. 
Page 2
Supervision Received: Works under the direct supervision of the Mayor’s Chief of Staff 
Job Environment: 
•  Majority of work is performed under typical office conditions; the noise level is moderate
•  Has frequent contact with city department heads, employees, elected officials, brokers, 
representatives of community groups, vendors. Contacts are in person, by telephone and in
writing by email or correspondence. 
•  Will occasionally travel to other locations in the city; access to a car not required
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
