CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
May 24, 2022 
RFP #22-128
May 24, 2022
POSITION: Emerging Technology Specialist, L-7
DEPARTMENT: Library
SALARY: $21.03 - $28.71 hourly; $41,024.00 - $56,000.00 annually
HOURS: 37.5 hours per week, alternating Fridays/Saturdays, two evenings per
week. Hours outside normal library operating hours may be required on
occasion. 
The Framingham Public Library, a recognized leader in collaborative programming, located 20 miles
west of Boston with a 53,000 sq. ft. Downtown Main Library, a 17,000 sq. ft. branch library, and a
Bookmobile, seeks a dynamic and energetic Emerging Technology Specialist to support patron and
staff technology services and infrastructure 
Position Purpose: 
Works with the Head of Technology Experience to support department activities. Provides exemplary
customer service for the Framingham Public Library, the premier resource for free inquiry, creative
enrichment, and lifelong learning. Exemplifies flexibility, diplomacy, and enthusiasm for library
customer service to the vibrant and diverse population of Framingham. 
Essential Functions: 
The job functions listed herein are neither exclusive nor exhaustive, but are intended to be
illustrative of the types of tasks the employee will most likely be expected to perform on a regular
basis. The employee may be asked to perform different or additional tasks than the ones listed here, 
as the needs of the employer and/or the requirements of the position change. 
•  Assists Supervisor of Technology in all aspects of Library technology including library hardware
and software. 
•  Under the direction of the Head of Technology Experience, supports staff and patron
technology usage by troubleshooting issues with networks, software, or devices such as
computers, printers, or mobile devices. 
•  Assists Head of Technology Experience in all aspects of hardware/software lifecycle: device
selection, evaluation, procurement, inventorying, testing, organization, configuration, 
documentation, deployment, troubleshooting, maintenance, and disposal. 
•  Troubleshoots issues with Sierra ILS and Encore, the online catalog, and works with
Minuteman Library Network technology staff to implement changes and updates to the ILS, 
Encore and to any other MLN administered technology such as Gmail email system, and
selected databases. 
•  Under the direction of the Head of Technology Experience, works with City of Framingham
Technology Services to support the phone system, network infrastructure, and administrative
PCs, etc. 
Page 2
•  Supports the “Mini-Key User” team in assisting individual departments with common
technology tasks. 
•  May be responsible for routine maintenance of technology in selected departments. 
Coordinates staff and patron training for meeting room technology including creating and
maintaining documentation for available technology. 
•  Sets up and conducts training sessions for outside users of meeting room technology. 
•  Works with the Head of Technical Processing, Head of Technology Experience, and key staff
to develop and maintain the “Library of Things” technology collection. 
•  Supports and participates with key staff including Supervisor of Community and Outreach
Services, Children’s Specialist Makers/Crafts, Collection Development Librarian, and Reference
staff in the development and execution of Adult Instructional Programming as it pertains to
technology skill building
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education, Training and Experience: 
Bachelor’s degree; 2 or more years of experience in public services or libraries preferred, or any
equivalent combination of training and experience which provides the following knowledge, ability, 
and skills. 
Knowledge, Ability and Skill: 
Knowledge of: 
Integrated Library Systems (ILS), Innovative Sierra preferred
Library operations and procedures
Microsoft Windows PCs and printers, including their configuration, usage, management, and
troubleshooting
Microsoft Office and Google Suite
Ability to: 
Work under pressure
Exhibit diplomacy, tact, flexibility, and initiative
Troubleshoot technology
Embrace change and contribute to the overall mission of the library 
Participate as an effective and enthusiastic member of the Library team 
Skill: 
Successful work in a fast paced and dynamic environment
Exemplary customer service skills to ensure excellent patron experience 
Excellent communication skills
Organization and time management skills
Familiarity with Spanish or Portuguese desirable 
Physical Requirements: 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an
employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations
may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to
enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. 
Page 3
● Work is performed mostly in an office setting; hand-eye coordination is necessary to operate
computers and various pieces of office equipment. Specific vision abilities required by this job
include close vision and the ability to adjust focus. 
● While performing the duties of this job, the employee frequently is required to stand and talk
or hear; use hands and fingers to handle, feel, or operate objects, tools, or controls and reach
with hands and arms. 
● The employee is occasionally required to walk; sit; climb or balance; stoop, kneel, or crouch. 
● The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 40 pounds. 
Supervision: 
Supervision Received: Head of Technology Experience 
Supervision Given: None
Job Environment: 
Work is performed primarily in an office environment with normal office noise and traffic. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
