CITY OF FRAMINGHAM 
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY 
January 4, 2022 
RFP#22-069
January 4, 2022 
POSITION: Field Assessors
DEPARTMENT: Assessor’s
SALARY RANGE: PR3 $53,661.40 - $66,764.36
HOURS: Monday, Wednesday & Thursday 8:30am to 5:00pm
Tuesday 8:30am to 7:00pm 
Friday 8:30am to 2:00pm 
Position Purpose: 
Under the direction of the Chief Assessor, the Field Assessor will be directly involved in all efforts to
value all City property will assist in the defense of assessed values during the appeals period; and will
help improve related processes, valuation models, and record keeping. 
Essential Functions: 
(The essential functions or duties listed below are intended only as illustrations of the various types of
work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them
from the position if the work is similar, related or a logical assignment to the position.)
▪  Assists Chief Assessor in valuing all city property on an annual basis for DOR value approval. 
May be responsible for other duties as assigned. 
▪  Participates in the maintenance, correction, and update of information in City’s computer assisted
Mass Appraisal (CAMA) systems and various other electronic databases. Organizes and
streamlines existing processes and systems to ensure accurate and efficient record keeping. 
▪  Responds to technical inquiries, handles all aspects of annual property data reporting requests, 
and manages related communications received by email, phone, and in person. 
▪  Meets with property owners and others regarding property values as assigned. Communicates
with outside organizations and other City departments to gather additional information. 
▪  Individually, and as part of a team, conducts physical field work such as inspections of properties
to collect and verify property data necessary for determining full and fair value for all property
types. Must possess valid motor vehicle driver’s license. 
▪  Is skilled in use of Microsoft Office Excel, Outlook, Access, and Word, and is able to generate
assessing system computer reports to assist in the analysis of assessment values. Prepares
valuation summaries and spreadsheet analyses for review by Chief Assessor. 
▪  Prepares analysis of potential liabilities posed by pending taxpayer appeals (abatement
applications) of assessed value and makes recommendations to Chief Assessor and the Board of
Assessors. 
▪  Assists Chief Assessor in maintenance of records and preparation of various reports as required by
city and state officials, including annual new growth report for personal property. 
Page 2
▪  Maintains awareness of current business trends relating to personal property to assist in
establishing appropriate market values and asset depreciation schedules. Follows rulings of the
Appellate Tax Board for insight into property values and recent case law that impacts personal
property values, and other assessing related values. 
▪  Provides coverage at the public counter as needed to respond to taxpayer all requests, and
performs other typical office duties as needed. 
▪  Performs special projects and other related duties as required, directed, or as the situation
dictates. 
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education, Training and Experience: 
Associates degree or equivalent work experience with a minimum of two (2) years of responsible
experience in assessing or appraising with emphasis or exposure to personal property, or work in a
Massachusetts municipal assessing department. Candidates must obtain Massachusetts Accredited
Assessor (MAA) designation within 48 months of hiring. 
Knowledge, Ability and Skill: 
Knowledge: Massachusetts General Law 59 and other assessing related laws, Knowledge of mass
appraisal value assessment process, Fundamentals of CAMA systems, particularly with Patriot
Properties AssessPro Appraisal software, Acceptable techniques and methods used to value personal
property and related property. General knowledge of mapping, surveying, and zoning, awareness of
local codes and regulations and other related industry standards such as USPAP, Standard 6. 
Ability: Communicate clearly, both orally and in writing (preferably using MicroSoft Excel, Outlook, 
and Word programs), Display courtesy, patience, tact, and maintain cooperative spirit with the
taxpaying public and others, Interpret and explain State laws and City policies related to valuation, 
Prepare concise written reports; perform a variety of complex tasks, Learn to operate software
necessary to perform assigned duties. 
Skill: Excellent customer service skills, Strong organizational skills, Skill in all of the above listed tools
and equipment. 
Physical Requirements: 
(The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee
to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made
to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.)
Most work is performed in a normal office environment, not subject to extreme variations of
temperature, lighting, noise, odors, etc. Must be able to operate computer, printer, photocopier, and
other basic office equipment. Outdoor work is required in inspecting properties and conducting other
property analysis. Outdoor work required in all weather conditions and is exposed to minor hazards
and some slippery terrain. Frequently required to walk, stand, climb, bend, reach, and lift 10 lb. 
objects. Must operate digital camera, measuring tape/wheel, laser tool, and other field equipment. 
Page 3
Supervision: 
Supervision Scope: Performs various duties requiring a thorough knowledge of departmental
operations and the exercise of considerable judgment to independently complete assigned tasks, and
to analyze the facts or circumstances surrounding issues not clearly defined by established
procedures. 
Supervision Received: Works under the direction of the Chief Assessor. 
Supervision Given: None. 
Work Environment: 
▪  Work is performed in an office environment. Majority of work is performed in a moderately quiet
work environment. 
▪  Operates computer, printer, telephone, copier, facsimile machine and all other standard office
equipment. 
▪  Makes frequent contact with City departments, the general public, Council, and Contractors. 
▪  Errors could result in delay or loss of service, and have potential legal and/or financial
repercussions. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
