CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
May 6, 2022 
RFP # 22-127
May 6, 2022
POSITION: Head of Technology Experience L-14
DEPARTMENT: Library
SALARY: $30.71 - $41.93/hour; $59,900 - $81,765 annual 
HOURS: 37.5 hours per week; evenings and weekends possible 
The Framingham Public Library, a recognized leader in collaborative programming, located 20
miles west of Boston with a 53,000 sq. ft. Downtown Main Library, a 17,000 sq. ft. branch library, 
plus a bookmobile, seeks a dynamic and energetic Supervisor of Technology and Information 
Services with the creativity, flexibility, and enthusiasm to develop and advance technology goals, 
programs, and services for the Framingham Public Library system. 
Position Purpose: 
Successful candidates will recognize the role of the public library in providing technology access 
and instruction, which is vital to individual and community success and enrichment and have a
strong focus on access to emerging technology experiences and instruction for both patrons and
staff. The position works in collaboration with Library Administration and staff to help the Library
fulfill its mission as the premier community resource for free inquiry, creative enrichment, and
lifelong learning. Works under the direction of the Director of Libraries and/or the Assistant 
Director of Libraries. Frequent contact with the public, community groups and other Library and 
City employees requires the exercise of tact, diplomacy, and flexibility. 
Essential Functions: 
(The essential functions or duties listed below are intended only as illustrations of the various
types of work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not
exclude them from the position if the work is similar, related or a logical assignment to the
position.)
▪  Provides positive public service. 
▪  Serves as systems administrator for the library’s local area network, including maintenance, 
security, backup, upgrade, repair, and monitoring of Server based network, software, and
network hardware. 
▪  Works in partnership with the City of Framingham Technology Services Department and the
Minuteman Library Network Technical Services to maintain, support, implement and develop
library systems, equipment and services. Attends Minuteman Library Network Key User
meetings and related training sessions. 
▪  Supervises Department Mini Key Users and oversees the operations of the Technology Team
to ensure optimum level of service for patrons and staff. 
Page 2
▪  Through networking, professional development, and research, actively stays abreast of
innovations in library technology and services. Collaborates with Library Administration and 
▪  staff to plan and implement new and current technology programming including new devices, 
equipment, software, systems, and programs. 
▪  Plans and executes staff training for software and hardware, creating documentation and
information guides. 
▪  Works with key staff, particularly the Information and Research Services Librarian (Librarian of
Things) and MakerSpace staff, to grow, develop, and maintain collection of circulating
technology and implement Technology Training for patrons. 
▪  As a department head, participates in Department Head meetings and assists in the
formulation of policies and procedures and in planning activities. 
▪  Manages desktop systems at all locations including installation, upgrade, repair, and routine
maintenance for staff and public functions. 
▪  Works with Library and Technology Services staff to troubleshoot and resolve computer
related problems. 
▪  Compiles and interprets statistics and prepares reports as needed. 
▪  Serves on select committees and working groups as technology point person. 
▪  Researches and recommends purchase of equipment and software to support and advance
Library systems and initiatives and interfaces with technology vendors. 
▪  Performs other related duties as required. 
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education, Training and Experience: 
Master’s Degree in Library Science from an ALA accredited institution; computer science training, 
course work, or experience required; or any equivalent combination of education and experience. 
Knowledge, Ability and Skill: 
Knowledge of: 
System peripherals
Server based networks
Library procedures and supervisory practices, including database searching and interlibrary
loan
Microsoft Office and Google Suite
Current computing practices, standards and equipment including desktop and laptop
computers, printers, routers, switches, scanners and Server based networks. 
Ability to: 
Exhibit a strong dedication to public service and equal access to technology
Interface with security controls for networks, clients, and maintenance of firewalls
Remove and reinstall hardware components
Work under pressure, prioritize projects and department operations efficiently
Interface with the community and serve as a representative of the Library 
Exhibit diplomacy, tact, flexibility, and initiative
Enthusiastically supervise, lead, and motivate staff
Learn new software and hardware quickly
Embrace change and contribute to the overall mission of the library 
Page 3
Skill: 
Strong understanding of Library operations, including experience with Integrated Library Systems, 
especially Sierra ILS –Innovative Interfaces
Leadership and supervisory skills
Exemplary customer service skills to ensure excellent patron experience 
Excellent communication skills; public speaking, writing
Organization and time management skills
Familiarity with Spanish or Portuguese desirable
Physical Requirements: 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an
employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable
accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential
functions. 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee
to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be
made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. 
● Work is performed mostly in an office setting; hand-eye coordination is necessary to operate
computers and various pieces of office equipment. Specific vision abilities required by this job
include close vision and the ability to adjust focus. 
● While performing the duties of this job, the employee frequently is required to stand and talk
or hear; use hands and fingers to handle, feel, or operate objects, tools, or controls and reach
with hands and arms. 
● The employee is occasionally required to walk; sit; climb or balance; stoop, kneel, or crouch. 
● The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 40 pounds. 
Supervision: 
Supervision Received: Library Director, Assistant Library Director 
Supervision Given: Emerging Technology Specialist
Job Environment: Work is performed primarily in an office environment with normal office
noise and traffic. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Page 4
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
