CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
May 10, 2022 
RFP#22-133
May 10, 2022 
POSITION: Helpdesk Technician 
DIVISION: Technology Services
SALARY RANGE: $58,993.00 – $65,137.00
HOURS: Monday, Wednesday & Thursday 8:30am to 5:00pm
Tuesday 8:30am to 7:00pm
Friday 8:30am to 2:00pm
Statement of Duties: The Helpdesk Technician is responsible for providing Helpdesk support
services to City Departments including software, hardware and peripherals in support of the mission of
the Department. Employee is required to perform all similar or related duties. 
Supervision Required: Under the general direction of the Assistant Director of Support, the
employee plans and carries out the regular work in accordance with standard practices and previous
training, with substantial responsibility for determining the sequence and timing of action and
substantial independence in planning and organizing the work activities, including determining the
work methods. The employee is expected to solve through experienced judgement most problems of
detail or unusual situations by adapting methods or interpreting instructions to resolve the particular
problem. Instructions for new assignments or special projects usually consist of statements of desired
objectives, deadlines and priorities. Technical and policy problems or changes in procedures are
discussed with supervisor, but ordinarily the employee plans the work, lays it out and carries it through
to completion independently. Work is generally reviewed only for technical adequacy, appropriateness
of actions or decisions, and conformance with policy or other requirements; the methods used in
arriving at the end result are not usually reviewed in detail. 
Confidentiality: Employee has regular access to confidential information such as employee records in
accordance with the State Public Records law such as official personnel records, client and department
records. 
Supervisory Responsibility: The employee, as a regular part of the job, is required to lead other
employees to assist them in completing their assigned work. Employee also performs non-supervisory
work that is of the same kind and level as is done by the employee(s) being supervised. The employee
is not responsible for taking any disciplinary action. The employee is involved in the hiring process
and the selection of new staff. 
The employee may be responsible for the direct supervision of one (1) seasonal position who works at
the same location and the same work shift. 
Page 2
Judgment: The work requires the employee to examine, analyze, and evaluate facts and
circumstances surrounding individual problems, situations, or transactions, and determining actions to
be taken within the limits of standard or accepted practices. Guidelines include a large body of
policies, practices, and precedents, which may be complex or conflicting, at times. Independent
judgment is used in analyzing specific situations to determine appropriate actions. Employee is
expected to weigh efficiency and relative priorities in conjunction with procedural concerns in decision
making. 
Complexity: The work consists of the practical application of a variety of concepts, practices and
specialized techniques relating to a professional or technical field. Assignments typically involve
evaluation and interpretation of factors, conditions or unusual circumstances; inspecting, testing or
evaluating compliance with established standards or criteria; gathering, analyzing and evaluating facts
or data to determine the most effective method(s) to accomplish the work. 
Work Environment: The work environment involves everyday discomforts typical of a municipal
office setting subject to frequent interruptions. Noise or physical surroundings may be distracting, but
conditions are generally not unpleasant. Employee may be required to work beyond normal business
hours in response to planned and unplanned emergency events as well as to attend various City
Council, Board and/or Committee meetings. 
Nature of Public Contacts: Relationships are primarily with co-workers and vendors doing business
with the City, City Council members and Board and Committee members. The employee serves as a
recognized authority in matters of considerable importance, including departmental practices, 
procedures, regulations or guidelines. The employee may be required to discuss controversial matters
where tact is required to obtain cooperation and desired performance of the computer system. 
Accountability: Consequences of errors, missed deadlines or poor judgment could result in excessive
labor/material costs, adverse public relations, jeopardize programs, danger to public safety, or adverse
public relations to the City. 
Occupational Risks: Duties generally do not present occupational risk to the employee. Personal
injury could occur, however, through the employee’s failure to properly follow safety precautions or
procedures. Examples of injury include bruises from falls, cuts or burns, or muscular strains from
lifting or carrying office equipment such as personal computers, servers and/or monitors. 
Essential Functions: 
The essential functions or duties listed below are intended only as illustrations of the various type of
work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them from
the position if the work is similar, related, or a logical assignment to the position. 
1. Provide technical support for approximately 600 users including researching and resolving a
variety of technical problems (i.e. PC hardware and Microsoft Operating Systems); apply
troubleshooting techniques and technical knowledge to identify the severity of the problem and
perform needed steps to resolve the issue. 
2. Responsible for the management of the customer help desk; monitor daily ticket flow to make
sure all issues are properly researched, updated, resolved or escalated. 
3. Responsible for adds, moves and changes in our Cisco VOIP system. 
Page 3
4. Manage laptop, PC and printer maintenance and support; install client software, OS upgrades
and Windows updates along with swaps and/or upgrades of equipment; Responsible for
inventory management and tracking, including onboarding/offboarding users and computers
and obsoleting equipment following City policies and procedures; monitors for spam and
viruses. 
5. Develops and implements employee training programs, materials and support documentation, 
including monthly Cyber Security training programs. 
6. Provide support for City Council meetings, including employees, Boards and Committees, 
assisting in the development of public presentations. Also provides on-site support at meeting
as required. 
7. Assumes project work as directed by the Assistant Director, Support 
8. Provides backup support to the Network Technician as needed. 
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education and Experience: Bachelor’s degree in computer science or a related field; three to
five (3-5) years’ experience; previous experience with desktop support required; or any
combination of education, training and experience which provides the required knowledge, 
skills and abilities to perform the essential functions of the job. 
Special Requirements: Class D Motor Vehicle Driver’s license. 
Knowledge, Abilities and Skill: 
Knowledge: Basic knowledge of TCP/IP, DHCP, and DNS configuration; knowledge of
network device connectivity, wireless setup and configuration; basic understanding of LAN
and WAN concepts; understanding of network printing and print server setup and
configuration; PC Support - experience with Windows 7 and Windows 10 OS; setup and
configuration of computers in MS Active Directory environment; ability to troubleshoot
hardware and software problems; installation and setup of Microsoft Office Applications, 
including setup of Microsoft Outlook in an Exchange server environment; experience with
antivirus clients and virus/malware removal; OS installation and ongoing updates, 
configuration and troubleshooting; advanced knowledge of using an asset management system
including computer imaging and patch management. 
Abilities and Skills: A highly motivated individual with great energy and a team player, eager
to learn and succeed; customer oriented, willing to go above and beyond for our customers; 
attention to detail, pride in work and the ability to get things done; strong communication skills
and ability to work in a team environment and individually; able to work individually on tasks
and projects with direction from other IT staff; quick learner with interest in pursuing
certifications through self-study and on the job training; organized with ability to document
policy and procedure. 
Physical and Mental Requirements: 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an
employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable
accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the position’s
essential functions. 
Page 4
Physical Skills: 
Work requires moderate intermittent physical strength and effort daily. The employee is
frequently required to lift, push or carry objects such as office equipment, personal computers
and monitors. 
Motor Skills: 
Duties are largely mental rather than physical. The employee is constantly required to have
hand, eye coordination in order to perform activities such as operating and repairing computer
hardware and installing software. 
Visual Skills: 
Visual demands require the employee to routinely read documents for general understanding
and for analytical purposes. The employee is required to determine color differences. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence
in the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
