CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
May 5, 2022 
RFP #22-123 
May 5, 2022
POSITION: Interchange Driver, L-3
DEPARTMENT: Library
SALARY: $16.98/hour - $23.18/hour
HOURS: Hours vary – Sunday and Additional hours required
Position Purpose: 
Provides positive public service. 
Essential Functions: 
(The essential functions or duties listed below are intended only as illustrations of the various
types of work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not
exclude them from the position if the work is similar, related or a logical assignment to the
position.)
▪  Packs and transports books, correspondence, equipment, currency and other materials
between the Main Library and branches. 
▪  Checks library book drops on week-ends and holidays. Prepares returned materials for check-
in. 
▪  Purchases and delivers Sunday newspapers for libraries. Responsible for locking and unlocking
library buildings and operation of burglar alarm systems. 
▪  Drops off packages and parcels at the post office for mailing. 
▪  Occasionally assists with various custodial functions. 
▪  Performs other duties as required. 
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education, Training and Experience: 
▪  Graduation from a standard high school. 
▪  Must have adequate motor vehicle, Class #3 license and good driving record. 
▪  Ability to bend, lift and carry boxes of library materials weighing up to 40 pounds is required. 
▪  Must be very dependable and trustworthy and available weekends and holidays. 
Physical Requirements: 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an
employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable
accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential
functions. 
Page 2
Time spent standing, walking, and sitting. Lifting, pushing/pulling, or carrying of objects weighing
up to 10 pounds with occasionally a maximum of 40 pounds. Climbing, stooping, kneeling, 
crouching, crawling, twisting, bending, and squatting. Repetitive movements of the hands. 
Supervision: 
Supervision Received: Works under the Director of Libraries or his/her designee.
Job Environment: 
▪  Requires driving and working year-round in a truck that has heat/air conditioning. 
▪  Requires regular travel between branches (and elsewhere when necessary) and
loading/unloading materials and equipment in all kinds of weather and climatic conditions. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
