CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
April 21, 2022 
RFP #22-116
April 21, 2022 
POSITION: Patron Experience Staff: Bookmobile Support, L-6
DEPARTMENT: Library
SALARY: $19.94/hour - $27.22/hour; $38,886 - $53,080 annual
HOURS: 37.5 hours/week; 2 evenings per week, alternating Fridays and
Saturdays
The Framingham Public Library, a recognized leader in collaborative programming, located 20 miles
west of Boston with a 53,000 sq. ft. Downtown Main Library, a 17,000 sq. ft. branch Library, and a
Bookmobile, seeks a dynamic and energetic Patron Experience Staff member to provide exceptional
customer service at the Main Library and Bookmobile. 
Position Purpose: 
Provides exemplary customer service for the Framingham Public Library, the premier resource for free
inquiry, creative enrichment, and lifelong learning. Exemplifies flexibility, diplomacy, and enthusiasm
for Library customer service to the vibrant and diverse population of Framingham. 
Essential Functions: 
(The essential functions or duties listed below are intended only as illustrations of the various
types of work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not
exclude them from the position if the work is similar, related or a logical assignment to the
position.)
•  Works with Head of Bookmobile Experience and other Patron Experience staff to support
Bookmobile operations by facilitating collection management and maintenance. Serves as
point person in Patron Experience for fielding Bookmobile related questions from patrons and
staff. 
•  Collaborates interdepartmentally to assist in implementing Bookmobile services and outreach. 
•  Will train as a Bookmobile driver and be available and prepared to drive the Bookmobile to
scheduled stops and special events. 
•  Performs circulation duties, and provides a warm, welcoming, and accessible patron experience
for all Library users. 
•  Handles patron transactions, which includes issuing Library cards, and checking materials in and
out. 
•  Provides information about Library services, policies, and procedures. 
•  Assists patrons in borrowing and using all Library materials, placing holds, and accessing digital
resources. 
•  Facilitates interchange of materials between the Main Library and Branch. 
Page 2
•  Resolves patron circulation concerns and responds in a positive and flexible manner. Refers
issues to Library Administration as required. 
•  Protects confidentiality of patron records according to Library policy and Massachusetts General
Law. 
•  Provides Reader’s Advisory and secondary reference. 
•  Participates in the maintenance of an attractive, current array of Library materials. 
•  Creates attractive displays to showcase and highlight Library materials of all kinds. 
•  Participates in shelf reading and weeding. 
•  Participates on Library committees as directed. Makes recommendations for service
improvements. 
•  Monitors safety of the Library facilities for employees and the public. Responds appropriately to
emergencies and keeps Library Administration informed of any problematic situation. 
•  May cover the Main Library, Branch, or Bookmobile as needed or assigned. 
•  May plan and lead Library activities. 
•  Follows safe work practices. 
•  Performs other duties as assigned. 
Recommended Minimum Qualifications: 
Education, Training and Experience: 
Bachelor’s degree; one or more years’ experience in Library services preferred, or any equivalent
combination of training and experience which provides the following knowledge, ability, and skills. 
Knowledge, Ability and Skill: 
Knowledge: 
Integrated Library Systems (ILS), Innovative Sierra preferred
Library operations and procedures
Microsoft Office and Google Suite 
Ability: 
Work under pressure
Exhibit diplomacy, tact, flexibility, and initiative
Troubleshoot and support technology
Embrace change and contribute to the overall mission of the Library 
Participate as an effective and enthusiastic member of the Library team 
Skill: 
Successful work in a fast paced and dynamic environment
Exemplary customer service skills to ensure excellent patron experience 
Excellent communication skills
Organization and time management skills
Familiarity with Spanish or Portuguese desirable 
Physical Requirements: 
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an
employee to successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations
may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. 
Page 3
The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by an employee to
successfully perform the essential functions of this job. Reasonable accommodations may be made to
enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions. 
•  Work is performed mostly in an office setting; hand-eye coordination is necessary to operate
computers and various pieces of office equipment. Specific vision abilities required by this job
include close vision and the ability to adjust focus. 
•  While performing the duties of this job, the employee frequently is required to stand and talk
or hear; use hands and fingers to handle, feel, or operate objects, tools, or controls and reach
with hands and arms. 
•  The employee is occasionally required to walk; sit; climb or balance; stoop, kneel, or crouch. 
•  The employee must occasionally lift and/or move up to 40 pounds. 
Supervision: 
Supervision Received: Head of Patron Experience & Head of Bookmobile Experience 
Supervision Given: None 
Job Environment: 
•  Work is performed primarily in an office environment with normal office noise and traffic. 
•  Requires driving and working year round in a bookmobile that has heat/air conditioning. 
•  Requires regular travel around the community and loading/unloading materials and equipment
in all kinds of weather and climatic conditions. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
