CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
May 18, 2022 
RFP # 22-039
May 18, 2022
POSITION: Pump Station Technician 
DEPARTMENT: Public Works – Water Division
SALARY: $22.99 - $27.08 hourly
HOURS: Tuesday – Saturday 7:00 am to 3:00 pm
GENERAL STATEMENT OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES: 
The Pump Station Technician will work in the repair, maintenance and operation of all pumping
stations, tanks and appurtenances. 
Responsible for care of equipment, assists in operation, repair and maintenance of pumps, 
motors and other equipment. 
Exercises frequent independent judgment to identify a problem and to determine appropriate
remedial action. 
Responsible to ensure that all safety practices and measures, including but not limited to, work
zone safety, confined space entry and excavation safety are adhered to and that personal
protective clothing and equipment are utilized. 
Operates motor equipment in a professional and competent manner and with care taken to
perform the work safely and with efficiency. 
Performs skilled tasks involving, but not limited to; installation, maintenance, repair and
replacement of pipe, valves, mains, pumps and other appurtenances that are part of the water
and wastewater pumping system. The incumbent is responsible for carrying out various other
assignments essential to the Water and Wastewater Division and shall have a thorough
knowledge of the principles and practices of water and/or wastewater pumping systems. 
Due to the importance of emergency response during winter weather events, vacations are
limited during this time. 
SUPERVISION RECEIVED: 
Works under the direct supervision of the Pump Station Supervisor or their designee. 
SUPERVISION EXERCISED: 
Train any unskilled personnel performing a variety of tasks in connection with the maintenance
and operation of the pump stations. May on occasion be responsible for the conduct of
subordinates. 
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBLITIES: 
Insures the efficient operation of pump station equipment. 
Operation, repair and maintenance of pump stations; maintains accurate pumping records, 
checks station, changes charts, takes required readings and computes pumpage. 
Page 2
Operates equipment including but not limited to front end loaders, backhoes, cranes, 
compacting equipment, skid steer loaders and snow-fighters. 
Performs routine water quality sampling and analysis including but not limited to: chlorine
residual, fluoride, temperature and PH. 
Takes and tests samples. Maintains accurate pumping and other records, including reports
which are required by the state. 
Maintains pumps, motors, chlorinators, SCADA systems, stand pipes and other auxiliary units. 
Prepares electronic work orders documenting daily tasks performed. 
Performs daily vehicle condition inspections and reports as required by law or by Department
policy. 
Cleans and maintains pumping station buildings and grounds. 
Works with treatment processes associated with the City’s water supply connections and sewer
discharge sites. Assists in the monitoring, records and reporting of chemical dosing associated
with treatment applications. 
Read and interpret engineering blueprints and specifications as they pertain to water and
wastewater pump stations and tanks in order to operate, repair and maintain pump stations
and tanks. 
Direct and oversee work performed by contractors. 
Performs required cross-departmental Public Works tasks such as snow plowing, snow removal, 
water and wastewater emergencies, highway and sanitation operations, standby and other
emergency functions as required. 
Establish and maintain effective working relationships with supervisors, co-workers and the
general public. 
Performs other related duties as may be required. 
QUALIFICATIONS AND ENTRANCE REQUIREMENTS:
WORKING KNOWLEDGE OF THE FOLLOWING: 
Principles, practices and techniques of construction, installation, repair and maintenance of
water and wastewater systems. 
Equipment required for the construction, repair and maintenance of water and wastewater
pumping systems. 
Rules, regulations and applicable laws relative to job related safety. 
Principles and practices of basic electrical testing including lockout tag out protocols and
trouble-shooting measures. 
Computers and related computer programs. 
THE ABILITY TO: 
Recognize conditions requiring maintenance and repair; perform these repairs as necessary. 
Exercise proper professional and technical judgment. 
Read and interpret engineering blueprints and specifications as they pertain to water and
wastewater pumping and tank systems. 
Operate equipment with a high degree of skill and efficiency. 
Work alone without close supervision. 
Take lead role toward customer response and problem resolution related to the Division. 
Comply with all Federal, State, City and Department policies and provisions. 
Frequently lift, move push, pull and/or carry up to 45 lbs. 
Occasionally lift, move, push, pull and/or carry up to 100 lbs. 
Balance, stoop, bend and crouch; reach and handle tools with both hands. 
Regularly enter manholes, pump stations, trenches, sewer lift stations and other confined spaces. 
Page 3
Work under varying weather conditions. 
Work scheduled and unscheduled overtime as may be required. 
ENTRANCE REQUIREMENTS: 
Graduation from a standard high school, vocational school course or GED. 
Minimum of three years in the operation and maintenance of a public water or wastewater
system or relevant mechanical maintenance experience. 
Must possess a valid Commonwealth of Massachusetts Class A license with air brake
endorsement and a good driving record. 
Must possess a Class 1B, 2B, 3A Massachusetts Hoisting License. 
Must possess a D2 Water Distribution license issued by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Division of Professional Licensure. 
Good physical condition as evidenced by a physical examination. 
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
