CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS 
NOTICE OF VACANCY
January 7, 2022 
RFP # 20-148
January 7, 2022
POSITION: Watchperson
DEPARTMENT: Public Works – Highway Division
SALARY: $16.03 - $18.41 hourly
HOURS: Monday through Friday (1 shift/day) – 3:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
Saturday and Sunday (2 shifts/day) – 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m. 
to 11:00 p.m. Working days will vary from week to week. Some holidays. 
JOB CONTROLS: 
Works under the general supervision of the Superintendent or his designee. Patrols buildings and
grounds in accordance with established routine. Must be able to deal with any type of problem at its
source or report same to proper person(s).
Receives messages and transmits same to appropriate supervisors or others. 
Reports inclement weather conditions to supervisors and others. 
MAJOR DUTIES: 
Makes rounds of Buildings and Grounds to prevent theft, trespassing, loitering, or disorder. Reports
disturbances and whatever appears to be of suspicious natures and which cannot be disposed of
immediately. 
Performs a variety of incidental duties as required such as receiving messages by telephone, and
transmitting messages to others. Checking temperature, weather, and road conditions and reporting
same to supervisors and others. 
Performs custodial duties in his work area. 
Performs other work as assigned. 
QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS: 
Completion of High School or equivalent desirable. Must have ability to receive and transmit message
to others. Ability to work alone for long periods and use initiative and resourcefulness as necessary. 
Able to work shifts as required and in varied weather conditions. 
Page 2
The City of Framingham is committed to the ongoing pursuit of strategic diversity initiatives that help
to position diversity, equity, and inclusion as central to municipality and community-wide excellence in
the City of Framingham. In doing so, Framingham strives for a city culture and environment that
fosters a true sense of belonging for all, provides opportunity for everyone to participate equally and
fully in the city, their communities and neighborhoods in ways that helps to develop each individual's
capacity to confidently and competently engage within and across difference. Given an evolving
national context and the richness in the demographic and linguistic profile of our city, the City of
Framingham has made a significant commitment to addressing and enhancing its community climate, 
culture and multiplicity of service capabilities as a city. 
Please visit our website: 
 www.framinghamma.gov/jobs
The City of Framingham is an Affirmative Action Equal Opportunity Employer. 
