BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction
Present VAFF system
Contributions to improvement of the VAFF system
  Improvements to ash-fall forecasts
  Survey to determine needs of VAFF users
  Working group on advanced VAFF
Future volcanic ash fall forecasts
  Types of forecast
    Information issued before an eruption (Regular Information)
    Brief forecast issued immediately after an eruption (Preliminary Forecast)
    Full Forecast issued after the eruption (Full Forecast)
  Format of VAFFs
  Categories of ash-fall quantity
  Information about lapilli fall
  Trial distribution of proposed new VAFF
Further refinements of VAFF system
Discussion
  Effect of strong winds on forecast accuracy
  Estimation of mass of volcanic ash in ash plumes
Conclusion
Competing interests
Authors’ contribution
Acknowledgements
Author details
References
Page 1
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2
DOI 10.1186/s13617-014-0018-2
RESEARCH  Open Access
Improvements of volcanic ash fall forecasts issued
by the Japan Meteorological Agency
Yoshihiko Hasegawa1*, Akira Sugai1, Yosuke Hayashi1, Yuta Hayashi1, Shoji Saito1 and Toshiki Shimbori2
Abstract
Since March 2008, the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) has operated a Volcanic Ash Fall Forecast (VAFF) system
to issue forecasts of areas in Japan where ash falls are expected following volcanic eruptions. The hazardous effects
of ash falls vary according to the quantity of ash generated and have different consequences for agriculture,
communication and transport networks, and buildings. The prediction techniques based on the JMA Regional
Atmospheric Transport Model were recently revised by the Meteorological Research Institute of JMA to allow
predictions of the quantity and areas of ash fall, and areas to be affected by lapilli fall. JMA plans further
improvements to the VAFF system to address the needs of people living near active volcanoes and to take into
account expert advice in fields such as volcanology, disaster prevention, and broadcasting and medical services.
The improved VAFF system will provide three types of information: a regular information before possible eruption, a
brief preliminary forecast issued 5–10 minutes after an eruption, and a full forecast issued 20–30 minutes after an
eruption. JMA has developed a table to accompany VAFFs that categorizes the hazardous effects for people
according to various quantities of ash fall, and provides advice on preparedness measures and actions to be taken
when an ash fall occurs. The new VAFF system will also provide predictions of areas of expected lapilli fall. JMA will
start operation of the new VAFF system in spring 2015.
Introduction
Since March 2008, the Japan Meteorological Agency
(JMA) has operated the Volcanic Ash Fall Forecast
(VAFF) system to provide forecasts when ash falls are
expected to affect large areas. However, the present sys-
tem predicts only the areas where ash may fall. A survey
of VAFF users conducted in 2012 by JMA in areas close
to active volcanoes (e.g. Asamayama, Kirishimayama,
and Sakurajima) demonstrated strong demand for fore-
casts of the quantity of ash falls, prediction of areas of
expected lapilli falls, and early issue of VAFFs. Recent
studies by the Meteorological Research Institute (MRI)
of JMA and an upgrade of the JMA supercomputer
system will allow JMA to improve the current system by
adding predictions of the quantity of ash falls and infor-
mation about expected lapilli falls.
Volcanic ash falls affect buildings and many areas of
human activity, such as traffic, infrastructure lifelines,
agriculture, forestry, fisheries, and human health (e.g. 
Mt. Fuji Hazard Map Examination Committee 2004;
Horwell and Baxter 2006; Wilson et al. 2012). The haz-
ards differ among these areas, and also according to the
quantity of ash falls. Prediction of the quantity of ash
falls is important for disaster mitigation or prevention.
In March 2013, JMA presented a Proposal for Advanced
VAFF at a meeting of the Working Group on Advanced
VAFF. Based on that proposal, JMA will update the
existing VAFF system to incorporate new capabilities
and create a distribution system for forecasts. JMA plans
to have the new system operational in spring 2015.
Present VAFF system
Under the present system, VAFFs are issued by JMA 30
to 40 minutes after large eruptions. The criteria for
issuance of VAFFs are provided in Table 1. The VAFF is
a graphical format including forecasts of the areal extent
of ash fall at one-hour intervals for six hours after the
eruption (Figure 1).  VAFFs are sent to authorities at
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:y-hasegawa@met.kishou.go.jp"] y-hasegawa@met.kishou.go.jp
1Japan Meteorological Agency, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Hasegawa et al.; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 2 of 12
Table 1 JMA Criteria for issue of VAFFs (effective
March 2014)
Volcano  Criteria
Asamayama Observation of an eruption of plume height
≥3000 m above the crater rim. For plume
heights of 1000–3000 m, a VAFF may be
issued under some circumstances.
Kirishimayama
(Shinmoedake) 
Observation of an eruption of plume height
≥2000 m above the crater rim.
Sakurajima Observation of an eruption of plume height
≥2500 m (criterion was 3000 m until May
20, 2013) above the crater rim.
Other Japanese volcanoes Observation of an eruption plume height of
≥3000 m above the crater rim.
affected prefectures, disaster prevention agencies, and
JMA branch offices and posted on the JMA website.
VAFFs have been issued for eruptions at Asamayama,
Kirishimayama, and Sakurajima volcanoes from March
2008 to March 2014 (Figure 2 and Table 2). 
Contributions to improvement of the VAFF
system
Improvements to ash-fall forecasts
Predictions of the areas and quantities of ash fall, and
of areas of lapilli fall, have been improved in accuracy
as a result of recent studies by MRI (Hashimoto et al.
2012; Shimbori et al. 2014).  These studies document
the use of weather radar systems to accurately mea-
sure the heights of volcanic plumes, which provide
important initial data for predictive use. The re-
cent upgrade of the JMA supercomputer system has
also improved the precision of ash-fall and lapilli-fall
predictions.
MRI applied the methodology described by Shimbori
et al. (2014) to the 2011 eruption from the Shinmoedake
crater of Kirishimayama volcano to derive predicted
ash-fall data that matched observed data reasonably well
(Figure 3; Shimbori et al. 2014).  JMA will incorporate
this methodology in the new VAFF system.
Figure 1 Example of a VAFF as issued under the present system. Translations from Japanese as numbered below. *1 Volcano name: Sakurajima
volcano. *2 Forecast title. *3 Time of issue: 13:50 JST June 13, 2013. *4 Summary: An eruption at 13:26 (JST) on June 13 produced a plume that extended to
3300 m above the crater. Ash may fall in Kagoshima and Miyazaki Prefectures. This forecast is valid until 19:00 (JST) on June 13. *5 Responsible observatory:
Fukuoka Regional Headquarters and Kagoshima Local Meteorological Office *6 Legend. “red filled area”: Forecast areal extent of ash fall at approximately
1-h intervals after onset of eruption. *7 Time at which map of forecast extent of ash fall (*8) applies: 17:00 (JST) on June 13. *8 Forecast areal extent
of ash fall.
Page 3
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 3 of 12
Figure 2 Volcanoes for which JMA issued VAFFs between March
2008 and March 2014. *Shinmoedake crater of Kirishimayama volcano.
Technical methods of the VAFF are as follows: We
first estimate the total mass of tephra from an eruption
on the basis of plume height and eruption duration
(Sect. A.2 of Shimbori et al. (2010) based on Suzuki
(1990)) and then use the JMA Regional Atmospheric
Transport Model (JMA-RATM) driven by the grid point
values of the numerical weather prediction model to
predict the quantity of ash fall (thickness of predicted
ash layer), the extent of the area of ash fall and the area
in which lapilli are expected to fall (Figure 4).
Survey to determine needs of VAFF users
During March to September 2012, JMA carried out a
survey to determine the needs of VAFF users in areas
near volcanoes where there have been recent ash falls.
Participants included disaster prevention organizations
Table 2 Number of VAFFs issued by JMA from March 31,
2008 to March 31, 2014
Asamayama Kirishimayama Sakurajima
(Shinmoedake)
2008 (Mar 31–Dec)
2009  11 
2
3
2010
2011  392  1
2012
2013 
4
523
2014 (Jan–Mar)
1Eruption on February 2, 2009.
2Eruptions from January 26 to April 18, 2011.
3Criterion for issue of VAFF changed on May 20, 2013. 
6 
near Sakurajima, Kirishimayama, and Asamayama vol-
canoes (227 responses),  local communities near those
three volcanoes (386 responses),  and local government
authorities near 47 other active volcanoes in Japan (116
responses).  The 47 volcanoes were selected on the
recommendation of the Coordinating Committee for
Prediction of Volcanic Eruption, a consultant body that
advises the Director General of JMA.
Questions in the survey addressed VAFF users’  needs
in terms of the specific types of information they re-
quire, the timing of issue of VAFFs, and their means of
access to VAFFs. Respondents were asked to consider
their needs for VAFFs issued at three stages: before an
eruption, immediately after the onset of an eruption, and
after an eruption.
The result of the survey showed strong demand for
early forecasts of the onset time and severity of ash fall
and the areas to be affected, and information about areas
to be affected by lapilli fall. The full survey results were
published by JMA (2013).
Working group on advanced VAFF
JMA formed a Working Group on Advanced VAFF,
which held meetings on July 5 and November 8, 2012,
and February 19, 2013. The 16-member group included
representatives from disaster prevention organizations,
agricultural organizations, medical and broadcasting ser-
vices, local government bodies, and volcanologists. The
working group considered the results of the 2012 survey
and sought to identify ways of improving the VAFF
system to provide more-effective disaster mitigation.
Matters discussed included how and what information
should be provided, the conditions under which VAFFs
should be issued, and appropriate forecasts for affected
communities for various quantities of ash fall.
Outcomes of the meetings were published in March
2013 (Working Group on Advanced VAFF 2013b) and
are summarized below.
VAFFs should be issued when the forecast quantity of
an ash fall is likely to affect local communities or the
utilities they depend on in their daily life.
VAFFs should be easy for people to understand and
act upon, and should include information about forecast
lapilli falls.
VAFFs should be issued at three stages:
Before a possible eruption: regular information, including
forecasts of areas that may be affected by ash fall and the
likelihood of lapilli fall.
As soon as possible after the onset of an eruption: pre-
liminary release of a brief forecast of the quantity of ash
fall, areas to be affected, and the likelihood of lapilli fall.
After an eruption: when sufficient data are available, a
detailed forecast of when ash fall will start and its
quantity and areas to be affected.
Page 4
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 4 of 12
Figure 3 Comparison of ash-fall quantity forecast using MRI method and observed ash-fall quantity. (a) Quantitative tephra-fall predictions
(g/m2) from 15:00 JST on January 26 until 00:00 JST on January 28 based on JMA-RATM for the 2011 eruption at Shinmoedake volcano. Initial values
for plume height and eruption duration based on data from the JMA weather radar network (Shimbori et al. 2014). Legend: ●, ash fall observed; ○, no
ash fall observed. (b) Ash-fall observations (kg/m2) for eruptions at Shinmoedake volcano during January 26–27, 2011 (Furukawa 2011). Colored dots
correspond to the color bar at the left side in the figure (b).
VAFFs should categorize ash falls according to quantity,
describe the potential impacts of each category on
human health, transport systems, and utilities, and
provide advice as to the appropriate actions to be taken
by the general public during and after ash falls.
There should be a trial VAFF distribution to local gov-
ernment bodies near Sakurajima volcano incorporating
Figure 4 Flowchart of procedure for tephra-fall predictions
using the JMA Regional Atmospheric Transport Model. Meso-scale
Model (MSM) and Local Forecast Model (LFM) are gridded weather
data (e.g., wind speed and direction, air temperature, atmospheric
pressure) calculated by using the JMA numerical weather prediction
model based on the Non-hydrostatic Model (NHM). 
the recommended improvements to the VAFF system
and seeking their feedback.
Case studies are needed that illustrate the effects and
appropriate actions for the general public for different
quantities of ash fall.
Where applicable, results of volcanological studies
undertaken at universities and other research institutions
should be used to improve the VAFF system.
Future volcanic ash fall forecasts
JMA is preparing to implement the improved VAFF sys-
tem based on the Proposal for Advanced VAFF (Working
Group on Advanced VAFF 2013b). The major improve-
ments (Table 3) are as follows:
Sequential release of three types of VAFF: regular infor-
mation issued before an possible eruption, a brief pre-
liminary forecast issued 5–10 minutes after an eruption
starts, and a full forecast issued 20–30 minutes after the
eruption.
VAFFs will be issued in Japanese in both graphical and
text formats.
JMA will provide a table categorizing ash falls by
quantity (little, moderate, and much),  documenting
the likely effects on the general public, and advising
them of necessary preparedness measures (Figure 5).
VAFFs will be issued for ash-fall quantities in the
moderate and much categories (Figure 5).
VAFFs will provide predictions of areas of lapilli fall
(lapilli size ≥1 cm) separated from predictions of ash fall
Page 5
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 5 of 12
Table 3 Comparison of present and proposed VAFFs
Present VAFF  Proposed VAFF
Type and timing of Volcanic Ash Fall Forecast
forecast 
Issued within 30–40 min of
onset of eruption 
Regular Information
Issued regularly (e.g. 3 hourly)
before possible eruption
Contents Forecast1 of situation at six
1-h intervals after onset of
eruption: Ash fall area.
Prefectures where ash may
fall 
Forecast1 for an assumed
eruption: Ash-fall area.
Lapilli-fall area. Recommended
actions for affected
communities
1Meso-scale Model used for forecasts (see Figure 4).
2Local Forecast Model used for forecasts (see Figure 4). 
Preliminary Forecast
Issued within 5–10 min of
onset of eruption
Forecast2 for first hour after
onset of eruption: Ash-fall area
and quantity. Municipalities
affected. Lapilli-fall area.
Recommended actions for
affected communities 
Full Forecast
Issued within 20–30 min of
onset of eruption
Forecast2 of situation at six
1-h intervals after onset of
eruption: Ash-fall area and
quantity. Municipalities
affected. Start of ash fall
for each municipality.
Recommended action for
affected communities
and provide recommended actions for people in areas
affected, because ash fall and lapilli fall pose different
hazards. Ash fall can, for example, cause a loss of trac-
tion on roadways whereas lapilli fall can break wind-
shields of cars. Furthermore, some lapilli fall damage
can occur even in areas of moderate ash fall. In addition,
the prediction of area of lapilli fall was also strongly
needed from users of VAFF (JMA 2013). 
Types of forecast
Because the effects of ash fall manifest quickly after an
eruption, VAFFs must be issued as early as possible.
However, the information available at the start of an
eruption lacks accuracy. Considering the needs of VAFF
users and the technical limitations of ash-fall predic-
tions, JMA will issue three types of VAFF, as described
below (Figure 6).
Figure 5 Categories of ash-fall quantity and corresponding conditions and preparedness measures. Table extracted from Working Group
on Advanced VAFF (2013b) and translated into English.
Page 6
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 6 of 12
Figure 6 Flow diagram showing timing of issue and contents of the current VAFF and the proposed new VAFF. *1 JMA provides wind
forecasts above volcanoes that have high likelihood of eruption. *2 JMA provides data such as eruption time, plume height, and direction of
plume extension about 5 minutes after onset of an eruption.
Information issued before an eruption (Regular
Information)
This information will be issued regularly (e.g. 3 hourly)
when there is a possibility that an eruption may occur
to provide information on potential areas of ash fall
and lapilli fall so that local communities can prepare
(Figure 7).
Since the 1980s, JMA has issued current and forecast
information about winds above Sakurajima volcano at
regular intervals (e.g. twice daily) to allow local residents
to prepare for possible ash fall.
Brief forecast issued immediately after an eruption
(Preliminary Forecast)
The Preliminary Forecast will be issued within 5–10
minutes of the onset of an eruption. It will be based
on JMA’s standard ‘Observation Report on Eruption’
(eruption time, plume height and direction of movement)
and will provide initial forecasts of ash-fall and lapilli-fall
areas (Figure 8). The Preliminary Forecast will be impor-
tant for communities close to the volcano.
To facilitate early issue, JMA has prepared in advance
various model forecasts for different conditions (eruption
time, plume height, wind direction).  When an eruption
starts, JMA will use the model forecast that best fits the
observed conditions for the Preliminary Forecast. 
Full Forecast issued after the eruption (Full Forecast)
The Full Forecast will be issued within 20–30 minutes of
the onset of an eruption and will contain accurate fore-
casts of the area and quantity of ash fall. It will give
communities living farther from the volcano time to
make appropriate preparations for ash fall (Figure 9).
For the Full Forecast, JMA will improve the accuracy of
plume height estimates of the previously issued Pre-
liminary Forecast by using weather radar and meteoro-
logical satellite data in addition to visual observations.
Format of VAFFs
VAFF information will be provided in the following
formats.
Textual information will be provided in Extensible
Markup Language (XML).
Graphical information will be provided in Portable
Document Format (PDF) format.
For specialist users, quantitative forecasts (g/m2) of
ash fall will be provided as numerical data at the JMA
website.
Categories of ash-fall quantity
Quantitative predictions of the amount of ash fall
(expressed in g/m2) include some errors and may be
difficult for non-specialist VAFF users to understand.
Page 7
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 7 of 12
Figure 7 Sample of Regular Information (graphical format) in the new VAFF format. Translations from Japanese as numbered below.
*1 Volcano name: Sakurajima volcano. *2 Information title. *3 Time of issue and source: Issued at 05:00 JST on November 7, 2014, by Seismology and
Volcanology Department of JMA. *4 Summary: Forecasts of areal extents of ash fall and lapilli fall for possible eruptions at three-hour intervals between
06:00 and 24:00 JST on November 7 are provided by the maps below. The forecast of areal extent of ash fall between 09:00 and 12:00 JST is forecasted
to southern direction and that between 21:00 and 2400 JST is forecasted to north-west direction. Forecast areas of ash fall and lapilli fall are based
on an eruption producing a 3000 m vertical plume above the crater. People in areas where lapilli fall is forecast should stay indoors or take refuge
under a solid roof. *5 Legend: Forecast areal extents of ash fall and lapilli fall. “Gray filled area”: Ash fall. “Red filled area”: Lapilli fall (≥1 cm size).
*6 Annotation of time of eruption: 15:00 – 18:00 JST on November 7. *7 Direction and distance from the crater to maximum extent of ash fall area.
Name of localities affected is provided in parentheses: Direction and distance are south-east and 20 km, respectively (direction of Tarumizu city and
Kanoya city). *8 Map showing forecast areal extent of ash fall. *9 Distance from the crater to maximum extent of area of lapilli fall: 3 km. *10 Map
showing forecast areal extent of lapilli fall.
Page 8
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 8 of 12
Figure 8 Sample of Preliminary Forecast (graphical format) in the new VAFF format. Translations from Japanese as numbered below.
*1 Volcano name: Sakurajima volcano. *2 Forecast title. *3 Time of issue and responsible observatory. *4 Summary: An eruption occurred at 08:04
on November 7. A 2000 m eruption plume formed and is rising and extending to south. An ash fall of moderate quantity and areal extent of ash fall is
forecast for Kagoshima city (Sakurajima) and areal extent of lapilli fall is forecasted to 3 km away from the crater to south-east direction is forecasted
within one hour after onset of the eruption. *5 Forecast of municipalities affected: An ash fall of moderate quantity is forecast in Kagoshima city.
*6 Precautions for disaster prevention: People in the open air in areas where a moderate ash fall is forecast should use an umbrella or wear a face
mask to minimize their exposure to ash. People driving vehicles should drive slowly. People in areas where a lapilli fall is forecast should stay indoors or
take refuge under a solid roof. *7 Reference: Categories of ash fall quantity. Much: Ash deposits more than 1 mm thick; low visibility by ash fall
and roads completely covered by ash; Stay Indoors. Moderate: Ash deposits 0.1 to 1 mm thick; recognizable ash fall and road markings partly
obscured by ash; Attention. Little: thin ash deposits, less than 0.1 mm thick. *8 Forecast areal extent of ash fall. *9 Legend (ash fall). “Yellow filled
area”: Area of ash fall of moderate quantity. “Gray filled area”: Area of ash fall of little quantity. Thick black line: boundary of municipality to be
affected by ash fall. *10: Forecast areal extent of lapilli fall. *11: Legend (lapilli fall). “Red filled area”: Area of lapilli fall (≥1 cm size).
Therefore, ash-fall quantities will be expressed in three
qualitative categories (little, moderate, and much),  as
proposed by the Working Group on Advanced VAFF.
These categories will each be accompanied by estimates
of the expected thickness of ash deposits, a simple
description (including photos) of the conditions that
communities may encounter after an ash fall (road con-
ditions, reduced visibility), and recommended safety pre-
cautions to be taken by the general public (Figure 5).
Information about lapilli fall
The damage caused by lapilli of ≥1 cm size can be con-
siderable (Figure 10 and Table 4). Because lapilli fall fas-
ter than ash particles, their arrival at the ground surface
precedes that of ash particles. Even for small eruptions 
with small plumes, considerable damage can be caused
by only a few large lapilli. JMA will therefore provide
forecasts of areas of lapilli fall where lapilli of ≥1 cm size
are expected.
Trial distribution of proposed new VAFF
Since April 2013, JMA has trialed distribution of the
proposed new VAFF (as described above and based on
real eruption data) to local government authorities in
the region of Sakurajima volcano. In this region, the
residents of Kagoshima city (population ~600,000) have
experienced frequent ash falls for several decades. JMA
will use feedback from the trial to further refine the
contents of VAFFs and the conditions under which they
are issued.
Page 9
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 9 of 12
Figure 9 Sample of Full Forecast (graphical format) in the new VAFF format. Translations from Japanese as numbered below. *1 Volcano
name: Sakurajima volcano. *2 Forecast title. *3 Time of issue and responsible observatory. *4 Summary: An eruption occurred at 08:04 on November
7. A 3500 m eruption plume extended to south was observed. An ash fall of moderate quantity is forecast for Kagoshima city (Sakurajima), and areal
extent of ash fall is forecasted to Mishima village. *5 Forecast of municipalities affected and start time and quantity of ash fall: Forecasts of ash fall
quantity and municipalities affected are as follows. Moderate: Kagoshima city. Little: Ibusuki city et al. Forecast starts of ash fall at municipalities are as
follows. Before 09:00 on November 7: Kagoshima city and Tarumizu city. 09:00 to 10:00: Ibusuki city and Minami-kyusyu city. 12:00 to 13:00: Minami-osumi
town. 13:00 to 14:00: Mishima village. *6 Precautions for disaster prevention. People in the open air in areas where moderate ash fall is forecast should
use an umbrella or wear a face mask to minimize exposure to ash. People driving vehicles should drive slowly. *7 Reference: Categories of ash-fall
quantity. Much: Ash deposits more than 1 mm thick; low visibility by ash fall and roads completely covered by ash; Stay Indoors. Moderate: Ash
deposits 0.1 to 1 mm thick; recognizable ash fall and road markings partly obscured by ash; Attention. Little: thin ash deposits, less than 0.1 mm
thick. *8 Legend: “Yellow filled area”: Area of ash fall of moderate quantity. “Gray filled area”: Area of ash fall of little quantity. Thick black line:
boundary of municipality to be affected by ash fall. *9 Time of forecast shown below (*10). *10 Forecast areal extent of ash fall for each
quantity category.
Further refinements of VAFF system
JMA and MRI will continue to work together to refine
the VAFF system. Areas to be addressed include:
Improvement of RATM-based ash-fall predictions for
strong wind conditions and for large-scale eruptions.
Development of a method to estimate volcanic plume
height, eruption column mass and eruption duration 
at times when bad weather prevents visual observations
and observations using radar data and satellite imagery.
Regular examination of the relationship between ash-
fall quantity and its effect on people, and review of the
recommended actions for affected communities.
Regular review of the three categories of ash-fall quantity
and the thresholds that separate them (Figure 5).
Page 10
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 10 of 12
Discussion
The Working Group on Advanced VAFF (2013b) re-
commended further work on the accuracy of the JMA
ash-fall prediction model RATM, for periods of strong
winds and review of the methodology used to calculate
the mass of ash in a volcanic plume. These two issues
are discussed below.
Figure 10 Damage caused by lapilli fall. Top: Rear car window
destroyed by lapilli fall (4 to 6 cm size) 7 km from the Shinmoedake
crater of Kirishimayama volcano. Bottom: Individual lapillus. Individual
squares on the ruler are 5 mm by 5 mm. Photos by JMA (January
27, 2011). 
Effect of strong winds on forecast accuracy
JMA reviewed the accuracy of lapilli-fall forecasts provided
in trial VAFFs issued for eight eruptions of Sakurajima vol-
cano between April 2013 and February 2014. Lapilli falls
were observed more than 3 km from the craters in all
cases. With one exception, the actual areas of lapilli fall
agreed well with forecasts. The errant forecast was for an
eruption on September 4, 2013 (Figure 11),  where the
forecast area of lapilli fall was clearly smaller than the
observed area. During this eruption, wind speed about
500 m above the volcano was 13 m/s, whereas wind speeds
during the other seven eruptions were 5–10 m/s.
For initial predictions of areas of ash fall, the JMA-
RATM assumes that ash plumes form a vertical column
directly above the crater (Shimbori et al. 2010).  Under
the influence of strong winds, an ash plume (and the
lapilli it contains) may drift leeward and diverge from the
vertical, thus resulting in lapilli fall over a greater area
than predicted, as was suggested by the Working Group
on Advanced VAFF (2013b).  Although we do not have
sufficient data to allow us to examine ash falls under
strong wind conditions, we consider that strong winds will
reduce the accuracy of our ash-fall predictions.
The current model for plume formation needs revision
to take into account the effect of strong winds (Suzuki
and Koyaguchi 2013). In addition, local topographic ef-
fects near the volcano, assumed grain-size distribution,
and vertical distribution of lapilli in the initial eruption
Table 4 Examples of damage due to lapilli fall after recent eruptions in Japan (since 1970)
Volcano  Eruption date (yyyy/mm/dd)  Size of lapilli Damage
Sakurajima  1983/8/14  6–7 cm  Windshield of car, glass pane in front door of house
Sakurajima  1978/7/31  5–6 cm  Injuries to people, car window, house window
Sakurajima  1986/6/24  5–6 cm  Windshield of car, slate roof
Sakurajima  1979/1/5  4–6 cm  Windshield of car
Kirishimayama (Shinmoedake) 2011/1/27  4–6 cm  Window of car
Sakurajima  1983/5/26  4 cm  Windshield of car, slate roof
Sakurajima  2000/10/7  3 cm  Window of car, greenhouse
Asamayama  1973/2/20  3 cm  Window of car
Sakurajima  1986/8/16  2–3 cm  Windshield of car
Kirishimayama (Shinmoedake) 2011/4/18  2 cm  Solar panel and fittings
Sakurajima  1983/8/14  1–3 cm  Window of car
Kirishimayama (Shinmoedake) 2011/2/14  1.5–2 cm  Slate roof
Table translated into English from Working Group on Advanced VAFF (2013a).
Page 11
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 11 of 12
Figure 11 Comparisons of predicted and observed areas of lapilli fall for two eruptions at Sakurajima volcano. Left: Underestimation of
area and lapilli clast size of lapilli fall for an eruption at 11:00 JST on September 4, 2013. The plume rose 2800 m above the crater and wind speed
at about 500 m above the crater at the time of the eruption was 12.6 m/s. Right: Predicted and observed areas and lapilli clast size of lapilli fall in
agreement. Eruption at 14:37 JST on January 22, 2014. The plume rose 2800 m above the crater and wind speed at about 500 m above the crater
at the time of the eruption was 6.3 m/s. Red: Points or areas where lapilli fall was observed. Obs: maximum size of observed lapilli. Yellow:
Predicted area of lapilli fall and size of lapilli; contours and their annotations indicate size of lapilli.
column model also need to be considered adequately.
Evaluation of these factors should be the subject of future
research. 
approach are inaccurate for small eruptions. As suggested
by the Working Group on Advanced VAFF (2013b), further
study is needed to improve these estimates.
Estimation of mass of volcanic ash in ash plumes
The JMA-RATM estimates the mass of volcanic ash in a
plume by applying a formula based on empirical data from
past eruptions in various parts of the world (plume height,
eruption duration, and field data on actual areas of ash
fall; Sect. A.2 of Shimbori et al. (2010). To date, we have
applied this model regardless of plume size; however, the
Working Group on Advanced VAFF (2013b) suggested
that this approach might not be accurate for small
eruptions.
Between April 2013 and February 2014 there were only
four eruptions at Sakurajima volcano for which there were
sufficient observations to allow us to compare observed
and predicted masses of ash generated. Although our esti-
mate was accurate for the largest of these eruptions (16:31
JST on August 18, 2013), which generated an ash plume
that rose 5000 m above the crater, we underestimated the
masses of ash for the three smaller eruptions, which had
plume heights of 2400–3300 m.
These results suggest that the estimates of the masses
of ash in plumes that we obtained by using the current 
Conclusion
To improve the current VAFF system and make it a
more-effective tool for disaster prevention or mitigation,
JMA took into account the needs of VAFF users and the
opinions of experts in various fields including disaster
prevention organizations. The current VAFF provides
only forecasts of areas of ash fall. Important improve-
ments to be implemented in the new VAFF system are
the provision of predictions of ash-fall quantity and
areas of lapilli fall. Two factors that have made impor-
tant contributions to these improvements are advances
in the methodology for prediction of ash-fall quantity
and areas of lapilli fall as a result of studies by MRI, and
increased processing capacity of the JMA supercomputer
system following a recent upgrade.
The main improvements incorporated in the new
VAFF system are as follows.
Three types of VAFF will be sequentially issued: infor-
mation issued before an eruption (Regular Information),
a brief forecast issued within 10 minutes of the onset of
an eruption (Preliminary Forecast) and a more extensive
Page 12
Hasegawa et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:2  Page 12 of 12
and accurate forecast issued within 30 minutes of the
onset of the eruption (Full Forecast).
VAFFs will be issued in Japanese in both graphical format
and text format.
JMA will provide with VAFFs a table that categorizes
ash fall by quantity, documents the potential effects on
people for each category and the preparedness measures
they should take.
VAFFs will be issued for ash falls of moderate and
much quantity.
In addition to forecasts of areas of ash fall provided in
current VAFFs, the new VAFFs will include predictions
of ash-fall quantity and areas of lapilli fall (for lapilli
size ≥1 cm), and recommended precautions for people
to take during and after ash and lapilli falls.
JMA plans to start using the new VAFF system in
spring 2015, and will continue to review and make
further improvements in the future.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contribution
YHas guided the review process of the research, and is the main author of
the manuscript. AS contributed to making of format of new VAFF and the
categories of ash fall quantity. YoHay contributed to making of format of
new VAFF and the categories of ash fall quantity. YuHay contributed to
making of format of new VAFF and the categories of ash fall quantity. SS
contributed to making of format of new VAFF and the categories of ash fall
quantity. TS contributed to improvement of techniques of ash fall prediction.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the chairman (Prof. A. Tanaka) and members of the
Working Group on Advanced VAFF for their contributions to this project.
We thank the people who participated in our survey of the needs of VAFF
users near Asamayama, Kirishimayama, and Sakurajima volcanoes, and the
organizations that cooperated in our trial distribution of VAFFs near
Sakurajima volcano, including local governments and local media. We also
thank two anonymous reviewers. Advice about improvements of the VAFF
system from Dr. H. Yamasato, S. Harada, and other JMA staff members is
much appreciated.
Author details
1Japan Meteorological Agency, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, Japan. 2Meteorological
Research Institute, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
Received: 29 May 2014 Accepted: 16 December 2014 
model for volcanic ash: A case study of the eruption at Asama volcano in
2009 (in Japanese). Pap Met Geophys 61:13–29, doi:10.2467/mripapers.61.13
Shimbori T, Kai R, Hayashi Y, Hayashi Y, Sugai A, Hasegawa Y, Hashimoto A,
Takagi A, Yamamoto T, Fukui K (2014) Tephra fall predictions with the JMA
regional atmospheric transport model: A case study of the eruptions at
Shinmoe-dake volcano in 2011 (in Japanese). Pap Met Geophys 65:75–107,
doi:10.2467/mripapers.65.75
Suzuki T (1990) Potential hazards of pyroclastic air-fall (in Japanese). Bull Inst
Vocational Training 19A:1–17
Suzuki YJ, Koyaguchi T (2013) 3D numerical simulation of volcanic eruption
clouds during the 2011 Shinmoe-dake eruptions. Earth Planets Space
65:581–589, doi:10.5047/eps.2013.03.009
Wilson TM, Stewart C, Sword-Daniels V, Leonard GS, Johnston DM, Cole JW,
Wardman J, Wilson G, Barnard ST (2012) Volcanic ash impacts on critical
infrastructure. Phys Chem Earth 45–46:5–23, doi:10.1016/j.pce.2011.06.006
Working Group on Advanced VAFF (2013a) Materials of 3rd Meeting of the
Working Group on Advanced VAFF (in Japanese)., [URL: "http://www.data.jma.go.jp/svd/vois/data/tokyo/STOCK/kouhai/kentokai/3rd/sankou.pdf"] http://www.data.jma.go.jp/
 svd/vois/data/tokyo/STOCK/kouhai/kentokai/3rd/sankou.pdf
Working Group on Advanced VAFF (2013b) Proposal for Advanced VAFF
(in Japanese)., p 27, [URL: "http://www.jma.go.jp/jma/press/1303/29a/teigen.pdf"] http://www.jma.go.jp/jma/press/1303/29a/teigen.pdf
References
Furukawa R (2011) Eruption of Shinmoedake volcano, Kirishima volcano group,
2011. AIST Today 2011–09:15
Hashimoto A, Shimbori T, Fukui K (2012) Tephra fall simulation for the eruptions
at Mt. Shinmoe-dake during 26–27 January 2011 with JMA NHM. SOLA
8:37–40, doi:10.2151/sola. 2012-010
Horwell CJ, Baxter PJ (2006) The respiratory health hazards of volcanic ash: a
review for volcanic risk mitigation. Bull Volc 69:1–24
JMA (2013) Report of Survey of Needs for Improvement of VAFF (in Japanese).,
p 101, [URL: "http://www.data.jma.go.jp/svd/vois/data/tokyo/STOCK/kouhai/kentokai/needs.pdf"] http://www.data.jma.go.jp/svd/vois/data/tokyo/STOCK/kouhai/
 kentokai/needs.pdf
Mt. Fuji Hazard Map Examination Committee (2004) Report of Mt. Fuji Hazard
Map Examination Committee (in Japanese)., p 240, [URL: "http://www.bousai.go.jp/kazan/fujisan-kyougikai/report/index.html"] http://www.bousai.go.jp/
 kazan/fujisan-kyougikai/report/index.html
Shimbori T, Aikawa Y, Fukui K, Hashimoto A, Seino N, Yamasato H (2010)
Quantitative tephra fall prediction with the JMA mesoscale tracer transport 
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁ t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
