BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction background
  Mt. Ruapehu volcano geological context
  Ngāti Rangi Iwi
    European history
    Te Maungā
    Maori belief structure
  Kaupapa Māori research
Methods
Results
  Mātauranga Māori (the Māori Knowledge System)
  Bridging Māori and western-gescience systems
  Workshops for Māori children
Discussion
  Expectations from the teaching tool
  The message from Ngāti Rangi to the scientific community
Conclusions
Appendix 1
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Authors’ information
Acknowledgements
Author details
References
Page 1
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5
RESEARCH  Open Access
Bridging Māori indigenous knowledge and
western geosciences to reduce social vulnerability
in active volcanic regions
Natalia Pardo1,2*, Hildalene Wilson3, Jonathan N Procter1, Erica Lattughi4 and Taiarahia Black5
Abstract
A new pedagogical methodology is proposed to reduce the social vulnerability of indigenous communities
occupying areas subject to volcanic activity, as a potential interactive approach between those communities,
scientists, and scientific institutions. The multidisciplinary methodology aims to increase scientist’s understanding of
the relationship between native inhabitants and active volcanoes in indigenous territories, and to improve the
effective dissemination of information. Also, the proposed methodology offers to the local community the scientific
knowledge in an understandable and useful way, in order to maximize people’s awareness of their exposure to
volcanic activity. The procedure starts with the recognition of the local ancestral comprehension of the volcano and
the cultural, ecological, and economical bonds between humans and volcanic processes. Subsequently, the
transmission of the indigenous knowledge to the scientific community and the appropriation of geological
knowledge by the children and teachers in a specific Māori primary school in New Zealand, allowed: (1) the
establishment of a common language, (2) enhanced communication and collaboration between the participants
involved in understanding and living with an active volcano, and (3) increased awareness about the relationship
between humans and active volcanoes.
A permanent application (and site-specific adjustment) of this method, and the use of the resulting teaching tools,
could reduce social vulnerability and empower indigenous communities in the development of volcanic risk
mitigation strategies by revitalizing and sharing knowledge, rather than imposing one epistemological system onto
the other.
Keywords: Body language; Contact-Improvisation; Iwi; Mātauranga; Ngāti Rangi; Volcanic risk
Introduction background
The lack of dialogue among stakeholders undertaking vol-
canic risk management hinders agreement in front of
decision-making processes (cf., King et al. 2007). The scar-
city of programs that integrate scientific-knowledge with
the local epistemology, including the environmental and
cultural relationship between the community exposed to
volcanic eruptions and the volcano itself, is a key factor
increasing the social vulnerability (cf.,  Alexander 1993,
Paton et al. 2001, Paton et al. 2008, Vervaeck 2012). This
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:npardov@gmail.com"] npardov@gmail.com
1Volcanic Risk Solutions Research Group, Massey University, Private Bag
11222, Palmerston North 4012, Aotearoa, New Zealand
2Servicio Geológico Colombiano & Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Diag.
53 #34-53, of. 141, Grupo Geología de Volcanes, Geociencias Básicas, Bogotá,
DC, Colombia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
is critical in the case of lands occupied by indigenous
communities where the relationship between people
and territory is long and more complex than a simple
land occupation for resource management (cf., Marsden
1988, 1992).
In most of the indigenous communities worldwide, the
territory is the centre of their identity, culture, livelihood
practices, ecology, economy, and knowledge and belief
systems (cf., Feiring 2013). Therefore, the concept of ter-
ritory is usually closest to the scientific notion of “eco-
system” than to the western concept of “land”. However,
it differs in that the perception of the territory by most
indigenous people is also based on the idea that every-
thing in the environment has life and spirit (cf., Berkers
et al. 1998). Although spirituality has been traditionally
excluded from any scientific approach, Anderson (1996)
© 2015 Pardo et al.; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 2 of 20
pointed out that “all traditional societies that have suc-
ceeded in managing resources well, over time, have done
it in part through religious or ritual representation of re-
source management. The key is not religion per se, but
the use of emotionally powerful cultural symbols to sell
particular moral codes and management systems”.
The value of traditional knowledge in sustainable de-
velopment and ecosystem management, biodiversity
conservation, and climate change adaptation has been
increasingly recognized by the western knowledge (scien-
tific) systems (Feiring 2013). In Oceania cultures (includ-
ing Polynesians),  Berkers et al. (1998) identified one of
the richest set of ecosystem applications, where the key
characteristics defining the territory as an ecosystem-like
unit are: (1) a unit with the height of land between adja-
cent valleys serving as the biophysical boundary; (2) the
recognition of land and sea space as a continuum; (3)
the presence of a social and ethical mechanism for inte-
grating humans and nature, where elders and leaders en-
courage the responsibility for the land within a system of
conservation-through-use. Within these concepts, western
science increasingly acknowledges indigenous understand-
ing of the non-linearity and openness of the natural eco-
systems, which are not always predictable and, certainly,
not always controllable (cf., Gunderson et al. 1995, Ludwig
et al. 1993). Moreover, the criteria of territory delimitation
in many traditional cultures worldwide are watershed-
based, which has been interpreted by Berkers et al. (1998)
as a mirror of their dependence on local resources.
Understanding the local indigenous vision about na-
ture, as well as the cultural and environmental links with
the territory is critical, not only for the development of
conservation strategies (e.g.,  Stevenson 1996),  but also
for hazard mitigation and risk management (cf.,  King
et al. 2007; Cronin and Cashman 2008).  For example,
King et al. (2008) postulated how Māori Environmental
knowledge in New Zealand provides a collection of ob-
servations, records, monitoring and forecast methods of
changes in their physical environment that contribute to
hazard mitigation. Likewise, Lowe et al. (2002) demon-
strated how Māori oral history of volcanic eruptions
were a valuable source of information, not only on past
eruption records, but also, on the understanding of past
response and recovery of Māori tribes to volcanic haz-
ards. Similarly, King et al. (2008) carried on an extensive
approach on how Māori oral narratives, laments, quota-
tions, proverbs, songs, and place names relate with
natural hazards and have served to teach, preserve, and
explain their occurrence. The importance of oral tradition
for volcanological investigations has been also demon-
strated in other Polynesian islands, such as Hawaii (cf.,
Swanson 2008).
This study aims to contribute to the development of haz-
ard mitigation strategies by reducing the social vulnerability 
of indigenous communities exposed to volcanic eruptions
through recognition of their traditional knowledge and its
integration with the geological understanding of the world.
The feedback between different, but not necessarily exclu-
sive epistemological systems combines multiple sources
of expertise and enhances communication between the
variable participants in volcanic risk management (e.g.,
scientists, local communities, extendable to governmental
agencies such as geological surveys). Rather than “impos-
ing” western science onto indigenous communities living
around active volcanoes we propose a participative dia-
logue in order to maximize the local awareness and build
up a strategy derived from multiple disciplines for risk
mitigation. The methodology was developed in collabor-
ation with and applied within the native Māori tribe Ngāti
Rangi Iwi, in the North Island of Aotearoa (New Zealand),
inhabiting the influence zones of Mt. Ruapehu (Figure 1)
volcanic activity.
Indigenous knowledge in the New Zealand context is
termed “mātauranga māori”, and for this project would
specifically be referred to as “mātauranga a Nāti Rangi”,
referred to hereafter as mātauranga. Here, we will show
how the body language (dance and other non-verbal forms
clarified below, in the methodology chapter), in combin-
ation with other expressive forms (verbal language, writ-
ing, drawing) is a useful tool to bridge mātauranga and
earth sciences. The integration of mātauranga,  science,
and arts served to (1) communicate the current under-
standing of geological and volcanological processes from
multiple perspectives; (2) empower indigenous communi-
ties living on active volcanoes to increase their awareness;
(3) develop a teaching tool for current and future genera-
tions, which can be used at different levels within the
community. Furthermore, this method follows an adaptive
management approach that allows iterative amendments,
to ensure the tool remains relevant as societies and volca-
noes change through time.
Mt. Ruapehu volcano geological context
Mt. Ruapehu is one of the most active stratovolcanoes
of New Zealand (Cronin and Neall 1997).  Located at
the southern end of the Taupo Volcanic Zone, it has
erupted low-K andesitic-dacitic magmas in effusive and
explosive (from phreatic to Plinian) eruptions since ~270 ka
(Donoghue et al. 1995, Pardo et al. 2012). The main edifice
is asymmetrical; it comprises lava-flows, rare domes, and
has been affected by events of sector collapse (cf., Palmer
and Neall 1989, McClelland and Erwin 2003, Procter et al.
2010, Tost et al. 2014).  The volcano is capped by small
permanent glaciers and snowfields and comprises overlap-
ping craters (Hackett and Houghton 1989, Cronin et al.
1996). Historical activity has been centred at the youngest
South Crater, currently occupied by an acidic Crater Lake
(Christenson and Wood 1993), from which lahar generation
Page 3
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 3 of 20
Figure 1 Location map of Mt. Ruapehu at the southernmost end of the Taupo Volcanic Zone (TVZ) in the North Island of New
Zealand (Te Ika ā Māui). The general view of the North Island (a) is based on the map provided by [URL: "http://prosale.co.nz/html/map.html"] http://prosale.co.nz/html/map.html, where
the location of Mt. Taranaki can be seen, offset from the Tongariro Volcanic Centre (green square); the latter, comprising Mt. Ruapehu, Mt.
Tongariro, and Pihanga volcanoes is shown in (b), based on a STER GDEM, 30 m resolution DEM. The coordinates are UTM.
is common (e.g. Cronin and Neall 1997, Neall et al. 2001,
Lube et al. 2009). Holocene eruptions have been predom-
inantly phreatic, producing base surges and ballistic fall-
out, and phreatomagmatic, producing subplinian columns
(Cronin et al. 1997, Kilgour et al. 2010).
Ngāti Rangi Iwi
“Whaia e au Manganui-o-te-ao kia tau au ki runga ō
Ruapehu ki Ngā Turi ō Murimotu ko te Ahi-kā o 
Paerangi-i-te-Whare-Toka i  puta mai ai Rangituhia,
Rangiteauria me Uēnuku-Manawa-Wiri”.  [Translates “I
follow the Manganui o tea o river, I settle up on Ruapehu
and the sacred alter of Nga Turi o Murimotu, the eternal
flame of Paerangi,  from hence we originate. Paerangi
begat Rangituhia, Rangiteauria, and their sister Ueunuku
Manawa Wiri”]. This is how Ngāti Rangi people introduce
themselves, and intrinsically links their ancestry to the
land, its geomorphology, and the flowing waters
Page 4
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 4 of 20
The Ngāti Rangi Iwi falls under the mantle of Te Kāhui
Maungā an identity, which encompasses the mountains of
the district and its original inhabitants. The ancestors
of Te Kāhui Maungā were the earliest inhabitants in
the area, arriving before many other Māori (cf., Waitangi
Tribunal, 2013). They were also known as the descendants
of Paerangi-i-te-Moungaroa, also known as Paerangi-i-te-
Whare-Toka. Paerangi is an ancestor of Ngāti Rangi, a
chief who is described in the narratives as one of the first
inhabitants of New Zealand (i.e., the “original people of
the land”).  The names of his daughters have specific
meanings, Rangituhia meaning “written in the heavens”,
Rangiteauria meaning “the joining of the heavens to the
earth”, and Uenuku Manawa Wiri meaning “the rainbow,
the anchorage of the pulsating heart”.
European history
From the time of European arrival and settlement of the
central North Island during 1800 Māori were recognised
as the native inhabitants and custodians of the land.
During the mid 1800s, increasing settlement and interest
in New Zealand from overseas required land to be se-
cured by the Crown for purchase. During this period, a
Native Land Court collected a large amount of informa-
tion on the connections that iwi (i.e., tribes) and individ-
uals had with the land. Unfortunately, the Courts of the
time were focused on ownership rather than tribal iden-
tity, history and traditional land tenure systems, result-
ing in individual cultural identity being overlooked,
poorly recorded and not understood.
The events of the formation of the Tongariro National
Park (comprising Mt. Ruapehu, Mt. Tongariro and
Pihanga volcanoes; Figure 1) with the gifting of a 2 km
radius of land around the peak of Mt. Ruapehu by Horo-
nuku Te Heuheu, on behalf to the neighbouring
Tūwharetoa tribe, also did not take into account Ngāti
Rangi culture and status over their tribal region and an-
cestral maungā (mountain).  Ngāti Rangi and other iwi
from the Whanganui district (Figure 1a) strongly pro-
tested this action and asked for their areas to be subdi-
vided out of the National Park. This was against the
thinking of the current government and the National
Park was established (cf., Waitangi Tribunal, 2013).
Ngāti Rangi, like many other maori tribes, has a rich
belief system that has developed over the last 1000 years
of occupation, with numerous spiritual and ritualistic
practises that occur at different times and locations. A
large number of these practises have disappeared due to
the introduction of European culture and Christianity.
However, several historical accounts that form the basis
of Ngāti Rangi belief system are now publicly known
and treated as stories, myths and legends.
Many of these stories have been over simplified over
the years with many different versions being portrayed. 
Unfortunately, the real meanings behind many of these
stories and practices have been lost or altered to be con-
sistent with European beliefs. This has forced Ngāti
Rangi to guard the remainder of their history and spirit-
ual connections to their rohe pōtae (i.e. tribal homeland),
to ensure that their mana (status) and principles are not
disrespected and that they endure.
Te Maungā
Paramount in Ngāti Rangi belief structure and culture are
the volcanoes that make up Te Kāhui Maungā, in particu-
lar Mt. Ruapehu. The dominant longstanding feature in
the landscape (Figures 1 and 2) is central in creation re-
cords, chronicles of settlement, and ritualistic practises.
The mountain is viewed as touching the heavens and is
seen as a place of gods and the resting place of their an-
cestors (C.Wilson, personal communication 2012).
The connection Ngāti Rangi have with the maungā is
highlighted in its name Te Kāhui Maungā ki Tangaroa.
The name signifies both their connection to the creation
of the land, their place of belonging (and the term used
to describe their natural grouping or iwi) and the source
of their awa/wai (river system) and mouri (Ngāti Rangi
dialect for mauri, meaning Life Principle, Life Force; cf.
Best 1982). Ngāti Rangi whakapapa (i.e., genealogy) re-
fers to the people that fished up and created the North
Island. Their spiritual beliefs centre on the atua (gods and
spiritual guardians):  Tangaroa (Guardian of the Ocean),
Ranginui (Father Sky), Papatūānuku (Mother Earth), and
Ruaumoko (Guardian of Earthquakes and Volcanoes, the
youngest son of Rangi and Papa), all of them connected
by water and before the island was “fished up” by the Poly-
nesian demi-god Māui. The “fish” would breath through a
hole or vent connected to the top of the South Island
called ‘Te Ihungangana a Ruapehu i rō wai’; when fished
up, the birth of Ruapehu calmed the fish.
Mt. Ruapehu later became known as Matua te Mana
(the powerful one) with himself and the Te Wai-ā-moe,
which refers to the Crater Lake, as the spring that
brought forth life from Papatūānuku (Mother Earth),
supplying spiritual and physical sustenance to the land
and Ngāti Rangi.
Maori belief structure
The beliefs and values of Māori are based on their rela-
tionship with the natural environment and their influ-
ence on management. Primary values associated with
land include: tikanga (customs) and whakapapa (geneal-
ogy),  which form the basis of any kaupapa Māori
(knowledge, skills, attitudes and values of Māori society)
process. Other Māori environmental concepts such as
tāonga (treasures),  mouri (life force),  wairua (spiritual
health and wellbeing),  kaitiaki (guardians),  and ahi kā
(unbroken connections) are important concepts used in
Page 5
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 5 of 20
Figure 2 Matua te Mana (Mt. Ruapehu) as (a) seen from the sacred lake of Rotokura, and (b) labelled with the Ngāti Rangi names of
each sacred location considered in their narratives (map designed and provided by Ngāti Rangi Iwi).
environmental management to essentially monitor the
state of the (cultural/Māori) environment or the intercon-
nectedness. Kaitiakitanga (guardianship) is another more
recent concept, which provides the framework to put into
practice these concepts and applies them to today’s west-
ern management systems and legislation. Kaitiakitanga
refers to the sustainable access, use, and conservation of
natural resources, developed by a specific community oc-
cupying a particular geographical area (cf., Marsden 1992).
None of these concepts form or relate to any legislation or
policy that guides natural hazard identification or the
emergency management process.
Kaupapa Māori research
Kaupapa Maori is the term used for the indigenous,
epistemological research system in New Zealand, which
includes the initiation, procedures, evaluations, con-
struction and distribution of newly defined indigenous
knowledge (cf.,  Bishop 1999, Moewaka Barnes 2000).
Many indigenous cultures have traditionally occupied
fertile, active volcanic areas. In New Zealand, Māori have
observed and monitored, as well as responded to and re-
covered from, numerous hazardous (volcanic) events
during the last ~800 years (Cashman and Cronin 2008;
King et al. 2007, Severne 1995). The knowledge, referred
to as mātauranga māori, gained from these experiences
is rarely considered when scientifically identifying vol-
canic hazards, yet it does contain a unique, valid epis-
temology and data (Roberts 1995, Durie 1996, Durie
1998).  By extracting and combining portions of both
Māori and western science within an applied spatial con-
text, utilising both scientific and kaupapa Māori frame-
works (Smith 1990),  we can begin to develop unique
solutions to natural hazards and increase resilience to
hazard events (cf., Rainforth et al. 2012).
Methods
We suggest that body language in combination with
other forms of human expression, such as, fine arts, 
music and poetry, are highly effective tools to teach geo-
logical and volcanological concepts. By reconsidering the
concept of “The body as a cultural object”, discussed by
authors such as Foucault (1977),  Mary Douglas (1973),
(Merleau-Ponty 1945, In: Silverman 1976), and Gardner
(1993), it is possible to develop different strategies using
the body language to experience, adopt, and translate
the scientific information. The concept of “body lan-
guage” refers to the collective expressions, which use the
physical body as the main subject of human perception,
nonverbal expression, and communication (cf., Merleau-
Ponty 1945, In: Silverman, 1976; Fran 1988).  Body ex-
pression is conceived as an intrinsic human, non-verbal
ability articulating personal sensitivity, thoughts, imagin-
ation, and creativity, complementing other expressive
tools such as, talking, painting, and writing (cf., Stokoe
and Schächter 1977).  It has been recognized since the
1970s as a powerful pedagogical tool (Stokoe 1978),
which encompasses the concepts of (1) free-style dance,
as an individual search; (2) dance to move, to communi-
cate, and to create or improvise (Kalmar 2006). In addition,
body language is encompassed within the concept of “bod-
ily knowledge”, also known as “somatic knowledge”, which
is a wide pedagogical research field comprising the ways
humans understand themselves and their environment
through the body, and make meaning of the world through
their bodily experiences (Green 2002).
For this project, we chose the Ngāti Rangi children as
the main representatives of the tribe to work with. The
reason for this selection was based on the hypothesis
that children are (1) excellent receptors and questioners
of knowledge, (2) participative in an innovative class-
room, and (3) communicators to older generations by
sharing their learning with their families. Also, children’s
psychomotor abilities and development are expected to
be better than in ordinary adults. We adapted the strat-
egies explained below to the conditions of Ngāti Rangi
population, which had one Māori medium primary
school at Ohākune Te Kura Kaupapa Māori o Ngāti
Page 6
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 6 of 20
Rangi,  which is taught between 80-100% in Te Reo
Māori and comprised 20–26 students between 5 and
13 years old in 2012–2013 (grouped within two class-
rooms).  The initial stage of the project consisted in
meetings between the volcanologist and the Māori Prin-
cipal of the primary school. In this phase, the volcanolo-
gist could learn about Ngāti Rangi history, the meaning
of Mt. Ruapehu for the community, the relationship be-
tween the tribe and the volcano, and how Māori explain,
understand and relate to the origin of the Universe,
Planet Earth, and volcanic activity in general, and to Mt.
Ruapehu, in particular. The questions from the Principal
to the volcanologist were also raised in this initial phase,
together with the main interests of the community
around how volcanology could contribute to and
straighten their knowledge system and practices. Since
Mātauranga Māori (Māori knowledge) is transmitted
across generations through oral tradition (prayers, narra-
tives and songs),  the meetings served to clarify the
meaning of the narratives, with particular attention to
all Māori etymology and toponomy referring to Mt.
Ruapehu and related activity.
From the first stage a rich database resulted, which
helped to identify the concepts within the mātauranga
that could overlap with western scientific (geological-
volcanological) theories. From this process, a correlation
between the indigenous and geological knowledge sys-
tems could be established and the main teaching sub-
jects were selected: (1) The origin of the Universe, Solar
System, and Planet Earth; (2) The Structure of the Earth;
(3) Earth dynamics (covering tectonics, earthquakes,
magma, and volcanic activity).
The third stage consisted in the design of multidiscip-
linary workshops focused on teaching geosciences by
using the body language and knowledge developed in
performing arts. The starting motive was always the
Māori perception of each concept, followed by the pres-
entation of the corresponding scientific point of view.
The entire aim was to evidence the agreement between
both systems and to bring about the need for respectful
and reciprocal interactions between people, natural pro-
cesses and resources to prevent disasters.
A series of five workshops were designed, each one
consisting of: (1) an introductory session (~1 hour long)
using different types of body expression exercises, includ-
ing Contact-improvisation dance (Smith and Nelson
1997),  theatre, and interpretative dance (Root-Bernstein
and Root-Bernstein 2003, Servos 1981),  improvisational
playmaking and game-dynamics (Boal 1979, 2002).  The
traditional narratives were recreated (i.e., performed) dur-
ing this sessions, by using them as motives and guides for
the improvised body movement/expression. This activity
was followed or alternated by a guided-dance part to first
experience the physical processes addressed in each 
subject (e.g., The Origin of the Universe, of the Planet
Earth and all forces of nature), in order to have an initial
“empirical-somatic” comprehension of the phenomena be-
fore receiving the theoretical explanation. Therefore, the
methodology is based on experiencing concepts and phys-
ical phenomena through the body movement, body ex-
pression, and by acquiring body knowledge at first.
Contact-improvisation dance, for instance, is based on the
improvisation that arises when two bodies establish con-
tact, following the physical laws that govern their motion:
gravity, momentum, and inertia. Therefore, it is an ex-
tremely useful technique to experience with the body
these physical laws. The bodywork was occasionally
shortly interrupted to reinforce the oral tradition and to
provide the scientific explanation of the same experience.
(2) A session (~1 hour long) of interactive talks followed,
to construct the concepts experienced with the body in the
first session. The theoretical scientific background was ex-
plained in continuous feedback with the Māori view about
the same processes. Audio-visual aids, such as images, vid-
eos, and power point presentations were used in this ses-
sion to specify and clarify the concepts by visualizing real
natural images or virtual models. This session had to be
strongly interactive, allowing streams of questions asked by
the children to be discussed and answered. (3) A subse-
quent practical session varied from observations directly in
the field (on Mt. Ruapehu) to laboratory or hands-on exer-
cises (e.g.,  construction of volcano models; Diet-Coke©
and Mentos© experiment following Coffey 2008). (4) Col-
laborators (teachers and artists) conducted a further ses-
sion, which varied according to the workshop. Learned key
concepts were synthetized and posed as motives to pro-
duce other art forms, such as poetry, pictures, paintings,
and songs. This activity (1 hour to several days) allowed
further assimilation of the learned concepts. During all
stages, a collection of existing and absent terms in Te reo
Māori language was recorded, in order to build up a gloss-
ary of geological terms in the native tongue.
Finally, the documented process and artistic products
were later used to (5) produce a teaching tool in video and
power point presentation formats. This tool was left as a
permanent resource to the school for continuing work with
future generations. It was also given to other teachers,
other members of Ngati Rangi community, and researchers
conducting investigation on Māori culture, mātauranga,
and risk mitigation strategies, to be used as an interactive
tool in order to extend the process to the elder generations.
Results
Mātauranga Māori (the Māori Knowledge System)
The meetings (hui) and conversations (kōrero) between
volcanologists and the Princiapal focused on the Māori
perception and their explanation about the Origin of the
Universe, the Planet Earth, Earth dynamics, Mt. Ruapehu
Page 7
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 7 of 20
and the relationship between the tribe and the volcano.
The discussions emphasized the concept of Kaitiakitanga
(guardianship), which encompasses the philosophical and
practical components that establish the local indigenous
environmental ethics. By protecting and managing the
land that Māori have been occupying over generations,
where the community exercises authority for decisions
made regarding the land (mana whenua) and manages
natural resources, the guardianship enhances the health
of valued species (mouri o ngā tāonga) and the local
ecosystem (cf.,  Forster 2011).  Therefore, Māori environ-
mental theories and practices derive from long (hundreds
of years) cultural and ecological relationships with their
ancestral land.
To understand the meaning of the Māori territory, it
is crucial to clarify their explanation about the origin of
the world known by humans. In the Māori tradition, the
Universe is a dynamic process, a continuous transform-
ation allowing the “unfolding of consciousness and
thought”. Its roots comprised (1) Te Korekore, meaning
the original void and the potential being (Figure 3); (2)
Figure 3 The Tino Rangatiratanga Flag, which became officially
the Māori flag of Aotearoa (New Zealand) in 1990. Designed by
Hiraina Marsden, Jan Dobson and Linda Munn. Text by Walter
Erstich (cf., Paora et al., 2011). 
Te Pō, meaning the original darkness and the world of
becoming; and (3) Te Ao Mārama, meaning the world
of light, the world of being. Māori genealogy starts from
here, from the beginning of the universe, developing into
the establishment of time-space, night and day, and the
formation of the male and female principles: Ranginui
(Father Sky) and Papatūānuku (Mother Earth).  From
their union all the spiritual powers were born and be-
came the guardians of their various domains, including
the ocean, the wind, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions,
forests and birds, the cultivated food, uncultivated crops,
human beings, and war. Within Māori cosmogony,
humans were born in the latest time of this genealogy
(cf., Kowhai Consulting Ltd. 2004).
Along with the unfolding universe, the ability of cos-
mic processes to give, but also, to destroy has been
widely recognized by Māori. There, the concept of Tapu
arises. It refers to the sacred and also to the forbidden
places, activities, and things, and it is therefore used as a
protective measure that establishes ethical and practical
norms, also imposing a social control. Tapu is the Māori
system to cultivate appreciation and respect for another
human being, another form of life, and any life force (cf.,
Kowhai Consulting Ltd. 2004).  Volcanic craters, crater
lakes, geothermal springs, water springs, and other spe-
cific landscapes are tapu. For example, Ngāti Rangi re-
fers to the Crater Lake on Ruapehu as Te Wai a Moe,
the Sleeping Water, which is a place of Tapu. This is not
trivial, since the most recently frequent eruptions of
Ruapehu regard unpredictable phreatic events that may
not significantly impact a large area, but certainly is a
threat for visitors on the volcano slopes and crater rim.
Likewise, a story about the origin of the Mangawhero
River from a tear escaped from Ranginui as he got sepa-
rated from his lover Papatūānuku could be used as a
starting point to explain the different lahar triggering
mechanisms. Similarly, the Rangipōs desert (Figure 1b)
is also referred as Tapu,  corresponding, from the vol-
canological perspective, to the proximal and medial loca-
tions of pyroclastic deposition during past, sustained
Plinian and subplinian eruption columns. Tapu can be
therefore considered as a native hazard mitigation strat-
egy (cf., Tapuke et al. 2006, King et al.,  2007, Grattan
and Torrence 2010),  which identifies a place as sacred
and forbidden because it is known to be dangerous, ul-
timately discouraging people to approach (e.g.,  it regu-
lates exposure to volcanic hazards).
A recurrent story within the Māori narratives regards
the “Three baskets of knowledge”. In the story, the su-
preme creator Io gave these baskets to Tane,  the god
and guardian (kaitiaki) of the forests and direct ancestor
of the human kind. The three baskets correspond to: (1)
the knowledge beyond space and time, the ultimate, and
unknown to us, reality; (2) the “womb of the universe”,
Page 8
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 8 of 20
the initial knowledge from which the universe origi-
nated; (3) “that before us”, corresponding to the know-
ledge that we acquire through the senses allowing the
current understanding about the natural world around
us. Within this context, the Māori education system de-
velops, providing the first principles or ground rules,
and the customs from which “one would guide oneself”
(cf., Kowhai Consulting Ltd. 2004). This “living and be-
haviour guide” is transmitted throughout generations
through the karakia (prayers),  waiata (songs),  kōrero
(oral stories), and other forms of performing arts collect-
ively named Kapa-Haka.
Ngāti Rangi’s starting point when approaching any dis-
cussion about Mt. Ruapehu was their karakia (prayer) to
the volcano, titled “He Ruruku: Mai ara ra!” (Appendix 1).
The prayer recalls the tribe’s genealogical link to Mt.
Ruapehu, which is not simply described as a geomor-
phological accident consisting of Rua (two) Pehu (cra-
ters), but is mainly referred as: (1) Koro (Grandfather),
(2) Matua te Mana (The powerful progenitor), and (3)
Te Whare Toka o Paerangi (The house of stone of Paer-
angi, their ancestor).
The karakia mentions the “Mountain Clan”,  which
refers to Mt. Ruapehu (Matua te Mana-Absolute
Wisdom), Mt. Tongariro (Matua te Toa - Absolute War-
rior),  Ngāuruhoe (Matua te Pononga-Absolute Negoti-
ator),  Pihanga (Matua te Hine-Absolute Feminine),
and Mt. Taranaki (Matua te Tapu-Absolute Sacredness)
(Figure 1b). The Māori story explains the actual distribu-
tion of the volcanoes, with Mt. Taranaki location offset to
the west coast and detached from the N-S volcanic trend
within the Central Volcanic Pleateau. These volcanoes
conformed the ancestral mountain clan and originally
lived together in the central North Island. Pihanga repre-
sents the only female character and was engaged with
Tongariro. However, a love affair with Taranaki provoked
conflict, from which Tongariro got furious and finally
“blew his top”.  Within the Ngāti Rangi version of this
story, Ruapehu, Koro (the grandfather), watched the scene
with worry and decided to send Mt. Taranaki (who was re-
sponsible for the sacred kōrero of the clan) to the west,
with the responsibility to “be the guardian of the setting
sun”. From there, he cries whenever he reminds Pihanga
and sends his caresses from the West in the form of
clouds. The story clearly places Ruapehu as the wise elder,
Matua te Mana, who protects Ngāti Rangi from the force
of Tongariro. Although we could not completely confirm
the entire story with geological evidence, Mt. Ruapehu
Plinian eruptions (>27-11 ka cal. BP) are older than
Tongariro largest explosive events (>10-7 ka cal BP).
Also, the shape of Mt. Tongariro has progressively
changed with time as violent eruptions and sector col-
lapses have occurred (cf.,  Donoghue et al.,  1995; Cronin
and Neall, 1997; Narin et al. 1998; Moebis et al., 2011). 
Ruapehu also plays a central role in Ngāti Rangi songs
and other stories, where it is referred as the shining scale
of the Great Fish caught by Māui (Polynesian demigod),
which subsequently became the North Island of New
Zealand (Te Ika o Māui;  cf.,  Te Ahukaramū Charles
Royal 2012).  From the conversations, it was clearly
understood that from the Māori perspective, the land
and the volcano clearly preceded human occupation in
the cosmogony.
Mt. Ruapehu is therefore considered one of the ances-
tors who provides benefits to the tribe and regulates the
balance of their territory. “If he needs to do his mahi
(job) then we need to let him. He needs to do what he
needs to do”. Ngāti Rangi permanently emphasized this
perception about the volcano, constantly repeating that
the tribe does not consider Ruapehu as a hazard; indeed,
Ngāti Rangi asked volcanologists to avoid this term from
the beginning of this project. During the meetings there
was a recurrent message reinforcing the tribe’s lack of
fear in front of volcanic activity of Ruapehu, and the
strong acknowledgement for all the benefits provided by
the volcano, which included: (1) Their water resources,
embracing rivers, water springs, the Crater Lake, and the
Rotokura lake (located on the SE ring-plain of Ruapehu
and considered to hold water with healing properties).
(2) The ski field, which is the main source of economical
and recreational activities during winter. (3) The pro-
ductive volcanic soils, and (4) protection from the erup-
tions of Tongariro (last erupted in 2012; Jolly and
Cronin 2014).
Bridging Māori and western-gescience systems
By integrating Māori and scientific perceptions, a con-
ceptual map was proposed (Figure 4; Table 1) in which
for each Māori concept there corresponds an analogue
scientific one. The resulting lines and arrows connecting
concepts and processes attempt to correlate the two.
For example, the genealogy from creation to mankind
detailed by Mātauranga Māori, starting from the root-
cause, the original void, and developing into the expan-
sion energy, primordial memory, sub-conscious wisdom,
and the seed-word breath of life, can have an equivalent
in science, starting from the Big Bang,  and developing
into the formation, replication, transcription, and trans-
lation of DNA. Similarly, the Māori notion about the
unfolding of life is comparable to the scientific theory of
evolution and the typical spiral representation of the
geological time.
In the resulting integrative map (Figure 4), the lessons
from the past experiences and from the observation of
the present moment play a role in the mental projection
of the future. From the mythological point of view, past
experiences are lessons for present generations; from the
scientific, geological point of view, the observations of
Page 9
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 9 of 20
Figure 4 Conceptual map developed for this project, based on the analogy between Mātauranga Māori and western Geosciences.
From this perspective, the Big Bang and Evolution theories could be integrated with native traditional thoughts.
current processes are the key to reconstruct the past
events (Principle of Uniformitarianism).  Both systems
look forward to study trends and envisage the future
(events/generations), which is a key procedure to design
strategies for risk mitigation and emergency planning.
Workshops for Māori children
Through the development of the conceptual map (Figure 4;
Table 1), the idea of humans as part of the environment,
rather than separated from natural processes was rein-
forced, and a sense of responsible participation could be
shown and shared with children. The co-validation of
Mātauranga Māori and western Geosciences aimed to
reach an agreement between both perceptions, which
helped to design four, one-day long workshops (one per
school-term),  where geology could be taught without
interfering but nurturing and being nurtured by the trad-
itional Māori understanding.
At the end of the first workshop (Te whakapapa o
Papatūānuku), the concepts of Time-Space, Matter and
Energy, the Laws of Thermodynamics, the Sates of Mat-
ter, The four Fundamental Forces, the Origin of the Uni-
verse, Solar System, Planets, Earth structure, and the
importance of soils and water conservation were effect-
ively shared (Table 2a and 2b). 
At the end of the second workshop (Ruaumoko shakes),
the concepts of Tectonic Plates, stress-and-strain, earth-
quakes, seismic waves, Earth crustal response to stress
(i.e., fragile, ductile, plastic, and elastic behaviour of mat-
ter), orogenesis, and the general theories of Earth’s dynam-
ics were integrated with the stories of Ruaumoko, the god
of earthquakes and volcanoes (Table 3).
The third workshop (Te Whare Toka ō Paerangi)
reviewed the structure of the Earth and focused on the
Tectonic Rock Cycle. This was successfully integrated to
the Ruapehu narratives as being the “House of stone” of
Paerangi, the Ngāti Rangi ancestor (Table 4).
The fourth workshop that could be developed within
the time of this project (Matua te Mana and Crystals) fo-
cused on the generation of magma, magma crystallization,
degassing, and the origin of volcanoes (Table 5). The last
workshop (Te Mahi o Ruapehu) focused on volcanic erup-
tions, volcanic products, and their benefits to humans
and, in particular, to the Ngāti Rangi people (Table 6).
As described above, all workshops included an initial
session of bodywork by integrating Contact-Improvisation
dance, partner-yoga, and somatic-dance exercises, which
provided a guided, free-style movement with scientific and
traditional native contents (here called Earth-Contact
Dance). The images, movements, and questions driven by
Page 10
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 10 of 20
Table 1 Comparative table showing the analogy between Māori knowledge system (Mātauranga Māori) and Western
Geosciences
Maori knowledge  Western-Science
Mātauranga Māori: Empirical and spiritual methods, inherited
tradition and costums 
Astrophysics, Geology, Palaeontology, Biology, Archaeology,
Anthropology
Whakapapa (Genealogy)  Cosmogony
The three baskets of knowledge  Principle of Uniformitarianism, Law of Superposition, non-linearity
of Space-Time
Atua: ancestors (divinities) with influence over particular domains  Potential Energy
Mouri: the principle of life-force or essence within all animate and
inanimate things, and resulting interconnection between all forms
of life. It is the power that creates unity in diversity, the binding
power that unifies. 
Dark energy, principles of thermodynamics
Hihiri: absolute energy, a form of illumination or aura, which appears
in all living things 
Electromagnetic and gravity fields
Mouri-Ora: the life principle existing in animate and inanimate things
and remains with them throughout its existence. 
a) Earth Physics (dynamics): convection within Earth Nucleus and
Mantle, Plate Tectonics, the Rock cycle, earthquakes, orogeny,
volcanic activity, atmospheric processes, formation of soils, crystals.
b) Living things: Genetic code
Male and Female principles  Sexual reproduction
Papatūānuku: Mother Earth as a living being  Planet Earth: Dynamic System
Ruaumoko: god of earthquakes and volcanoes represented as the
youngest son of Papatuanuku and living underneath her. 
Earth’s core and mantle convection, Plate tectonics
Kaitiaki: divinities created by the love of Papatūānuku (Earth, female
principle) and Ranginui (Sky, male principle). Some of the most
mentioned in the narratives are Tangaroa (god of oceans),
Tawhirimatea (god of winds), Tanemahuta (god of forests), Whiro
(darkness, god in charge of illness, strengthen by death) 
Natural forces and cycles
Kaitiakitanga: Active, interdependent relationship between Atua,
natural resources, ancestors, present human generation. It considers
the inhabitants knowledge of the physical space and the “layers of
events and relationships that have occurred in that area over time”
(Forster, 2011). 
Ecology, Environmental Sciences, Stratigraphy, History
Tāne Mahuta, the direct ancestor of Man: humans and trees are
genetically related 
The Human being and trees share some DNA
Mana whenua: the potential of the land  The ability of the land to produce the benefits of nature. It is
linked to environmental conservation, land distribution
Matua Te Mana, Koro, Te Whare Toka o Paerangi: name of Mt.
Ruapehu, considered as Ngati Rangi ancestor 
Mt. Ruapehu: the most active inland volcano of New Zealand.
Ka Ora tenei whenua: Mt. Ruapehu protects the tribe, provides
healing water, rivers, soils, snow 
Benefits from volcanoes, including: (1) Main water sources for
Ngati Rangi territory, (2) Soils fertilization from degradation of
volcanic ash, (3) contribution to Earth’s atmosphere composition,
(4) Tourism
The mahi (job) of volcanoes, needed to maintain the life, natural
cycles, processes, and the world as we know it 
Volcanic hazards
Tapu  Vulnerability and Risk perception and management
Ngati Rangi Iwi identity and awareness of their geologically active environment
the instructor pulled out the attention towards observa-
tion of the own body and construction of empirical know-
ledge. After the physical sensations were explored through
the body language the children had time to narrate their
perceptions. From here, the physical-laws and geological
concepts were constructed together with the teachers,
making always the paragon with Māori knowledge. The 
process resulted in a continuous creative education prac-
tice during which the teacher was constantly inducing
research by the students. Rather than limiting the lessons
to a unidirectional talk by the teacher, the permanent
thinking-induction through questions to the children
allowed the construction of concepts by themselves. The
emotion triggered through this process allowed the
Page 11
Table 2 First Workshop design: Te whakapapa o Papatūānuku (From the Big Bang to the Origin of Planet Earth)
Workshop Body-Language Māori narratives Scientific concepts
teaching technique 
Example-exercises Audiovisual aid
a.
1. Te whakapapa
o Papatūānuku
(The Genealogy
of The Earth):
Introductory
workshop 
Theatre-dance
and somatic dance:
māori and/or the
scientific story
performing through
body sensitization.
By guided attention,
an exploration of the
physical sensations
was directed while
building up the
narrative of the
origin of the Universe
and the Earth. The
movement was
connected with
feelings, findings,
needs, desires (e.g.,
the need of light and
order in the cosmos,
the desire of expansion
and space). Rarely the
children needed to
imitate the teacher
and most of the
time, a free-style
movement was
established in order
to focus attention
on the individual
processes. According
to the physical laws
experienced with the
body (i.e., gravity,
momentum, inertia)
and the image or
narrative given by
the instructor, the
scientific explanation
was provided either
during the dance or
in short pauses used
for discussion circles.
At the end of the
movement-session a
talk-circle served to
construct concepts
through the interactive 
Te Kore, transition
from Te Pō to
Te Ao Mārama
Space
Time 
Expansion of the
Universe (Big Bang)
1) Matter and Energy.
Physical particles and
their interactions:
collision, rejection,
bonding, fusion. 2)
Stellar nucleosynthesis,
and Origin of Life.
Laws of Thermodynamics 
Laying down with
closed-eyes, starting
to explore the ground
and describe textures,
temperature, solidity,
the feeling of darkness
and confusion. Then,
continuing the exploration
with open-eyes and feel
the difference. Slowly start
to explore the space in
the vertical direction
while changing levels
(from the floor to standing),
experiencing the force
of gravity, inertia, and
momentum.
Changing Partner games:
(1) Find a partner in the
space and establish short
interactions (e.g., establish
eye-contact for a few
seconds and approach
without touching, then
leave-to feel magnetism-
reject, collide, make bonds).
(2) Find a partner and play
mirrors for a few seconds.
With these exercises we
aimed to reproduce all pos
sible particle interactions in
the space after the Big
Bang. A group of children
start to come close to
gether until forming a
cluster, feeling gravity
and density, and guide
them towards liberating
themselves from that,
recreating how stars
are born. 
1) Images about
nebulae, star dust,
galaxies and you-tube
videos about star
formation and the
origin of the Solar
System and planets.
2) Te Koru, an unfolding
spiral representing the
Maori evolution of the
Universe, and Geological
time in Science.
The activities above are
done at different speeds,
including stopping the
movement. 
External collaborators
Jen Hyde-Independent
Performing artists, expert
in Acro-yoga, Circus,
Theater of the oppressed,
Games, and Teaching
for social justice 
Pardo 
et 
al. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Volcanology 
2015, 
4
:
5
http:
/
/
www.
appliedvolc.
com/
content/
4/
1/
5 
Page 
11 
of 
20
Page 12
Table 2 First Workshop design: Te whakapapa o Papatūānuku (From the Big Bang to the Origin of Planet Earth) (Continued)
discussion between
teachers and students. 
Separation
between
Papatūānuku
and Ranginui
Papatūānuku
Kaitiakitanga
b.
1. Te whakapapa Partner Yoga
o Papatūānuku
(The Genealogy
of The Earth):
Introductory
workshop
[continued] 
Introduction
to Ruaumoko 
Forces: Gravity, Magnetism,
Electricity, Nuclear Force 
Explained from activities
above.
Moving in the space while
feeling the centre of
gravity, experiencing
what happens when
changing levels.
Representation by teachers
and collaborators using
acro-yoga techniques
States of Matter: liquid,
solid, gas–vapor
The Origin of the Solar
System and planets
Planet Earth: location in
the Solar System and
Structure
After explaining the
Earth’s Structure, the
attention focused on
the nature, scale, and
value of water and
the soil. 
Free-dance experiencing/
performing the states of
water when changing
temperature
A group of children form
a central cluster (Sun), by
making a circle holding
hands and recreating
collapse, explosion,
rotation, initiation of the
Star. In the meantime, the
rest of the children stay
around, individually moving
in circles, as asteroids.
Careful creation of larger
clusters (planetoids) by
embracing children along
selected orbits, adding
more “mass to each planet”
Closed-eyes sensitivity by
doing an imaginary trip
from the Earth’s core
towards the surface,
feeling all the Earth’s
layers beneath us. 
An apple was used
to visualize the
proportions of potable
water and soils.
Stress and stress-release:
earthquakes and volcanic
eruptions need to happen
to guarantee natural
cycles and Life on Earth
as we know it
Gravity 
Stretching exercises in
partners, feeling tension
and its release, weight
and its release. 
Field-visit: a short
excursion to the
Eastern Ring Plain
of Ruapehu to learn
how to identify East,
South, West, and
North at Onetapu, 
Each student wrote
a poem in native
language about
Papatūānuku, natural
forces, and the need
of volcanic eruptions
to support Life. Each 
Jen Hyde-Independent
Performing artists, expert
in Acro-yoga, Circus,
Theater of the
oppressed, Games,
and Teaching for
social justice 
Pardo 
et 
al. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Volcanology 
2015, 
4
:
5
http:
/
/
www.
appliedvolc.
com/
content/
4/
1/
5 
Page 
12 
of 
20
Page 13
Pardo 
et 
al. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Volcanology 
2015, 
4
:
5
http:
/
/
www.
appliedvolc.
com/
content/
4/
1/
5
Table 2 First Workshop design: Te whakapapa o Papatūānuku (From the Big Bang to the Origin of Planet Earth) (Continued)
Continuing
theatre-dance 
Papatūānuku 
Magma, formation of gas
bubbles within magma,
volcanic eruptions, and
pumice rocks and obsidian 
Guided movement and
somatic dance, feeling as
if we were “magma”,
detailing what a viscous
behaviour is, the formation
of a gas bubble, and the
bursting response of the
bubble when subject to
decompression.
Cardinal directios,
orientation, and
coordinates
Stratigraphy: how we
read the story of the
Earth by using the Principle
of Uniformitarianism and
the Law of Superposition.
The analogue of the
rivers “carving the skin of
Papatūānuku” helped to
explain river incision and
the outcrops of horizontal
tephra beds. 
one of Ngāti Rangi poem was accompanied
sacred places. by pictures taken by
Identification of the them during the
surrounding volcanoes: workshop, and an
Mt. Tongariro, Mt.  exhibition in the
Ngauruhoe, Mt.  classroom followed.
Ruapehu. Visit to a
small valley to
recognize the
volcanic deposits
of Ruapehu, learn
how to read the
geological history.
The children were
able to connect
the morning dance
exercises and
recognized that
pumice is solidified
magma, and its
voids are the bubbles. 
Page 
13 
of 
20
Page 14
Pardo 
et 
al. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Volcanology 
2015, 
4
:
5
http:
/
/
www.
appliedvolc.
com/
content/
4/
1/
5
Table 3 Second Workshop design: Ruaumoko shakes (An introduction to Earth dynamics and earthquakes)
Workshop Body-Language
teaching technique 
Māori
narratives 
Scientific concepts Example bodywork
exercises 
Audiovisual aid Experience Outcome External
collaborators
2. Ruaumoko Guided movement
shakes: to recreate the return
introduction to the original void,
to earthquakes darkness, space.
and seismic
activity 
Partner Yoga
Guided movement
recreating mantle
convection. 
Mai ara rā!  Review of the Big  Short version of the  1) New vocabulary Other Te
Bang and Earth  corresponding activity  in English and  Kaupapa o Ngāti
Structure. of workshop 1.  Māori languages. Rangi teachers
2) Art-piece: a
Papatūānuku’s  Stress and stress-release: Stretching exercises in Class showing
stress and forces earthquakes and volcanic partners, feeling tension videosand pictures
eruptions need to happen and its release, weight about the Earth
to guarantee natural and its release. Contact- structure, mantle 
A round of
questions from
teachers aimedto
reinforce and 
sculptured series
of paintings
displayed as P, S,
and R-seismic waves
cycles and Life on Earth Improvisation exercises convection, tectonic synthetize the
Gravity 
to experience: gravity, plates, and emphasis lessons. This activity
push, pull, roll, slide. on Subduction was mingled with
Ruaumoko’s job 
processes. traditional songs.
(mahi) inside
Papatūānuku
Free-style movement
to experience the response
of matter (strain) to stress. 
Crustal strain and stress,
and introduction to
earthquakes 
Free-style fluid, plastic,
elastic, and fragile
behavior with
movements.
Game with a rope to
recreate P, S, and
R-seismic waves. 
Seismic waves
Game: one kid personified
Ruaumoko triggering
earthquakes, and a team
of children represented
the crust responding to
the seismic waves by
rolling, folding, pushing,
sliding, until creating
mountains. 
Orogenesis 
Page 
14 
of 
20
Page 15
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 15 of 20
Table 4 Third Workshop design: Te Whare Toka ō Paerangi (A look to the Tectonic Rock Cycle)
Workshop Body-Language
teaching technique 
Māori narratives Scientific concepts Audiovisual aid  Experience Outcome
3. Te Whare
Toka o Paerangi
(Mt. Ruapehu:
Paerangi’s house
of stone) 
Theatre-dance: māori
and/or the scientific
story performing through
body sensitization and
somatic dance exercises.
A free-style movement
was guided to recreate
the tectonic Rock Cycle,
the action of water and
wind on rocks. According
to the physical processes
experienced with the
body, the scientific
explanation was provided
either during the dance or
in short pauses used for
discussion circles. At the
end of the movement-
session a discussion circle
served to construct
concepts about igneous
and sedimentary rocks,
erosion, metamorphic
rocks, and the tectonic
rock cycle as Earth’s
recycling processes. 
Ruaumoko, Te
Whare toka
o Paerangi 
Earth Dynamics,
Surface processes
and the Tectonic
Rock Cycle. 
Lesson in the
classroom drawing
the Rock-Cycle
process and
explaining each
step. This explanation
occurred with
continuous
questioning from
the students. 
Laboratory class:
children were
grouped in different
teams according to
age. A rock sample
representing each
rock-type was given
to each group for
observation and
description. The
teacher provided
the name of each
rock, and a
representative of
each team exposed
the observations
and the location of
each rock within the
cycle to the rest of the
teams. An additional
aid was the exhibition
of thin-section pictures
of each rock-type on
a screen. 
Pictures
and new
vocabulary.
assimilation of the learned concepts and the motivation to
share their new findings with their families, promoting
communication to elder generations.
Because of the conditions of this project, the guided
movement and scientific explanations were given first in
English, followed by the translation in Te reo Māori to
assure comprehension.
The results were surprisingly positive because of the
highly active participation and creativity of Ngāti Rangi
students. Throughout frequent questions along the entire
project we could confirm the appropriation of geological
and traditional knowledge without conflict.
Resulting tangible products include a collection of poems,
paintings, crafts, pictures, and a song. These products were
integrated within a video and a power-point presentation
formats, as a teaching tool for children and adults (being
adaptable to all levels), for future generations.
Discussion
Expectations from the teaching tool
The didactic video/.ppt resource prepared for Ngāti Rangi
Iwi is a continuous process, a compilation of visual and
auditory material to provide insight into knowledge plat-
forms uniting Ngāti Rangi historical and intellectual
tenets, code of conservation beliefs and practices, and
Geosciences. It emphasizes the interconnectedness of
Ngāti Rangi knowledge, history, and contemporary teach-
ing sources (poems and songs) in a learning atmosphere
that engaged the children at primary school. 
The following points below highlight some discussion
points, which can be used for the development, inte-
grated learning to produce a Ngāti Rangi geoscience re-
source. It provides a starting point to develop an entire
glossary of geological terms in the native language, pro-
viding an instrument to support native language revital-
isation, reclamation, and regeneration. It could be also
used as a tool to inspire new songs, poems, dances, and
theatre plays within the local art style, nurturing the
tradition and knowledge for future generations. It ultim-
ately brings an opportunity for Ngāti Rangi to lead in
worldwide efforts to reinforce the capabilities of indigen-
ous communities to manage volcanic risk reduction.
The message from Ngāti Rangi to the scientific community
Forced evacuation and displacements of native people
away from their ancestral land impact their entire social,
cultural, economical, and ecological network, which may
increase their vulnerability in future events. Rather than
imposing the results of western science and governmen-
tal decisions on indigenous communities exposed to vol-
canic activity, the participation of the community and
the recognition of their own, empirical knowledge devel-
oped throughout generations of land occupation may be
a better way to decrease social vulnerability. Empower-
ing native and scientific community awareness and co-
operative prevention strategies during volcanic repose
periods, may enhance concerted participation in emer-
gency planning and response.
Page 16
Pardo 
et 
al. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Volcanology 
2015, 
4
:
5
http:
/
/
www.
appliedvolc.
com/
content/
4/
1/
5
Table 5 Fourth Workshop design: Matua te Mana and crystals (Magma and introduction to volcanic eruptions)
Workshop Body-Language Māori narratives Scientific concepts Example bodywork
teaching technique  excercises 
Audiovisual aid Experience Outcome External collaborators
4. Matua te  Somatic dance
Mana, Magma followed by guided
and Crystals choreography 
Mouri, Mana, Mahi Atoms, Atomic
bonds, Molecules,
molecule vibration
within the solid
state of matter
Somatic dance and
guided movement
to recreate rock
melting, magma
genesis, magma
chamber, magma
partial crystallization,
magma ascent,
vesiculation, and
eruption.
Guided movement:
recreation of crystal
structures with our
bodies. 
Papatūānuku,
Ruaumoko, Matua
te Mana, Te Whare
toka o Paerangi,
healing properties
of crystals 
Magma
Magma degassing
Magma crystallization 
While describing the
physical properties of
the magma children
can “dance” these
properties. With the
imagination, children
feel they are magma
within the chamber,
changing from being
molten, to crystals, to
bubbles. Each state is
linked to a change in
the physical conditions
of the magma.
Crystal structures Build-up each structure
type with the bodies:
one body equals one
atom, and ropes were
used to connect atoms.
Then two lines were set
up to explain the
properties of crystals:
mirror axis, planes of
symmetry, centre of
symmetry. 
Experiments with
Diet Coke and Mentos,
following Coffey (2008) 
The lyrics of  Matiu Te Huki-musician
a song dedicated and kapa haka teacher.
to Matua Te  He composed the
Mana, Te Whare music, guided the
toka o Paerangi,  creation of the lyrics,
and all the  and carried on the
interdependence final edition and
of the Iwi and recording of “Ko
Mt. Ruapehu. Matua te Mana” song
(Te Huki 2013)
Large megacrysts were
brought to the classroom.
The properties of each
crystal/mineral were
explained followed by a
direct observation and
sensorial experience with
each crystals per group
of 4 to 5 students.
Somatic dance and
guided movement to
recreate effusive and
explosive eruptions,
bubble burst and
lava flows. 
Volcanic eruptions:
Explosive vs. Effusive 
Lesson in the
classroom with
videos of real
volcanic events
and virtual models 
Page 
16 
of 
20
Page 17
Table 6 Fifth Workshop design: Te mahi o Ruapehu (Volcanic products: events, deposits, and benefits)
Workshop Body-Language Māori narratives
teaching technique 
Scientific concepts Example bodywork exercises Audiovisual aid
5. Te mahi Somatic dance
o Ruapehu followed by
guided
choreography 
Te mahi o Ruaumoko, Volcanic products: A choreography was directed Lesson in the
Te Whare toka o  lavas, pyroclastic falls, to represent (1) dome formation, classroom with
Paerangi Pyroclastic density and implied viscous-rigid behavior, videos of real
currents (PDCs), lahars, (2) dome explosion and tephra volcanic events
debris-avalanche fall dispersion, (3) eruption and virtual models
column collapse and the  showing: difference
generation of PDCs. Then the  between effusive
teacher would detonate the  and explosive
first eruption at one team of  eruptions, ballistics,
The Mountain's clan Relationship of the
volcanoes in New
Zealand to the
Subduction along
the Kermadec trench 
students recreating eruption
activity (1). They would select
the next team, who would
trigger activity (2), and so on
with activities (3) and back to
(1). A cycle of eruptions could 
sustained eruption
columns, ash-plumes,
Pyroclastic Density
Currents (flows and
surges), lahars, edifice
sector-collapse, and
Tongariro blew his head Explosive eruptions be recreated and the implied production of
modify the shape processes were explained (e.g.,  debris-avalanche.
of the volcanoes Dome explosion would lead
Wai-ā-Moe 
to Eruption column with ash
Crater Lake, phreatic dispersal, then eruption column
and phreatomagmatic collapse; after the gas got
eruptions exhausted, a new generation
Onetapu and the  Lahar triggering of domes would grow).
Origin of Mangawhero mechanisms:
River  eruptive and
non-eruptive
Rangipōs desert
considered as Tapu 
Rangipō desert is
under the dispersal
axis of major (Plinian)
past fallouts
Ka Ora, Kaitiakitanga Volcanic benefits
(water sources,
geothermal springs,
fertile soils),
Environmental
Geology 
Interactive discussion
about the benefits the
tribe receives from Mt.
Ruapehu 
Experience External collabora-tors
A model of wheat, Ana Gabriela Mar Sarabia.
baking powder, and  Children psychotherapist
water volcano can  specialized in dance-
be created to explore therapy and Hata yoga
different magma viscosities teacher
(Acknowledgement to
James Cowlyn and Ben
Kennedy-University of
Canterbury, New Zealand)
The video was launched
and given to the children
so that they could see all
their integrated artwork
and dance around their
sacred volcano. 
Pardo 
et 
al. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Volcanology 
2015, 
4
:
5
http:
/
/
www.
appliedvolc.
com/
content/
4/
1/
5 
Page 
17 
of 
20
Page 18
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 18 of 20
This project showed how traditional knowledge and
western, modern sciences are not necessarily exclusive
or in conflict. Their integration can in fact be a powerful
education tool to empower native communities to ac-
tively contribute to volcanic risk mitigation strategies,
and take their insights abroad to other indigenous and
non-indigenous groups and institutions leading to disas-
ters prevention. Specifically, the Ngāti Rangi objection
to referring to volcanic activity of Mt. Ruapehu as a
“hazard” (with a potential negative outcome) is an invita-
tion to the scientific and governmental communities to
include traditional knowledge within emergency plan-
ning strategies. The tribe emphasized a perception about
the volcanic activity, which has been more likely to pro-
duce benefits than disasters over generations. Within
this point of view, the Māori community asks scientists
and government to guide human kind behavior, politics,
and decisions by considering that it is not about control-
ling the Earth and natural processes, but about living in
harmony with volcanism. In a sense, this is an invitation
to use science in a way that supports the traditional con-
servation practices and that proposes mitigation strat-
egies worked within consensus with the local native
communities. The ultimate aim is to reduce vulnerability
and optimize social response during volcanic crises.
Conclusions
By using the “body” as the mirror of our own point of
view about the world rather than being an object in the
world (Merleau-Ponty 1945),  it is possible to under-
stand scientific ideas by experiencing and feeling them
first, and then by adding words to the given information
to construct concepts. We showed how physical pro-
cesses and concepts, such as the principles of thermo-
dynamics, the origin of the Solar System and formation
of Planet Earth, as well as how earthquakes and volca-
noes work can be recreated and experienced through
basic exercises of Contact-Improvisation dance, somatic
dance, games, and other ludic activities based on body
language and bodily knowledge. We showed how the
resulting Earth-Contact Dance could bridge languages
that could be misinterpreted as contradictory, such as
native traditional belief systems and western earth sci-
ences, to create a new way of looking at volcanic activity
and hazard.
Blending traditional indigenous and scientific know-
ledge systems reduces social vulnerability by: (1) increas-
ing awareness of volcanic phenomena by the local
indigenous communities, (2) increasing awareness of sci-
entists and government about the cultural and vital rela-
tionship between the communities and volcanoes, and
(3) providing a better environment for active community
participation and potential positive response during
emergency management. The integrative approach can 
contribute to living safely with active volcanoes and re-
ducing risk, during eruptive and non-eruptive periods.
Appendix 1
Māori prayer (Karakia) to Mt. Ruapehu titled He Ruruku:
Mai Ara Ra!
Mai ara rā! Mai ara rā!
Mai ara rā te Tupua!
Mai ara rā te Tawhito!
Tēnei au
Tēnei au te rangahau ana, ki te ao, ki te pō
Kia Ranginui e tū iho nei,
Kia Papatūānuku e takoto ake nei.
Mai ara rā, mai whea ra tōku ahunga mai?
Tāhuri whakataumaha, huri whakamāmā
E te Kāhui Maungā ko wai ra koe?
Inā, Matua Te Mana te aunahi pīataata mātahi
Pikimai Rawea te kai-kukume ake matua whenua rō wai
Te rongo nei ia hīhī,
Te rongo nei ia hāhā me huka tātairango.
Tina, tina toko te manawa ora, he manawa ora!
Ko te Roi-a-Rangi mo Rua-te-Tipua
Ko te Roi-a-Rangi nō Nukuhau e
Te pātukituki ka tū whakahirahira Kāhui Maungā mā.
Ko toka pokohiwi ka hora maru tapu, e Ngā Turi-o-
Murimotu
Te ahi kā o Paerangi i te Whare Toka
Te puta mai te Kāhui-o-Rangi, te Kāhui-a-Rua
Tōna hekenga mai i Te Wai-ā-Moe ki Paretetaitonga
Ko te ara hekenga, ko te ara hokinga mo ngā uri kōtuku
Ka tuku, ka tuku atu i ngā hau kaha ia Parakakariki,
ia Mouwhakaarahia
Hei tohu, hei whakaatu ki te ao!
Whiti, whano, hara mai te toki!
Haumia! Hui e!
Taiki e!
He Ruruku: Mai Ara Ra! (English translation by Che
Wilson, Ngāti Rangi Iwi, 2012)
Let us return to our origins!
Returning to the time prior to common knowledge
Returning to the time of the ancient knowledge
Searching
Understanding the evolution of life
Absorbing the force of Father Universe
Absorbing the energy of Mother Earth
To truly understand who I am
Internalising this learning…
I now know who I am.
I am the first shiny scale of the Great Fish
I am the energy that turned the Fish to Land
Warmth embraced
Cold embraced, I am the blanket of snow
I am the pulse of the Great Fish
I am the tears of the heavens for Rua-te-Tipua
Page 19
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 19 of 20
I am the tears of the heavens from Nukuhau
Divine connection, I embody the Mountain Clan
Anointed as custodian of life, as window to the spirit
world
I am Ngā Turi o Murimotu.
The fire from the House of Stone of Paerangi, I am
The genesis of the Sky Clan, I am
The genesis of the River Clan, I am
Emanating from out of Te Wai-ā-Moe
The alpha, I am. The omega, I am
The upper winds, I am
The lower winds, I am
This is my declaration!
A declaration sanctified by stone
Let us unite as one
Unite in conscious thought!
Competing interests
This project was supported by the project “Mātauranga Māori and Volcanic
Hazards”, funded by the Natural Hazards Research Platform (grant number
2012-MAU-01-NHRP) of New Zealand. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
NP conceived the study, carried out the meetings with the indigenous
communities by representing the volcanology expertise integrated the
indigenous and western geoscience systems, designed and leaded the
workshops, and drafted the manuscript. HW was the Principal of the māori
school at Ohakune, being the main representative and communicator
regarding mātauranga māori, mātauranga a Ngāti Rangi. She provided all
the resources regarding indigenous knowledge, facilitated the logistics at the
school, and translated the instructions from English to Te Reo Maori during
the workshops. H. Wilson was the main collaborator during the workshops
and participated in the edition of the manuscript. JP, as leader of the main
sponsoring project “Mātauranga Māori and Volcanic Hazards”, funded by the
Natural Hazards Research Platform (grant number 2012-MAU-01-NHRP),
facilitated the logistics at Massey University, the official meetings between
the University and Ngāti Rangi, drafted the background of manuscript, and
edited the final text. EL contributed to workshops 1 and 4th design and
development, provided all the techniques to include responsible use of soils,
and guided some of the creative stages of the workshops. TB participated
in clarifying the lines of expected results during the process, edited and
enhanced the teaching tools, and drafted part of the discussion section of
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Authors’ information
NP carried out this project during the last year of her PhD at Massey
University (Palmerston North, New Zealand) and during her postdoctoral
fellowship at Volcanic Risk Solutions research team of the same university.
Her present affiliations are the Colombian Geological Survey (SGC) and
Universidad Nacional de Colombia at Bogotá D.C.
Acknowledgements
This project would not have been possible without the active participation
and collaboration of all the students at Te Kura Kaupapa Māori o Ngāti Rangi
(Ngāti Rangi Primary school at Ohākune, New Zealand) between 2012 and
2013. Similarly, we acknowledge Che Wilson (Ngāti Rangi Trust), Kate
Arentsen (Massey University), and all the staff of Te Kaupapa o Ngāti Rangi.
Special gratitude to all the artists and external pedagogical collaborators
who nurtured the workshops with great creativity and support: Matiu Te
Huki, Jen Hyde, and Ana GM Sarabia. We gratefully thank Professor John
Ham (Hīrangi School, Tūrangi, New Zealand) for requiring, facilitating, and
nurturing the development of similar, short workshops at Te Kura o Hīrangi
in 2013 (after Mt. Tongariro eruption 2012). He also enriched the discussions
about the method. Hanna Rainforth (Ngāti Rangi Trust), Garth Harmsworth
(New Zealand Landcare Research), Javier Agustín-Flores, and Professor Shane 
Cronin (Massey University), are also thanked for their valuable comments,
suggestions, and support.
Author details
1Volcanic Risk Solutions Research Group, Massey University, Private Bag
11222, Palmerston North 4012, Aotearoa, New Zealand. 2Servicio Geológico
Colombiano & Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Diag. 53 #34-53, of. 141,
Grupo Geología de Volcanes, Geociencias Básicas, Bogotá, DC, Colombia. 3Te
Kura Kaupapa Māori o Ngāti Rangi, 40 Burns St Ohākune 4625, Aotearoa,
New Zealand. 4Permaculture, dance and workshop design-Independent
consultant, 166 Wellington Road, Kapiti Coast, Paekakariki 5034, Aotearoa,
New Zealand. 5Te Pūtahi a Toi School of Māori Studies, Massey University,
Private Bag 11222, Palmerston North 4012, Aotearoa, New Zealand.
Received: 30 June 2014 Accepted: 16 December 2014
Published: 5 February 2014
References
Alexander DE (1993) Natural Disasters. University College London Press, Kluwer,
Dordrecht/London, p 632
Anderson EN (1996) Ecologies of the heart: emotion, belief and the environment.
Oxford University Press, New York, p 272
Berkers F, Kislalioglu M, Folke C, Gadgil M (1998) Exploring the Basic Ecological
Unit: Ecosystem-like Concepts in Traditional Societies. Ecosystems 1:409–415
Best E (1982) Maori religion and mythology being an account of the cosmogony,
anthropogeny, religion beliefs and rites, magic, and folk lore of the maori folk
of new Zealand. Part 2. New Zealand Electronic Text Collection Te Puhikotuhi o
Aotearoa. PD Hasselberg, Government Printer, Wellington, New Zealand, p 682
Bishop R (1999) Kaupapa Maori Research: An indigenous approach to creating
knowledge. In: Robertson N (ed) Maori and psychology: research and
practice - The proceedings of a symposium sponsered by the Maori and
Psychology Research Unit. Maori & Psychology Research Unit, Hamilton,
pp 1–6
Boal A (1979) Theatre of the Oppressed. Pluto Press Limited, Australia, 184
Boal A (2002) Games for actors and non-actors. Roudlesge, London, p 301
Cashman KV, Cronin SJ (2008) Welcoming a monster to the world: Myths, oral
tradition, and modern societal response to volcanic disasters. J Volcanol
Geotherm Res 176:407–418
Coffey TS (2008) Diet Coke and Mentos: What is really behind this physical
reaction? Am H Phys 76(6):551–557
Christenson BW, Wood CP (1993) Evolution of a vent-hosted hydro- thermal
system beneath Ruapehu Crater Lake, New Zealand. Bull Volcanol 55:547–565
Cronin SJ, Neall VE, Palmer AS (1996) Geological history of the northeastern ring
plain of Ruapehu volcano, New Zealand. Quat Int 34(36):21–28
Cronin SJ, Neall VE (1997) A late Quaternary stratigraphic framework for the
northeastern Ruapehu and eastern Tongariro ring plains, New Zealand. N Z J
Geol Geophys 40:179–191
Cronin SJ, Hodgson KA, Neall VE, Palmer AS, Lecointre JA (1997) 1995 Ruapehu
lahars in relation to the late Holocene lahars of Whangaehu River, New
Zealand. N Z J Geol Geophys 40:507–520
Cronin SJ, Cashman KV (2008) Volcanic oral traditions in hazard assessment and
mitigation. In: Gratton J, Torrence R (eds) Living under the shadow: Cultural
impacst of volcanic eruptions. Left Coast Press, CA, pp 165–176
Donoghue SL, Neall VE, Palmer AS (1995) Stratigraphy and chronology of late
Quaternary andesitic tephra deposits, Tongariro Volcanic Centre, New
Zealand. R Soc N Z 25(2):112–206
Douglas M (1973) Natural Symbols, Exploration in Cosmology. Routledge, New
York, p 177
Durie MH (1996) Mātauranga Māori: Iwi and the Crown: A Discussion Paper.
Paper prepared for mātauranga Māori hui. James Henare Māori Research
Centre, University of Auckland, pp 1–4, 26 September
Durie MH (1998) Mana, Te Kawanatanga: The Politics of Māori Self-determination.
Oxford University Press, Auckland
Feiring B (2013) Indigenous peoples’ rights to lands, territories and resources.
International Land Coalition, Rome, p 94
Forster M (2011) Kaitiakitanga: A Māori Environmental Ethic. In: Tomlins-Jahnke H,
Mulholland M (eds) Mana Tangata, Politics of Empowerment. Huia Publishers,
New Zealand, pp 221–241
Foucault M (1977) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Translated by
Alan Sheridan, vol 1975. Allen Lane, Penguin. First published in French as
Surveiller et punir, Gallimard, Paris London, p 333
Page 20
Pardo et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015, 4:5
http://www.appliedvolc.com/content/4/1/5 
Page 20 of 20
Fran JL (1988) Dance/Movement Theraphy. A healing art. National Dance
Association and American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, Recreation,
and Dance., p 354, ISBN-0-88314-380-1
Gardner SB (1993) “Still iving flesh”: Beckett, Merleau-Ponty, and the
Phenomenological Body. Theatr J 45:443–460
Grattan J, Torrence R (2010) Volcanic Oral Traditions in Hazard Assessment and
Mitigation. In: Living under the shadow: cultural impacts of volcanic
eruptions. Left Coast Press., pp 172–202
Green J (2002) Somatic knowledge: The body as content and methodology in
dance education. J Dance Educ 2(4):114–118
Gunderson LH, Holling CS, Light SS (1995) Barriers and bridges to the renewal of
ecosystems and institutions. Columbia University Press -Nature, New York,
p 593
Hackett WR, Houghton BF (1989) A facies model for a Quaternary andesitic
composite volcano, Ruapehu, New Zealand. Bull Volcanol 51:51–68
Jolly AD, Cronin SJ (2014) From eruption to end-user; bridging the science-managment
interface during the 2012 Te Maari eruption, Tongariro Volcano, New Zealand. J
Volcanol Geotherm Res 286:183
Kalmar D (2006) Que es la expression corporal: a partir de la corriente de trabajo
creada por Patricia Stokoe. Lumen Humanitas Ed, Buenos Aires, Argenitina, 176
Kilgour G, Manville V, Della Pasqua F, Graettinger A, Hodgson KA, Jolly GE (2010)
The 25 September 2007 eruption of Mount Ruapehu, New Zealand:
directed ballistics, surtseyan jets, and ice-slurry lahars. J Volcanol Geotherm
Res 191:1–14
King DNT, Goff J, Skipper A (2007) Māori Environmental Knowledge and natural
hazards in Aotearoa-New Zealand. J R Soc N Z 37(2):59–73
King DNT, Skipper A, Tawhai WBM (2008) Māori Environmental Knowledge of
local weather and climate change in Aotearoa-New Zealand. Climate Change
90:385–409
Kowhai Consulting Ltd (2004) Certificate in Iwi Environmental Management and
Trusteeship: Kaitiakitanga. Te Wānanga o Aotearoa., p 57
Lowe DJ, Newnham RM, McCraw JD (2002) Volcanism and early Māori society in
New Zealand. In: Torrence R, Grattan J (eds) Natural disasters and cultural
change. Routledge, London, England, pp 126–161
Lube G, Cronin SJ, Procter J (2009) Explaining the extreme mobility of volcanic
ice-slurry flows, Ruapehu volcano. New Zealand Geol 37(1):15–18
Ludwig D, Hilborn R, Walters C (1993) Uncertainty, resource exploitation and
conservation: lessons from history. Science (Washington) 260:17–36
Marsden M (1988) The Natural World and Natural Resources: Māori Value Systems
and Perspective Māori. Resource Management Law Reform Working paper
no. 29, Part A. Ministry for the Environment, Wellington
Marsden M (1992) Kaitiakitanga: a definitive introduction to the holistic
worldview of the Māori. In: Royal TAC (ed) The Woven Universe: Selected
writings of Rev. Māori Marsden. Te Wānanga-o-Rawkawa, Ōtaki
McClelland E, Erwin PS (2003) Was a dacite dome implicated in the 9,500 B.P.
Collapse of Mt Ruapehu? A palaeomagnetic investiga- tion. Bull Volcanol
65:294–305
Merleau-Ponty M (1945) Phenomenology of Perception, Gallimard (ed).
Translated by Colin Smith, New York: Humanities Press, 1962; London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962; translation revised by Forrest Williams
(1981), 469p.
Moebis A, Cronin SJ, Neall VE, Smith IE (2011) Unravelling a complex volcanic
history from fine-grained, intricate Holocene ash sequences at the Tongariro
Volcanic Centre, New Zealand. Quatern Int 246:352–363
Moewaka Barnes H (2000) Kaupapa maori: explaining the ordinary. Whariki
Research Group, University of Auckland. Pacific Health Dialog 7:13–16
Narin IA, Kobayashi T, Nakagawa M (1998) The ~10ka multiple vent pyroclastic
eruption sequence at Tongariro Volcanic Centre, Taupo Volcanic Zone, New
Zealand: Part 1. Eruptive processes during regional extension. J Volcanol
Geotherm Res 86:19–44
Neall VE, Cronin SJ, Donoghue SL, Hodgson KA, Lecointre JA, Palmer AS, Purves
AM, Stewart RB (2001) Lahar hazards map for Ruapehu volcano. Institute of
Natural Resources–Massey University, Soil and Earth Sciences Occasional
Publication No. 1
Palmer BA, Neall VE (1989) The Murimotu Formation, 9500 years old deposits of a
debris avalanche and associated lahars, Mount Ruapehu, New Zealand. NZ J
Geol Geophys 32:477–486
Pardo N, Cronin SJ, Palmer A, Németh K (2012) Reconstructing the largest
explosive eruptions of Mt. Ruapehu, New Zealand: lithos- tratigraphic tools to
understand subplinian-Plinian eruptions at andesitic volcanoes. Bull Volcanol
74:617–640 
Paton D, Millar M, Johnston D (2001) Community Resilience to Volcanic Hazard
Consequences. Nat Hazards 24:157–169
Paton D, Smith L, Daly M, Johnston D (2008) Risk perception and volcanic hazard
mitigation Individual and social perspectives. J Volcanol Geotherm Res
172:179–188
Procter JN, Cronin SJ, Zernack AV (2010) Landscape and sedimentary response to
catastrophic debris avalanches, Western Taranaki, New Zealand. Sediment
Geol 38(1):67–70
Rainforth H, Procter J, Black T, Harmsworth G, Pardo N (2012) Exploring
indigenous knowledge for assessing volcanic hazards and improving
monitoring approaches. Abstracts Cities on Volcanoes 7, Colima, México.
Roberts M (1997) Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Resource Management
Systems: Past, Present and Future Perspectives, draft paper. In: Williams D
(ed) Mātauranga Māori and Tāonga: The nature and extent of Treaty rights
held by iwi and hapū (I Indigenous flora and fauna; II Cultural heritage
objects; III Values and traditional knowledge). Auckland University, New
Zealand, Waitangi Tribunal report for the Wai 262 claim
Root-Bernstein M, Root-Bernstein R (2003) Martha Graham, Dance, and the Poly-
mathic Imagination. A Case for Multiple Intelligences or Universal Thinking
Tools? J Dance Educ 3(1):16–27
Paora R, Tuiono T, Flavell TU, Hawksley C, Howson R (2011) Tino Rangatiratanga
and Mana Motuhake. Alter Native 7(3):246–257
Servos N (1981) The Emancipation of Dance: Pina Bausch and the Wuppertal
Dance Theatre. Modern Drama 23(4):435–447
Severne CM (1995) Traditional use of geothermal resources by New Zealand Māori.
Proceedings of World Geothermal Congress, Florence, Italy, pp 401–404
Silverman (1976) Re-Reading Merleau-Ponty”. Telos 29:106–129
Smith GH (1990) Research Issues Related to Māori Education, paper presented to
NZARE Special Interest Conference, Massey University, reprinted in 1992, The
Issue of Research and Māori, Research Unit for Māori Education. The
University of Auckland, New Zealand
Smith NS, Nelson L (1997) Contact Improvisation 25th Anniversary Sourcebook.
Collected writings and graphics from Contact Quarterly dance journal
1975–1992. Contact Editions. ISBN 0-937645-04-4, 260 p.
Stevenson MG (1996) Indigenous knowledge in environmental assessment. Arctic
49:278–291
Stokoe P, Schächter A (1977) La Expresión Corporal, Paidósth edn. Barcelona,
Spain, p 111
Stokoe P (1978) El movimiento como liberador de potencialidades. In: Gainza V,
Hebrón A, Fessler O, Stokoe P. Educación y Expresión Estética, Plus Ultra
Edition, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 153p.
Swanson DA (2008) Hawaiian oral tradition describes 400 years of volcanic
activity at Kīlauea. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 176:427–431
Tapuke S, Procter JN, Cronin SJ, Roskruge N (2006) Working effectively with
tangata whenua in volcanic risk management in Aotearoa-New Zealand. In:
Volume A, Conference F (eds) Abstracts Volume, Fourth Conference, Cities
on Volcanoes IAVCEI. Instituto Geofisico de la Escuela Politecnica Nacional,
Quito, Ecuador, pp 176–177
Te Ahukaramū Charles Royal (2012) Whenua-how the land was shaped-The North
and South islands. Te Ara, the Encyclopaedia of New Zealand. URL: [URL: "http://www.teara.govt.nz/en/whenua-how-the-land-was-shaped/page-2"] http://
 www.TeAra.govt.nz/en/whenua-how-the-land-was-shaped/page-2
Tost M, Cronin SJ, Procter JN, Smith IEM, Neall VE, Price RC (2014) Impacts of
catastrophic volcanic collapse on the erosion and morphology of a distal
fluvial landscape: Hautapu River, Mount Ruapehu, New Zealand. Geol Soc
Am Bull B31010:1
Vervaeck A (2012) The impact of cultural and religious influences during natural
disasters (volcano eruptions). Earthquake-Reprot.com. [URL: "http://earthquake-report.com/2012/09/27/the-impact-of-cultural-and-religious-influences-during-natural-disasters-volcano-eruptions/"] http://earthquake-
 report.com/2012/09/27/the-impact-of-cultural-and-religious-influences-
 during-natural-disasters-volcano-eruptions/
Waitangi Tribunal, 2013. Nga Iwi o te Kahui Maunga. In: Wai 1130 Te Kāhui Maunga:
The National Park District Inquiry Report. Chapter 2: [URL: "http://www.justice.govt.nz/tribunals/waitangi-tribunal/reports_old/wai-1130-te-kahui-maunga-the-national-park-district-inquiry-report/chapter-2-nga-iwi-o-te-kahui-maunga"] http://www.justice.govt.nz/
 tribunals/waitangi-tribunal/reports_old/wai-1130-te-kahui-maunga-the-national-
 park-district-inquiry-report/chapter-2-nga-iwi-o-te-kahui-maunga
Te Huki M (2013) Ko Matua Te Mana (the song dedicated to Mt. Ruapehu,
written with the teachers and children of Te Kura Kaupapa Māori o Ngāti
Rangi at Ohākune) [URL: "http://www.reverbnation.com/matiuthehooktehuki/songs"] http://www.reverbnation.com/matiuthehooktehuki/songs
doi:10.1186/s13617-014-0019-1
Cite this article as: Pardo et al.: Bridging Māori indigenous knowledge
and western geosciences to reduce social vulnerability in active
volcanic regions. Journal of Applied Volcanology 2015 4:5.
