BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction
  Properties and users of probabilistic volcanic hazard maps
  Data classification
  Content
  Colour scheme
  Map users
Methods
  Interviews
  SurveyResults
  Interviews
    Map data classification
    Map colour scheme
    Map key expression
    Map content
    Revisions to maps for the survey
  Survey
    Map data classification
    Map content
    Map key expression
    Hazard curves
    Map colour scheme
    Map explanatory text and map format
Discussion
  Data classification and uncertainty
  Colour scheme and messages of hazard
  Key expression and map trust
  Map content and map usefulness
  Map format and the importance of map-maker choices
  Methodological remarks
  Implications for volcanic hazard map design
    Future work
Conclusion
Additional file
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgements
References
Page 1
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6
DOI 10.1186/s13617-015-0023-0
RESEARCH  Open Access
The influence of probabilistic volcanic hazard
map properties on hazard communication
Mary Anne Thompson*, Jan M Lindsay and JC Gaillard
Abstract
Probabilistic volcanic hazard analysis is becoming an increasingly popular component of volcanic risk reduction strategies
worldwide. While probabilistic hazard analyses offer many advantages for decision-making, displaying the statistical results
of these analyses on a map presents new hazard communication challenges. Probabilistic information is complex, difficult
to interpret, and associated with uncertainties. Conveying such complicated data on a static map image without careful
consideration of user perspectives or context, may result in contrasting interpretations, misunderstandings, or aversion to
using the map. Here, we present the results of interviews and surveys conducted with organisational stakeholders and
scientists in New Zealand which explored how probabilistic volcanic hazard map properties influence map interpretation,
understanding, and preference. Our results suggest that data classification, colour scheme, content, and key expression
play important roles in how users engage with and interpret probabilistic volcanic hazard maps.
Data classification was found to influence the participants’ perceived uncertainty and data reading accuracy, with
isarithmic style maps reducing uncertainty and increasing accuracy best. Colour scheme had a strong influence on the
type of hazard messages interpreted, with a red-yellow scheme conveying the message of a hazard distribution (high to
low), and a red-yellow-blue scheme conveying the message of hazard state (present or absent) and/or risk. Multiple types
of map content were found to be useful, and hazard curves were viewed as valuable supplements. The concept of
“confidence” was more easily interpreted than upper and lower percentiles when expressing uncertainty on the hazard
curves. Numerical and verbal expression in the key also had an influence on interpretation, with a combination of both a
percent (e.g., 25%) and a natural frequency (e.g., 1 in 4) “probability” being the most inclusive and widely-understood
expression. The importance of these map property choices was underscored by a high portion of participants preferring
to receive maps in unalterable formats, such as PDF.
This study illustrates how engaging with users in a bottom-up approach can complement and enhance top-down
approaches to volcanic hazard mapping through a collaborative and integrative design process which may help to
prevent miscommunications in a future crisis when maps are likely to be drafted and disseminated rapidly.
Keywords: Hazard communication; Hazard maps; Probabilistic volcanic hazard analysis; Hazard curve; Interviews; Surveys;
Stakeholders
Introduction
Volcanic hazards are spatial phenomena, described and
communicated globally using maps. In conventional haz-
ard mapping practice, scientists analyse data about vol-
canic hazards, and then display the results on a map for a
diverse audience of readers. However, this insular top-
down approach to volcanic hazard communication does
not necessarily translate into effective hazard awareness
or informed decision-making, which are key contributors
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:m.thompson@auckland.ac.nz"] m.thompson@auckland.ac.nz
School of Environment, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland
1142, New Zealand 
to risk reduction. These factors are dependent on how
the reader interprets and understands the hazard map, a
facet of volcanic hazard communication that has been
relatively unexplored.
Wide variation in data type, hazard modelling tech-
niques, cartographic styles, and subjective preference has
led to a vast diversity in the ways volcanic hazard informa-
tion is represented on maps (Calder et al. 2012), yet lim-
ited attention has been paid to the impact of these choices
on reader response and comprehension. For example, does
the use of a particular colour scheme (e.g., blues versus
reds),  data classification (e.g.,  stretched versus binned),
© 2015 Thompson et al.; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 2 of 24
or key expression (e.g., 10% versus 1 in 10) affect the way
that a user interprets hazard information from the map?
Geography (e.g., Robinson 1967; Bertin 1983; MacEachren
1995; Monmonier 1996; Kunz and Hurni 2011) and com-
munication (e.g.,  Fisher 1991; Hoffrage et al. 2000;
Severtson and Myers 2013; Doyle et al. 2014) research
literature suggests that these types of properties may
play an important role in hazard information processing.
As capabilities and accessibility of hazard analyses continue
to advance, it is important and timely to investigate how
quantitative hazard map information is interpreted by those
who may refer to the maps for decision-making. Initial in-
terpretations of maps become particularly important in the
context of decision-making during high-stakes, time-
pressure crisis situations when reliance on affective heuris-
tics, or intuitive feelings about the map, is likely to be high
(Finucane et al. 2000).
In this New Zealand-based study, we use qualitative
and quantitative methodologies to empirically investigate
how certain map properties affect the way that stake-
holders and scientists respond to and interpret informa-
tion from probabilistic-style volcanic hazard maps, and
aim to gain key map user perspectives on these hazard
map properties. Understanding how map properties in-
fluence map legibility and accessibility can help build
awareness in the scientific community about the impact
of certain choices when designing hazard maps, and ac-
cordingly, help improve the consistency, clarity, and ef-
fectiveness of volcanic hazard communication.
Properties and users of probabilistic volcanic
hazard maps
Volcanic hazard maps are thematic maps, in which the
features selected as primary map content are themed on
information about the potential dangers associated with
volcanoes. Probabilistic volcanic hazard maps depict, in
varying ways, the likelihood of a certain dangerous vol-
canic phenomenon(a) occurring in a particular area in a
specific time frame. Computational advances and devel-
opment of a number of probabilistic volcanic hazard
analysis methodologies over the past decade (e.g., Mader
et al. 2006) have led to a marked increase in the amount
of probabilistic volcanic hazard maps being created
today. There are many advantages of using a probabilis-
tic approach to analyse volcanic hazards. Volcanoes are
inherently complex systems associated with many degrees
of uncertainty. Probabilistic methods allow scientists to
evaluate the unknowns and to quantify and compare the
likelihood of a broad range of different possible hazard
scenarios, introducing more practical applications to
risk assessment than traditional methods which typic-
ally analyse only one scenario (Newhall and Hoblitt
2002; Marzocchi et al. 2012). However, using probabilis-
tic volcanic hazard data to build hazard maps also 
presents new challenges. Probabilities are inherently diffi-
cult to communicate and understand among experts and
non-experts alike (Hoffrage et al. 2000; Spiegelhalter et al.
2011), and are interpreted and contextualised differently
by different types of map users (Reyna and Brainerd 2008;
Doyle et al. 2014). Conveying uncertain data using con-
crete map images may also introduce communication ob-
stacles (Severtson and Myers 2013).
Many methods exist for both generalising (simplifying)
and representing (depicting) thematic content on maps
(Slocum 1999; Dent et al. 2009). Extensive options mean
that strikingly different maps can be created from a sin-
gle set of data. Such choices for representing the data
may have important impacts on how the map is per-
ceived and interpreted (Monmonier 1996). While a map
may be designed to convey a single dataset of interest, it
does not convey a single universal message. Each user
constructs their own individual knowledge from inter-
preting the different symbols, colours, and expressions on
the map (Bertin 1983; MacEachren 1995). Some key the-
matic map properties for which it is important to consider
the choice of representational style are: data classification,
map content, and colour scheme (Monmonier 1996; Dent
et al. 2009).
Data classification
Data classification refers to the characterisation and cat-
egorisation of a dataset into a particular visual symbol-
ogy (Dent et al. 2009; Slocum 1999).  For example, for
a dataset which comprises 1,000 numerical values that
range from 1 to 100, e.g.,  probabilistic hazard values,
those values can be stretched gradationally over a grad-
ual ramp of colours, where each value responds to a
unique shade of colour on the ramp (e.g.,  white = 0 to
black = 100 for a greyscale ramp). Isopleths or isarithms
(lines connecting points of equal value) can be applied
on top of the shaded classification to provide points of ref-
erence for the reader. Alternatively, the numerical values
can be classed into exclusive bins which contain a specific
range of values (e.g., 1 – 9, 10 – 19, and 20 – 29) and are
represented by a unique colour. All values that fall together
within a certain bin, or colour, are equally representative of
that category. Applying different data classifications can
yield markedly different patterns on the map, and can also
influence how readers interpret the data (Robinson et al.
1995; Monmonier 1996; Brewer and Pickle 2002).
Content
Map content is another important property which can
influence interpretation of thematic maps (Monmonier
1996; Dent et al. 2009).  Background content, such as
boundaries, rivers, and landforms, are provided as points
of reference for the reader, and are essential for users to
be able to orient themselves with the data. Haynes et al.
Page 3
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 3 of 24
(2007) and Nave et al. (2010) found that selection of
background content can have a significant influence on
how well readers understand volcanic hazard maps, par-
ticularly among local populations living proximal to the
volcano. The representation of thematic feature content
also has an impact on how readers interpret the map.
Probabilistic hazard datasets are typically quite robust in
that they often include a range of data types (e.g., vol-
canic ash thickness, ash grain size) at multiple levels of
uncertainty (e.g., 90th percentile, average) over a number
of different time frames (e.g., in the event of an eruption,
in the next 10 years).  For example, some probabilistic
volcanic hazard map toolsets are currently being de-
signed to output two types of mappable content: a distri-
bution of the probabilities of reaching and exceeding a
fixed hazard intensity threshold (e.g., 10 mm of ash), or
a distribution of hazard intensities expected at a fixed
probability threshold (e.g.,  25%) over any user-defined
timeframe (Tonini et al. in press). Certain types of haz-
ard information may have different meanings and sali-
ence to different types of map users.
Colour scheme
Influencing more than just aesthetics, colour is a map
property that has the power to provide visual contrast,
unify elements, and guide attention of the map reader
(Robinson 1967; Wolfe and Horowitz 2004).  Blends of
colour hue, saturation, and lightness can be manipulated
to create a broad range of appropriate and logical colour
schemes for maps. However, colour schemes also have a
high margin for confusion (Brewer 1994; Robinson et al.
1995; Olson and Brewer 1997).  Colours are inherently
imbued with meanings for the map reader (Robinson
1967; Bertin 1983; Brewer 1994; Dent et al. 2009). While
many volcanic hazard maps employ a Western green-
yellow-red “stoplight” colour scheme, or a blue-yellow-
red “cold to hot” colour scheme, these may have unin-
tended meanings for some map readers (Monmonier
1996). For example, red may be associated with “hot” or
“bad” and green with “vegetation” or “good”.  A green-
red diverging colour scheme is also likely to be very dif-
ficult to perceive for a colour blind user (Olson and
Brewer 1997; Jenny and Kelso 2007; Brewer et al. 2013).
Approximately 8% of males and 0.5% of females have
some form of colour-vision deficiency (AOA 2014) and
this can cause complications if not taken into consider-
ation in map colour scheme design (Olson and Brewer
1997; Jenny and Kelso 2007).  Although map makers
strive for the highest degree of objectivity in designing
probabilistic hazard maps, these fundamental choices
for colour scheme, content type, and data classification
are largely driven by subjective preference. Currently,
there are few recommendations available for choosing 
appropriate styles, as the impact of these choices has not
previously been tested with volcanic hazard map users.
Map users
Volcanic hazard maps have a wide range of applications
and uses, and accordingly, they have many different types
of users. In New Zealand, some important hazard map
stakeholders are in local and regional government, health,
education, agriculture, aviation, communications, emer-
gency management, and in other groups which may use
volcanic hazard information to make decisions regarding
national, institutional, or local risk reduction. The detailed
quantitative nature of probabilistic volcanic hazard infor-
mation is well suited for organisational stakeholder
decision-making, and could enhance the structure, per-
formance, and reliability of decision-making strategies
(Woo 2008, 2009; Marzocchi et al. 2012).  Although
each stakeholder will have different perspectives and infor-
mational needs, resource and time constraints make it
impractical to develop unique hazard maps for each user
group, particularly in a time of volcanic crisis (Leonard
et al. 2014). It is therefore important to investigate how
hazards maps can be designed to maintain a wide degree
of relevance, legibility, and applicability among a diverse
group of stakeholders. In order to do this, stakeholder
perspectives and opinions must be taken into account,
as studies show that differences exist in the way that
scientists (typically the hazard map makers) and other
stakeholders, such as emergency managers, understand
and use probabilistic volcanic hazard information (Doyle
et al. 2011, 2014). Emergency managers are a particularly
important group of hazard map users in New Zealand,
as they are responsible for managing many short- and
long-term natural hazard and risk reduction decisions
which directly affect populations at risk (MCDEM 2002).
We emphasise that people at risk are also very import-
ant stakeholders in probabilistic volcanic hazard maps and
in the decisions made using such maps, but acknowledge
that a survey of those at risk is outside of the scope of this
study. We also acknowledge that the New Zealand stake-
holder community is a generally well-educated populace,
and typically has a good grasp of the concept of volcanic
hazard due to regular engagement with the scientific com-
munity. Exploring probabilistic volcanic hazard map per-
ception in other cultural, volcanic, and socio-economicsettings both within New Zealand and internationally, is
an important area for further research.
Methods
A pragmatic mixed-methods approach was adopted
(Morgan 2007),  where qualitative semi-structured in-
person interviews were implemented as a pilot study to
test ideas and questions which informed the development
of a qualitative and quantitative online survey exploring
Page 4
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 4 of 24
the influence of probabilistic volcanic hazard map design
properties on understanding and communicating hazard.
Inductive thematic analysis of semi-structured interviews
was used to identify themes regarding how scientists and
stakeholders felt about certain map design properties and
how they engaged with the hazard maps. Design proper-
ties which emerged as themes which have a sensitive or
powerful impact on interpretation of the hazard maps
were explored further in the survey among a broader sam-
ple group. Both methodological components of this study
were individually approved by a human participation eth-
ics committee.
It was emphasised to participants that the data on the
maps were hypothetical, and all participants were
reminded that the maps seen were not to be referred to for
any type of decision-making. The datasets used were in
raster format and represented the probability of accumulat-
ing a certain thickness of volcanic ash in the event of a rhy-
olitic eruption from Tarawera volcano in New Zealand’s
North Island. Datasets were based on actual ash hazard
analyses done by Thompson et al. (under review). Tarawera
volcano is a well-known active volcano in New Zealand,
and has had two very large explosive eruptions in the past
1 ka (Walker et al. 1984; Nairn et al. 2001). Ashfall hazard
was chosen because it is one of the most common prod-
ucts of volcanic activity worldwide, and it is a widespread,
disruptive hazard that can impact society on many differ-
ent spatial, temporal, and socio-economic scales (Blong
1984). Ashfall is also a volcanic hazard that is commonly
analysed using a probabilistic approach because of the need
to consider variable atmospheric conditions (e.g.,  Scollo
et al. 2008; Folch 2012). New Zealand regularly experiences
small scale (~1 – 2 mm) volcanic ashfalls from its most fre-
quently active volcanoes, with the most recent incidence of
minor ashfall occurring in 2012 (Scott and Potter 2014). 
isopleths (5% labelled intervals),  and binned (10% inter-
vals).  These maps were displayed using a red-yellow
multi-hue sequential colour scheme similar to that used
commonly in volcanic hazard maps worldwide. The fifth
map displayed the data using a blue-yellow-red multi-hue
diverging colour scheme similar to that used in other types
of hazard maps worldwide (e.g., flooding), and the sixth
map showed a deterministic scenario hazard map based
on a single pre-determined eruption scenario (i.e.,  one
wind condition and one set of eruptive parameters).  A
series of cards depicting numerical expressions of percent
(10%), natural frequency (1 in 10), and decimal probability
(0.1) and verbal expressions of “probability”, “likelihood”,
and “chance” were also presented for discussion.
Participants were recruited by e-mailing informational
flyers to regional and district councils near Tarawera vol-
cano and to the national geological research institute
(GNS Science), with encouragement to circulate the in-
formation among colleagues, affiliates, and peers who
would be interested in participating. Initial contact was
made by interested persons contacting the researchers
with an expression of interest. A total of 14 people par-
ticipated in the interviews, including four volcano scien-
tists with specialties in volcano geophysics, monitoring,
and hazard analysis, and ten stakeholders with special-
ties in emergency management, planning, infrastructure
and resource management, and public health.
Full transcripts of the semi-structured interviews were
analysed using inductive thematic analysis at the seman-
tic level, based on the framework outlined by Braun and
Clarke (2006). The transcripts were analysed in order to
identify emergent themes regarding how map properties
such as data classification, colour scheme, key expression,
and content influenced the way the participant thought
about or interpreted the map and its usefulness.
Interviews
A one-on-one semi-structured interview format was
used, in which a flexible framework of questions was
built around discussion of six maps which were designed
to foster discussion of the participants’  views on map
data classification, colour scheme, content, key expression,
and usefulness (Figure 1).  Interviews lasted an average
duration of 40 minutes. The same probabilistic hazard
dataset, showing the probability of accumulating ≥10 mm
of ash, was used for all maps (except one), so that only
changing map design properties, and not changing data,
influenced responses. All maps depicted hazard only for
the administrative region in which Tarawera volcano is lo-
cated, and were viewed at 315 × 275 mm size.
Four of the maps showed the hazard data displayed
using different data classification styles: gradational shaded
(minimum-maximum stretch),  isarithmic with solid iso-
pleths (5% labelled intervals),  isarithmic with dashed 
Survey
The online survey comprised 16 pages of 31 questions
designed to measure participant views on data classifica-
tion (Figure 2), map content (Figure 3), key expression,
hazard curves (Figure 4), map colour scheme (Figure 5),
explanatory text (Figure 6),  and map format. These
topics were chosen based on their assumed relevance
from results of the interviews, literature review, and the
prominence of these properties recognised in existing
natural hazard maps. The survey is summarised in
Table 1. The survey was based on participants viewing
eight different hazard maps styles (Figures 2, 3, 5) and
two hazard curve styles (Figure 4),  and responding to
questions about them. The results of the interviews
informed some of the design features used in the survey
maps. Seven of the maps showed the exact same probabil-
istic hazard data, the probability of accumulating ≥1 mm
of ash, so that only changing map design properties, and
Page 5
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6
A  B 
Page 5 of 24
C
DEF
Figure 1 Maps used in the in-person interviews. Maps A - D were presented for discussion of the following data classification types: A) gradational
shaded (minimum-maximum stretch), B) isarithmic with solid isopleths (5% labelled intervals), C) isarithmic with dashed isopleths (5% labelled intervals),
and D) binned (10% intervals). Map E shows probabilistic hazard data displayed in a blue-yellow-red diverging colour scheme, and map F shows a
deterministic scenario hazard map (the only map to use a different dataset). Data are cut to a geopolitical regional boundary. Maps were viewed at
315 × 275 mm size.
not changing data, influenced responses. The remaining
map used the same dataset, but showed a probability
threshold (i.e., 25% probability), instead of an ash thresh-
old (i.e., ≥ 1 mm ash). All maps were displayed at 150 ppi
with a size of 800 × 710 pixels (except for colour scheme
maps, shown at 584 × 518 pixels) and were designed with
colour blind-safe 8-bit RGB colour schemes retrieved from
the Color Brewer tool ([URL: "http://www.colorbrewer2.org"] www.colorbrewer2.org, Brewer
et al. 2013).  Color Brewer is a free, online, research-
backed (Brewer 1996; Harrower and Brewer 2003) tool
which provides many colour schemes specifically designed
to suit a variety of display environments (e.g., screen or
print) and to be colour blind accessible. Participants
accessed the free online survey using a custom one-time-
use URL. The survey was open for participation for
41 days. Average time for completion was 25 minutes. A
copy of the survey can be found in Additional file 1.
Participants were recruited using a standard snowball
sampling methodology. E-mails were sent by the
researchers to approximately 50 organisations with a
request that the information advertising the survey be
circulated to any persons who may use, be interested in,
or be involved in the production and editing of, volcanic 
hazard maps in New Zealand. The e-mail encouraged
interested persons to share the survey link with
colleagues or associates that they thought may also
be interested. All interview participants were also
directly invited to participate in the survey. The survey
drew 110 participants from a variety of different occu-
pational disciplines, with 29.1% of respondents in the
scientist group, and 70.9% in the stakeholder group
(including 26.4% in emergency management and plan-
ning) (Table 2).  The majority of participants (88.1%)
ranged between 25 and 64 years of age, and 88.2%
held an undergraduate or postgraduate/graduate degree
(Table 3).
Descriptive and inferential statistical analyses of sur-
vey results were performed using IBM SPSS predictive
analytics software. Responses to this survey generated
primarily non-parametric nominal (i.e.,  categorical)
data, and chi-square tests were used to identify the
existence of significant differences within and among
samples. Text responses to open-ended survey questions
were qualitatively analysed using inductive thematic
analysis at the semantic level to identify key patterns and
themes.
Page 6
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 6 of 24
A  Figure 2 Map images used in the survey (Table 1, Questions 6–13)
showing three different probabilistic hazard data classification
styles: A) gradational shaded, B) binned, and C) isarithmic. Blue
outline shows the urban area of Whakatane for reference purposes here
only. In the survey, Whakatane and other areas appeared outlined in
grey with grey striped fill underneath the transparent hazard overlay (not
clearly visible at reduced size printed here). Seventeen urban areas, main
highways, large lakes, and a greyscale digital elevation model underlie
the transparent hazard layer as background features. Black triangle
represents the location of Tarawera volcano. Maps were viewed
at 800 × 710 pixels.
Results
Interviews
Map data classification
Clarity/ease of reading, precision/uncertainty, and aes-
B  thetics emerged as the three primary themes in partici-
pants’  discussion of map data classification. The ease
with which participants were personally able to read data
from the map was a motivator for map preference, but
participants also expressed consideration of how easy it
would be to use the map to communicate with peers
and the public:
It’s more than just communicating it [the map] to
fellow scientists, or fellow emergency managers,
or engineers, or whatever. It’s also how do you
communicate that further down to, to members of
the public. – Stakeholder 5
The isarithmic maps (Figure 1B,C) were well-liked and
were viewed as accurately portraying the realistic nature
of the volcanic ash hazard, while also being easy to read
C  with a high degree of precision:
The advantage is you can still quite easily see the
gradational nature of the probability, but at the same
time you can read off the actual percentage if you feel
you need to read that off. – Scientist 4
No relationship was observed between dashed
(Figure 1C) and solid isopleths (Figure 1B) and inter-
pretation of hazard information. However, the black
isopleths and labels across the map were viewed as
busy and distracting, detracting from the aesthetic
appeal of the map. Participants overall recommended
smoothing of the isopleths, citing that straight lines
and right angles resulting from the square grid used in
the model were visually unappealing and could falsely
imply certainty. Participants also viewed the 5% inter-
vals on the isopleths (Figure 1B,C) as misleadingly pre-
cise, and instead preferred the 10% intervals used in
the binned map (Figure 1D).
Page 7
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 7 of 24
Figure 3 Map images used in the survey (Table 1, Questions 14–15) showing two different types of map content. Map A depicts the hazard
using a fixed ash threshold – a distribution of probabilities of reaching and exceeding a fixed ash threshold, here, 1 mm, and map B depicts the hazard
using a fixed probability threshold – a distribution of ash thicknesses expected at a fixed probability threshold, here, 25%. Key in A shows binned
classes of probability (e.g., 25 – 34%). Key in B shows binned classes of ash thicknesses (e.g., 1 – 10 mm). Maps were viewed at 800 × 710 pixels.
The binned map was also well-liked among participants,
who viewed it as easy to read and visually appealing. Stake-
holder participants also expressed that the binned map
allowed for interpreting the map with more certainty, view-
ing binned zones as “more definitive”.  Stakeholders also
expressed the bins as a useful tool for visualising zones: 
Although there’s defined areas between them [bins], it’s
kind of useful in terms of a planning aspect that you’ve
got some boundaries to work on. – Stakeholder 6
However, both scientists and stakeholders expressed
that the boundaries between classes on the binned map
Figure 4 Hazard curves used in the survey (Table 1, Questions 18–22). Both show the same dataset for Whakatane probabilistic ash hazard,
but the presentation of the curve in A shows the average absolute probability, along with the 10th and 90th percentile lines, and in B shows the
average absolute probability, where the area between the 10th and 90th percentile lines is presented as an 80% confidence interval. Hazard curves
were viewed at 800 × 710 pixels.
Page 8
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6
A
B
C
Figure 5 (See legend on next page.) 
Page 8 of 24
Page 9
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 9 of 24
(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 5 Maps used in the survey (Table 1, Questions 23–25) showing three different map colour schemes: A) red-yellow sequential,
B) blue-yellow sequential, and C) blue-yellow-red diverging. Maps were presented in both gradational shaded (left) and binned (right)
data classification format simultaneously so that participants could visualise the colour schemes on different styles of map. Maps were viewed
at 584 × 518 pixels.
(Figure 1D) could present a disadvantage if they were a potential to be impacted on the red-yellow sequential
interpreted as non-gradational or “step-wise”:  map (Figure 1A-D):
Except, when you put a boundary on it, then people
probably think if they’re on one side of the boundary
or the other there’s a huge difference in probability
when there isn’t. – Scientist 3 
My first impression of that [diverging map] is, blue
would be safe. Whereas, where this [blue area] is
yellow in the other maps, it implies there is some sort
of risk that we need to consider. – Stakeholder 2
The background content was generally well liked,
and viewed as helpful for orientation and location
tasks, without cluttering the map. In contrast, geopol-
itical boundary limits on the data were not liked. Par-
ticipants suggested that the boundary made the hazard
appear to “stop” artificially. Participants also empha-
sized that managing and responding to hazards is a
collaborative process that crosses boundaries, and that
uncertainties or unknowns for the hazard in the sur-
rounding regions introduced potential issues for inter-
pretation and application.
Map colour scheme
Colour associations, zoning, and response emerged as
the three primary themes in participants’  dialogue con-
cerning map colour scheme. Overall, participants associ-
ated red hues with a presence of hazard and blue hues
with an absence of hazard. This became particularly im-
portant in low probability areas, which would be consid-
ered as “safe” if seen in the blue-yellow-red diverging
map (Figure 1E), but would still be considered as having 
These associations were described by participants as
“subliminal”,  “genetic”,  and “psychological”.  The contrast
between hues in the diverging map (Figure 1E) was seen as
making the hazard appear smaller, as a localised zone, and
was discussed as facilitating distinction between impacted
zones in the context of targeting response attention:
It makes it very clear, ‘that’s the area we’re worried
about. We’re not worried about anything else around
the district’. – Stakeholder 7
Stakeholders also observed that the diverging colour
scheme appeared very similar to other natural hazard
maps that they had experience with:
Automatically [I] relate that to weather maps… and
just to complicate matters worse, we’re also doing
flooding maps, and the models that we use are based
very much on the same colour format. So I would
look at that straight away and think, ‘Oh, it’s a flood
map.’…because you see the blue. – Stakeholder 8
Figure 6 Explanatory text provided at the top of one of the maps in the survey (Table 1, Questions 26–27).
Page 10
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 10 of 24
Table 1 Summary of questions asked in the online survey
Questions in survey
Question  Topic  Type
Ethics
1  Understanding of voluntary consent  MC
2  Understanding of access to summary of study findings MC
Field of work
3  Primary field of work  MC*
Personal associations/relevance of volcanic hazard
4  Experience/memories of volcanoes  MC*
5  Importance of volcanic hazard maps  MCL
Data classification (Figure 2)
6  Read probabilistic hazard from gradational shaded map Txt
7  Read qualitative hazard from gradational shaded map MCL
8  Read probabilistic hazard from binned map  Txt
9  Read qualitative hazard from binned map  MCL
10  Read probabilistic hazard from isarithmic map  Txt
11  Read qualitative hazard from isarithmic map  MCL
12  Order data classification style maps preference DD
13  Explain data classification style maps preference Txt
Map content (Figure 3)
14  Helpfulness of fixed ash/probability threshold maps MCL
15  Preferred map to receive of fixed ash/probability MC
threshold maps
Key expression
16  Preferred key text  MC
17  Influence of key text on perceived level of hazard MC*
Hazard curves (Figure 4)
18  Read hazard curve with percentile lines  MC
19  Ease/difficulty of reading hazard curve with percentile lines MCL
20  Read hazard curve with confidence interval area MC
21  Ease/difficulty of reading hazard curve with confidence area MCL
22  Rank helpfulness of hazard curves being available with map MCL
Map colour scheme (Figure 5)
23  Preferred colour scheme set of maps  MC
24  Explain reason for colour scheme preference Txt
25  Influence of colour scheme on hazard perception MCL*
Explanatory text (Figure 6)
26  Helpfulness of explanatory text to understanding map MCL*
27  Importance of explanatory text on map  MCL*
Format
28  Desired format for receiving volcanic hazard maps MC+
Demographics (Table 2)
29  Age bracket  MC
30  Ethnicity  MC
31  Highest level of education  MC
*Optional comments text box provided.
+Can select more than one answer.
MC, Multiple choice. MCL, Multiple choice Likert scale. Txt, Text. DD, Drag-and-drop.
See Additional file 1 for full survey. 
Table 2 Survey participants’ occupational discipline
Participant occupational discipline
Primary field
of work* 
Frequency Percent Cumulative
percent
Group Response
Scientist**  Physical/chemical/earth 32
science (academic or
scientific organisation) 
29.1  29.1
Stakeholder Agriculture 4  3.6  70.9
Communication 3  2.7
Education 1  0.9
Emergency
management
and planning 
29  26.4
Engineering 9  8.2
Government 17  15.5
Health  1  0.9
Infrastructure/resource 11
management 
10.0
Social science 3
(academic or
scientific organisation) 
2.7
Total  110  100 100
*“Response” is taken from participant response to a question about their
primary field of work. “Group” is generalised for purposes of comparison in
this study, though we acknowledge some participants may identify with both
groups. An “other” field was present for those who did not identify with a
particular field. However, all responses with an “other” specification also chose
a primary field from those provided (e.g., a “statistician” in the
physical/chemical/earth sciences).
**For the purposes of this study, a “scientist” is a scientist who specialises in
the physical, chemical, or earth sciences.
This was the only significant difference observed be-
tween scientists and stakeholders in the interviews. The
potential difficulty in reading maps due to colour blind-
ness was raised as an issue by several participants.
Map key expression
Trust and familiarity emerged as two themes in discus-
sion of key expression. Overall, participants viewed the
verbal expressions “probability” and “likelihood” as very
similar. However, “probability” was considered by stake-
holders to sound more reliable, scientific, and trust-
worthy, and in that context, it was also interpreted as a
more definitive way of expressing the hazard:
Depends on how accurate you want to be. Probability
means yes, definitely it is 10% probable. Whereas
10% likelihood [means] well it might, it might not.
- Stakeholder 9
“Chance” was perceived as untrustworthy, and akin to
“slang”,  invoking associations with gambling and horse-
racing. Percentages (e.g., 10%) were overall the most pre-
ferred numerical expression, with participants explaining
Page 11
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 11 of 24
that they are a commonly used format in many different
walks of life. However, some participants noted that nat-
ural frequencies (e.g., 1 in 10) were easier for people to get
a “feeling” or gist for the value. Decimal values (e.g., 0.1)
were universally considered as unfamiliar and too difficult
for most people to understand. Many participants also
commented that the gradational shaded key symbology
was difficult to read with only three percent values marked
(min., med., and max.).
Map content
Participants viewed the probabilistic maps (Figure 1A-E)
as long-term planning and reference tools, and as pre-
paredness tools to use in the event of an impending cri-
sis before more detailed deterministic-style maps (e.g.,
Figure 1F, or an ash advisory bulletin) were available.
Participants also expressed that 10 mm was a high
threshold in terms of useful application of the map.
Most participants expressed that their primary concern
would be the possibility of acquiring any ash at all,
explaining that a hazard threshold even as low as 1 to
2 mm thickness would have very important impacts that
they would need to consider:
Any ash to me is the worst case scenario. - Stakeholder 3
Similarly, some participants expressed that probabilis-
tic data for low ash thresholds were helpful supportive
content:
I think the probability is more important than the
thickness because [of] the way people work. It’s,
‘Will I get ash?’ Not, ‘How much will I get?’ …
They’re not sort of thinking ‘We can do this with
10 mill[imetre]s; we can’t do this with 100.’ It’s kind
of ‘Oh, ok, we have to deal with volcanic ash.’
Saying that there’s a 30 or 40 percent chance…
drives home a pretty strong message that they’ve
got to deal with it. – Scientist 2 
Many participants also suggested that addition of text
explaining the possible impacts of the ash thickness
would make the map more relevant and useful. It was
advised that the text be placed directly onto the map
face, explaining that it could easily be misplaced, trun-
cated, or disregarded if supplied separately.
Revisions to maps for the survey
The results of the pilot study interviews which were based
on the six maps in Figure 1 informed some revisions to
the maps in order to better meet user preferences and
needs, resulting in the eight map styles explored in the
survey (Figures 2, 3, 5):
 Geopolitical boundary constraint on hazard data
removed (Figure 2)
 Colour blind accessible colours were adopted
(Figure 3)
 10% bins and isopleth intervals were adopted
(instead of 5%)
 More intervals were labelled on the gradational
stretch symbology in the key
 White contour lines were used instead of black
(to reduce map noise)
 Isopleths were smoothed to remove the jagged
artefact of the modelling grid
 ≥1 mm of ash was displayed instead of ≥10 mm
of ash.
Survey
Out of the 110 respondents, seven participants did not fully
complete the survey. Results for questions with missing
values were measured using only the number of completed
responses (min. 103). Results are reported for the 5% sig-
nificance level (95% confidence), where χ2 is the chi-square
value for a goodness-of-fit chi-square test (one sample),
Pearson χ2 is the chi-square value for a Pearson chi-square
test of independence (two or more samples),  df is the
degrees of freedom, and α is the level of significance.
Table 3 Participant demographics
Survey participant demographics
Age bracket
Group  Percent (%)
18–24  4.0
25–44  51.5
45–64  36.6
65+  5.0
Prefer not to answer 3.0 
Ethnicity
Group
NZ European
NZ Maori
Other European
Asian
Pacific
Other
Prefer not to answer 
Percent (%)
60.4
3.0
27.7
0.0
0.0
6.9
2.0 
Highest level of education
Group
Did not complete high school
High School/GED
Vocational/Trade qualification
Tertiary/University degree
Postgraduate/Graduate degree
Prefer not to answer 
Percent (%)
0.0
4.0
6.9
22.8
65.4
1.0
Page 12
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 12 of 24
In response to a question about whether they had ever
experienced volcanic activity or had any memories associ-
ated with volcanic activity (Table 1, Question 4), 68.8% of
participants responded “yes”.  Of those, 64.0% described
specific volcanic activity in New Zealand. When asked to
rank their opinion about how important it is to have a vol-
canic hazard map for the potentially active volcanoes in
New Zealand on a 5-point Likert scale (Table 1, Question
5), 99.1% of respondents expressed that it was important
to some degree, with 73.4% ranking it “very important”. 
Map data classification
Results for questions about data classification (Table 1,
Question 6–13; Figure 2) are shown in Figure 7A-D.
When reading probabilistic hazard for the 78 km2 urban
area of Whakatane, respondents were more likely to give
a range of values (e.g., 40 - 45%) as opposed to a single
value (e.g., 40%) when using the binned data classifica-
tion map (Figure 2B) (χ2 = 114.919, df = 1, α < 0.001)
or the isarithmic map (Figure 2C) (χ2 = 117.237, df = 1,
α < 0.001) (Figure 7A).  In contrast, respondents were
Figure 7 Responses based on questions concerning gradational shaded, binned, and/or isarithmic data classification schemes (see
Figure 2). Graphs A-C show responses for questions based on reading the hazard for the urban area of Whakatane off of each map separately. Graph A
shows whether the respondent wrote a single value or a range of values when reading the hazard from each map. Graph B shows the value (average
probability) of hazard estimated by respondents using each map separately. The actual hazard at Whakatane is approximately 40 - 45%. Categories in graph
B are mutually exclusive; preference is given to the “within 40 - 45” category before the “within 35 - 45% category”. Graph C shows the estimated
qualitative level of hazard interpreted for Whakatane using each map separately. Graph D shows the preference for each map type (selected after
answering questions related to graphs A-C). Note vertical and horizontal scales are different for each graph. Top key is for all graphs.
Page 13
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 13 of 24
equally likely to give either a range of values or a single
value when using the gradational shaded map (Figure 2A)
(χ2 = 0.092, df = 1, α = 0.762) (Figure 7A).  Of those who
responded with a range, more participants (17.9%) re-
ported a 5% interval range when using the isarithmic map
(Figure 2C) than for any other data classification map
style. Ten percent ranges were the most commonly esti-
mated range interval for all data classification types. The
actual hazard values for Whakatane ranged between ap-
proximately 40 – 45%. When reading hazard from the isa-
rithmic map (Figure 2C), respondents were more likely to
estimate a single or range of values within 40 – 45%
(very accurate) or 35 – 45% (generally accurate) than
when using the other two maps (Figure 7B).  When
using the gradational shaded map (Figure 2A), respon-
dents were more likely to under- or over-estimate the
hazard value (Figure 7B).
More than half of respondents interpreted the qualita-
tive level of hazard as “medium” regardless of map data
classification style used (Figure 7C). The level of qualita-
tive hazard interpreted from each map did not change for
71.8% of respondents who chose only one hazard level for
all three maps. Scientists were more likely to show a
change in the level of qualitative hazard interpreted from
the different maps than stakeholders (Pearson χ2 = 7.987,
df = 2, α = 0.018),  with 40.0% of scientists choosing two
hazard levels among the three maps, and 3.3% choosing
three, and 25.0%, and 0.0% of stakeholders choosing two
and three levels of hazard, respectively.
The isarithmic data classification map (Figure 2C) was
ranked as the most preferred map choice, and the grad-
ational shaded map (Figure 2A) was ranked the least pre-
ferred (Figure 7D).  There was no difference in the
preferences of scientists and stakeholders, with 37.5% of
both scientists and stakeholders preferring the binned data
classification map (Figure 2B),  and 62.5% preferring the
isarithmic (Figure 2C) (Pearson χ2 = 0.000, df = 1, α =
1.000). Respondents wrote an average of 30 words in re-
sponse to an open-ended text question about map data
classification style preference. Three main themes emerged
concerning the influence of map data classification style on
respondent’s interpretation of the hazard map: clarity/ease
of reading, precision/uncertainty, and realistic hazard rep-
resentation. Many respondents stated that the presence of
gradational shading (Figure 2A,C) was favourable because
it represented the gradational nature of ashfall hazard more
realistically:
Clearest because it shows that the hazard is
gradational, steadily decreasing away from the source.
– Scientist 30
Similarly, the binned map (Figure 2B) was seen by
many users to be an unrealistic portrayal of ash hazard: 
The [actual] change is gradational, so [the binned
map] is too stepwise. Gives the wrong impression.
– Stakeholder 54
However, using gradational shading only (i.e., without
isopleths) (Figure 2A) was overall seen as requiring too
much effort to read with any degree of precision. When
labelled probability isopleths were included on the grad-
ational shaded map, many participants found the result-
ing isarithmic map (Figure 2C) much easier to read with
a higher degree of precision:
[It is] instantly obvious which range of values an area
falls within, plus you can see where in the range it falls,
so you can get quite a precise value just by quickly
looking at the [isarithmic] map. – Stakeholder 87
Less reliance on the key symbology was also seen as
increasing precision:
The labels indicating the probability band removes
any confusion associated with the colour symbology.
– Scientist 104
Map content
Results for questions about map content (Table 1, Ques-
tion 14–15; Figure 3) are shown in Figure 8A-B. Both
types of map content investigated (Figure 3) were viewed
as helpful to some degree by the majority of respon-
dents, with 95.2% of respondents ranking the fixed ash
threshold map (Figure 3A), and 89.4% ranking the fixed
probability threshold map (Figure 3B),  as very helpful,
helpful, or somewhat helpful (Figure 8).  Among the
97.2% of respondents who chose a preference, no statis-
tically significant difference exists between preference
for receiving a map with content describing a fixed ash
threshold, a fixed probability threshold, or one of each
(χ2 = 1.529, df = 2, α = 0.465).  There was no statistically
significant difference in the preferences of scientists and
stakeholders (Pearson χ2 = 2.111, df = 2, α = 0.348).
Map key expression
Results for questions about key expression (Table 1,
Question 16–17) are shown in Figure 9. When presented
with three different combinations of verbal and numer-
ical phrases of probabilistic hazard in the map key,
73.4% of respondents said the phrases used did not
change the level of hazard they interpreted from the
map. However 14.6% of respondents thought that the
natural frequency expression (1 in 4) made the hazard
seem greater than the percentage (25%). Despite the ma-
jority of respondents saying that the key had no influ-
ence on hazard perception, 93.2% of respondents chose
a preferred key expression (Figure 9). More than half of
Page 14
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 14 of 24
Figure 8 Respondents’ preference and perceived helpfulness of two different types of map content: maps depicting a distribution of
probabilities of reaching and exceeding a fixed ash threshold, such as 10 mm (fixed ash threshold), and maps depicting a distribution
of ash thicknesses expected at a fixed probability threshold, such as 25% (fixed probability threshold) (see Figure 3). Both types of
content were viewed as helpful to some degree, and no statistically significant difference exists for preference between receiving a fixed ash
threshold map, fixed probability threshold map, or one of each (see text for Pearson’s chi-square test values).
respondents preferred having both a percent “probabil-
ity” and natural frequency “likelihood” expressed in the
key. The second most preferred key expression was a
percent probability. Of the 22.3% of respondents who
entered text as optional commentary, many described
Preferred map key expression
3.9% “1 in 4 likelihood”
6.8% 
No preference 
the key with a natural frequency “likelihood” expression
only as “amateurish”, “subjective”, and “awkward”, with
one respondent citing that “likelihood” has a different
and specific meaning in their field of work. Percent
probability was generally described as a common, famil-
iar expression that was readily understood by both pro-
fessionals and the public. Some respondents suggested
that providing the natural frequency likelihood alongside
a percent probability may help the message be received
by a larger audience. No significant difference existed in
the key expression preference of scientists and stake-
holders (Pearson χ2 = 0.892, df = 3, α = 0.892).
51.5%
“25% probability
(1 in 4 likelihood)” 
37.9%
“25% probability”
*73.4% of respondents said key expression
does not change perceived level of hazard
Figure 9 Map key expression preference. More than half of
respondents preferred the map key which expressed the hazard as
both a percent (25%) “probability”, as well as a natural frequency
(1 in 4) “likelihood”. 
Hazard curves
Results for questions about hazard curves (Table 1,
Question 18–22; Figure 4) are shown in Figure 10A-B.
When ranking how helpful it would be to be provided
with hazard curves for chosen locations on the map,
55.4% of respondents said the curves were very helpful,
helpful, or somewhat helpful. However, scientists found
the hazard curves significantly more helpful than stake-
holders, with 73.3% of scientists ranking the curves as
helpful to some degree, while only 48.1% of stakeholders
did (Pearson χ2 = 6.324, df = 2, α = 0.042).  Nine percent
of stakeholders were not sure about the helpfulness. Per-
formance in reading a hazard curve for Whakatane im-
proved significantly when respondents used the hazard
curve with the 80% confidence area (Figure 4B),  with
70.3% of respondents choosing the most correct answer,
Page 15
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 15 of 24
Avg P with 10th, 90th percentile lines hazard curve Avg P with 80% confidence area hazard curve
A Response variation in reading hazard curves B  Ease/Difficulty of reading hazard curves
80  50
Response 
frequency 
(
%) 
Response 
frequency 
(
%)
70 
40
60
50  30
40
30  20
20 
10
10
0 
1  2
* correct response 
3  4*  5
Response option 
6 
0 
Very
easy 
Easy Avg Difficult Very
difficult
Response 
Not
sure
Figure 10 Responses based on separate questions in which respondents used a hazard curve for a point in the urban area of
Whakatane drawn with average probability, 10th, and 90th percentile lines, and then with average probability and an 80% confidence
area (see Figure 4). Graph A shows the frequency at which six possible responses were chosen using each hazard curve for a question which
required the respondent to read information from the curve and choose which statement was the most true. Response option four is the most
correct answer. Graph B shows the level of ease/difficulty respondents reported for reading information from each hazard curve.
compared to 12.6% when using the hazard curve with
10th and 90th percentile lines (Figures 4A, 10A).  More
than 46% of respondents chose a response option in
which the 10th percentile was incorrectly described as
10% confidence when using the hazard curve with 10th
and 90th percentile lines (Figure 4A),  compared to just 
7.9% when using the hazard curve with 80% confidence
area (Figure 4B) (response option 2, Figure 10A). In de-
scribing the ease/difficulty of reading the two hazard
curves, 71.9% of respondents found the curve with 10th
and 90th percentiles difficult or very difficult to read,
and 26.2% found it average, easy, or very easy, compared
Figure 11 Responses pertaining to A) the degree to which map colour scheme influences hazard perception, and B) preference
between blue-yellow sequential (blue), red-yellow sequential (red) and, blue-yellow-red diverging (diverging) colour schemes on
probabilistic volcanic hazard maps (see Figure 5). The majority of respondents (67.3%) agreed that colour scheme influenced their perception
of hazard, with diverging and red being the two most preferred colour schemes.
Page 16
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 16 of 24
Figure 12 Word clouds showing the most frequently used words in responses to an open-ended survey question in which respondents
entered text to describe their perspectives on the A) red-yellow sequential, B) blue-yellow sequential, and C) blue-yellow-red diverging
colour scheme maps (see Figure 5). Words shown in red hues are important thematic words. Equal signs were used by participants to express
colour associations (e.g., “red = hot”). Font size of word reflects the word’s the frequency of occurrence, i.e., the larger the word size, the higher
it’s frequency of occurrence in responses. Height of word font is approximately 0.8 × word frequency. Approximately 100 of the most frequently
used words for each colour scheme is shown.
to 41.6% and 57.4% of respondents for the 80% confi-
dence area curve, respectively (Figure 10B).
Map colour scheme
Results for questions about colour scheme (Table 1,
Question 23–25; Figure 5) are shown in Figure 11A-B and
Figure 12A-C. For more than 67% of respondents, colour
scheme had an effect on how they perceived the level of
hazard (χ2 = 14.957, df = 2, α = 0.001) (Figure 11A).  The
blue-yellow-red diverging colour scheme (“diverging”)
(Figure 5C) and red-yellow sequential colour scheme
(“red”)  (Figure 5A) were the most preferred colour
schemes (Figure 11B).  Among the top two preferred
colour schemes, chosen by 89.1% of respondents, the red
map (Figure 5A) was preferred by a majority 59.3% of
scientists, and the diverging map (Figure 5C) was pre-
ferred by a majority 64.3% of stakeholders (Pearson χ2 =
5.072, df = 1, α = 0.024).
Respondents wrote an average of 16 words when
explaining their map colour scheme preference. Four
main themes emerged concerning the influence of colour
scheme: colour associations, cultural/social/mental conno-
tations, zoning, and risk and response. Figure 12 highlights 
the words most frequently used by respondents in discus-
sion of each colour scheme. Red hues were associated with
concepts of danger, the presence of hazard, and volcanoes
(Figure 12A). In contrast, blue hues were associated with
concepts of safety, the absence of hazard, and water
(Figure 12B):
Red always denotes hazard to me. – Stakeholder 89
The blue looks negative rather than low. The colour
blue is usually associated with water. – Stakeholder 57
Many respondents remarked that the colour associa-
tions were evoked by cultural, social, or psychological
connotations. Respondents used words such as “intui-
tively”,  “universally”,  “subliminal”,  “socialised”,  “logical”,
and “used worldwide”, to describe the reasons for their
strong associations with the colours red and blue. The
associations with red and blue colours were consistent
for both diverging and sequential colour schemes:
[The diverging map] give the impression of safety [in the
blue areas] and emphasizes danger in the red areas...
Page 17
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 17 of 24
volcano, probabilistic hazard, and possible volcanic ash
impacts on the map was helpful to some degree. The
same proportion of respondents also viewed explana-
tory text on the map as important to some degree, with
50.5% ranking it “very important”. Results for questions
about map format (Table 1, Question 28) are shown in
Figure 13. The most popular format for receiving vol-
canic hazard maps was PDF, followed by GIS layer and
JPEG (Figure 13). More than three-quarters of respon-
dents (75.3%) chose more than one of the five format
options provided.
Figure 13 Desired formats for receiving volcanic hazard maps.
Participants could choose one or more of the five formats, GIS layer,
JPEG, KML, paper, or PDF, or write in an alternative one. More than
one option was chosen by 75.3% of respondents. The format
preferred most by respondents was PDF (78.2%).
[The red map] gives the impression of increasing danger
closer to the volcano. – Scientist 99
Red-blue seems to imply hazard and non-hazard,
instead of hazard and less hazard. – Stakeholder 58
When describing the diverging colour scheme map,
many respondents explained that they liked that the
contrast made it much easier to “distinguish” and “de-
lineate” the map into discrete “zones” (Figure 12C).
However, the zones of colour had different context for
different users. While responses describing the red
map primarily focused on describing the map in the
context of hazard, there was a marked increase in dis-
cussion of “risk” with the diverging colour scheme map
among stakeholders (Figure 12B,C):
The blue de-emphasises lower likelihood areas allowing
for a more risk-based focus. – Stakeholder 46
In some cases, the area of transition for the divergent
colours was explicitly linked to response action:
The transition between hot and cold colours should
be carefully set at a standard point, as anywhere in
cold colours is unlikely to receive attention when
planning in government departments is carried out.
– Stakeholder 91
Map explanatory text and map format
In responding to questions about explanatory text
(Table 1, Question 26–27; Figure 6),  94.1% of respon-
dents said that providing informative text about the 
Discussion
Data classification and uncertainty
Regardless of map data classification style viewed (Figure 2),
more than half of survey participants considered the
probability of accumulating ≥1 mm of ash in Whakatane
as a “medium” level of hazard (Figure 7C). Few partic-
ipants, and particularly few stakeholders, changed the
qualitative descriptor used, even when their estimates
of numerical value varied between maps, highlighting
that qualitative descriptors of hazard may have less
sensitivity for reflecting subtle perceived changes in
hazard data. This demonstrates possible issues with
relying on a broad verbal probability translation table
for volcanic uncertainty, and emphasises the import-
ance of including numerical values along with qualita-
tive descriptors of probability as suggested by Doyle
et al. (2011) and Budescu et al. (2009).
Estimates of hazard read from a probabilistic hazard
map displaying only a gradational shaded stretch of
values (Figure 2A) were less consistent than for other
data classification types (Figure 7A,B),  which suggests
that there is low reliability in the way users may read
and interpret information from this style of map. The
vast majority of participants also ranked the map as least
preferred (Figure 7D) or expressed dislike, which could
manifest in practice as an aversion to using and applying
maps with data presented in this style. However, the
addition of probability isopleths dramatically improved
the favourableness and readability of gradational shaded
data classification. The isarithmic map (Figure 2C) was
the most preferred (Figure 7D) and most accurately-read
data classification style (Figure 7B). Presence of isopleths
also increased the frequency of reading hazard as a range
of values instead of a single value (Figure 7A), which is a
more accurate estimation of hazard for the 78 km2 area
of Whakatane (actual hazard ~40 – 45%, Figure 2). Ex-
pressing a range of values may have positive implications
for practice, as Dieckmann et al. (2010) found that using
a range of probabilities to express uncertain information
is likely to be considered more credible and responsible
in a decision-making context than use of a single value
probability.
Page 18
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 18 of 24
The isarithmic data classification (Figure 2C) also ap-
peared to enhance the level of map engagement, by en-
couraging participants to critically assess the map and
estimate a more precise range of probabilities. Reading
the gradational shaded map (Figure 2A) required partici-
pants to spend increased effort, only to achieve a broad
variation in accuracy and a low level of consistency in
responses. Reading the binned map (Figure 2B) facilitated
quick perception of a range of hazard with little effort, but
the majority of respondents read this as “definitive” and did
not elaborate beyond the 10% accuracy conveyed in the
map key. When reading the isarithmic map (Figure 2C),
participants were able to quickly and easily estimate a
10% range of hazard, and more participants opted to
critically assess the shading within the 10% interval to
increase the precision of their estimate to within 5% ac-
curacy (Figure 7B). The non-discrete “fuzzy” appearance
of gradational shading is considered an appropriate
strategy to depict uncertain hazard and risk information
(MacEachren 1992; Slocum 1999), and our results sug-
gest that adding isopleths to this style effectively im-
proves reader ability to interpolate shading for those
who seek to reduce uncertainty.
Concern about precision and uncertainty in the mod-
elled data was a primary theme regarding data classifica-
tion in both the interviews and the surveys. For
example, most participants found 5% interval isopleths
(Figure 1B,C) unfavourable because they appeared to de-
pict “unwarranted” precision or certainty. The prominence
of uncertainty and precision in discussion of the maps
suggests that it is recognised as an important component
of probabilistic volcanic hazard data by both scientists and
stakeholders. Donovan et al. (2012) found that effective
communication and acknowledgement of uncertainty
among both groups was critical for achieving useful appli-
cation of probabilistic volcanic hazard and risk data in
decision-making during volcanic crises at Montserrat.
However, uncertainty in volcanic hazard maps is not al-
ways recognised or accepted, and it is important to ex-
plore how users perceive and approach uncertainty in
maps. In the context of map properties, our results indi-
cate that depicting 10% intervals in probability may be
perceived as appropriate, adequate, and accessible for
visualising and processing hazard information among a di-
verse group of users.
As a whole, participants expressed a general under-
standing that there are uncertainties associated with
modelled probabilistic volcanic hazard data. However,
more specific concepts of uncertainty related to the na-
ture of the probabilistic data were less clear. The con-
cept and meanings of lower and upper percentile values
were not consistently or easily understood by the major-
ity of participants when reading from a hazard curve
(Figure 10).  A hazard curve displaying the concept of 
confidence (Figure 4B) was better understood, with more
participants also finding it easier to read than the curve
with percentiles (Figure 4A). These differences have im-
portant implications for the language and graphics we
use to communicate probabilistic hazard. As probabilis-
tic tools such as volcanic hazard curves become more
integrated in volcanic hazard and risk management (e.g.,
Tonini et al. in press), it is important to understand the
contextual measures which can be implemented to im-
prove the presentation of results and achieve clearer
communication, particularly because statistical interpret-
ation is a common challenge for many people (Reyna
and Brainerd 2008).
Colour scheme and messages of hazard
The emergence of “risk and response” as a theme associ-
ated with the diverging colour scheme showed that the
concept of hazard was also ambiguous in some cases.
Volcanic hazard refers to the possible occurrence of a
dangerous or destructive volcanic phenomenon, and can
vary in frequency, magnitude, and spatial extent. In con-
trast, volcanic risk implies consideration of both the haz-
ard and the vulnerabilities and capacities of people and
communities in the areas exposed to the hazard (Fournier
d'Albe 1979; UNISDR 2009). While the volcanology com-
munity agrees that scientists are responsible for analysing
and communicating hazard, the role of scientists regarding
volcanic risk and response advice is more controversial, as
risk-based decision-making must take into account many
social, political, and economic factors (Marzocchi et al.
2012). The diverging colour scheme (Figure 5C) was pre-
ferred by a significantly greater proportion of stakeholders
than scientists, as this group may have a greater propen-
sity for seeking risk-related information. Our results sug-
gest that unintended messages or connotations of risk and
risk-based response may be avoided by using sequential,
rather than diverging, colour schemes to illustrate hazard.
Diverging hues convey messages of a changing state or
phenomena (Slocum 1999), such as a safe state and a dan-
gerous state. In contrast, adjusting lightness and saturation
of incremental hues on a sequential scale conveys a mes-
sage of changing intensity or degree (Slocum 1999), recog-
nised in the participants’  perception of low, but not
absent, hazard in light yellow-coloured areas on the red
colour scheme map (Figure 5A).  Sequential hue colour
schemes have also been found to convey changing inten-
sity in health risk maps (Severtson and Vatovec 2012;
Severtson and Myers 2013).
The stakeholder participants’ tendency to observe “con-
fusing” similarities between the diverging colour scheme
volcanic hazard map (Figure 5C) and hydrological-type
hazard maps highlights the fact that many stakeholders
are often responsible for dealing with many different types
of hazard and risk. Despite volcanic ash not being a high-
Page 19
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 19 of 24
Figure 14 Binned maps from A) the interview, in which colour blind accessible colours were not considered (see Figure 1D), and B) the
survey map, in which a colour blind accessible colour scheme was used based on Color Brewer ([URL: "http://www.colorbrewer2.org"] www.colorbrewer2.org, Brewer et al.
2013) (see Figure 2B), viewed through an Adobe Photoshop® protanopia colour blindness filter, which shows how the image would
appear to a person with protanopia-type (red-green) colour blindness. The issue of colour blindness was raised in interviews, which
prompted the adaption of colour blind accessible colour schemes for the survey. The upper three classes have greater contrast, and are more
discernible in B than in A.
temperature phenomenon, the associations of “hot” volca-
noes with the red map (Figure 12A) suggests that using
warm colour schemes may make volcanic hazard maps
distinguishable for users who frequently encounter hazard
and risk maps for other phenomena. Improvement in the
colour contrast of the maps from the interviews to
the surveys emphasizes the importance of selecting colour
blind accessible colour schemes. Color Brewer (Brewer
et al. 2013) was an effective and simple tool for choosing
colour blind accessible map colour schemes, and filters
which show how the map is likely to appear to a colour
blind reader, such as those offered in Adobe Photoshop®,
or in the free online tool Color Oracle ([URL: "http://www.colororacle.org"] www.colororacle.
org, Jenny and Kelso 2007), can be helpful tools for testing
preliminary colour selections on maps (Figure 14).
Depicting value labels on the map face, instead of only
in the key, may also assist participants with vision
deficiencies.
Key expression and map trust
The verbal expression “probability” was associated with
greater levels of trust than “likelihood”.  This suggests
that verbal expression in the key can play a role in inter-
pretation of hazard map data, as trust is a critical factor
in stakeholder engagement with uncertain hazard map
data (Frewer and Salter 2007; Wachinger et al. 2013). 
For numerical expression, preference of percentages
over natural frequencies may reflect a high level of nu-
meracy in the sampled stakeholder group which re-
ported high education levels. While many studies
suggest natural frequencies are the most widely- and
well-understood numerical expression of probabilistic
information (e.g.,  Hoffrage et al. 2000; Lipkus 2007),
others (Reyna and Brainerd 2008; Keller and Siegrist
2009; Severtson and Myers 2013) advise that the effect
of expression is dependent on reader numeracy skills.
Using a combination of both percentages and natural
frequencies on the key was the most favoured option by
more than half of participants (Figure 9), and also may
be the most inclusive option for reaching trust and un-
derstanding among audiences with different numeracy
skills. Including natural frequency expressions may also
have additional importance in the context of low prob-
ability hazard values, as users may be more likely to in-
terpret very low probabilities as “very low hazard” when
reading natural frequencies, as opposed to interpreting
very low probabilities as “no hazard” when reading per-
centage values (Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Reyna
and Brainerd 1991; Stone et al. 1994). This trend may
be indicated by the ~15% of respondents who viewed
the hazard as greater when presented with a natural fre-
quency compared to a percentage.
Page 20
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 20 of 24
Map content and map usefulness
Overall, participants showed an understanding for the
gradational nature of volcanic ash hazard, acknowledging
the “realistic” appearance of gradational shading, and dis-
missing a geopolitical constraint on hazard. These positive
indications of understanding of volcanic ash hazard may be
due to the high proportion of participants with memories
or experiences of volcanoes. Equal preference of fixed ash
threshold and fixed probability threshold maps indicates
that there are audiences for both types of probabilistic vol-
canic hazard map content, and that offering different types
of outputs is a valuable aspect of probabilistic volcanic haz-
ard analysis tools. Outputs at a number of different thresh-
old levels are likely to be useful, with results of this study
suggesting even thresholds as low as 1 mm of ash can be
useful information for many stakeholders. However, many
participants drew upon experiences from New Zealand’s
past minor ashfall events to express the perceived value in
information for 1 mm of ash, and this is likely to be differ-
ent in other regions, where decision-makers and communi-
ties are more frequently exposed to greater thicknesses of
volcanic ash.
Map format and the importance of map-maker choices
The high preference to receive PDF, JPEG, and paper
formats (Figure 13), suggest that many hazard map users
do not expect to alter any of the properties on the original
map (via GIS or other digital tools). Accordingly, the many
representation choices for map properties made by the
map makers (often volcanic hazard scientists) are import-
ant because they are likely to be carried through decision-
making processes. Participants also expressed intentions
to use the maps as tools for communicating with others
during decision-making processes, stressing the import-
ance of being able to clearly understand the map them-
selves in order to be capable of clearly and consistently
explaining the hazard map to others, as recommended in
a collective communication strategy by key national stake-
holders (MCDEM 2010). Considering that maps are likely
to be used “as is”, it is important that makers of volcanic
hazard maps are aware of how choices in map properties
can influence communication and understanding.
Methodological remarks
Semi-structured interviews served as a valuable pilot study
methodology for acquiring rich contextual thematic data
and for recognising important topics and issues, and the
surveys were a valuable method for exploring and testing
these topics among a broader sample group. Overall, no
major discords or contrasts were recognised between the
results of the two methodologies. Inclusion of open-ended
text questions in the survey enhanced the richness of the
survey data collected and delivered insight into motiva-
tions behind key trends. Limitations in the survey methods 
include possible sampling bias, question order bias, and
internet access. The survey was also limited to investiga-
tion of the selective map properties and topics addressed
in the questions, and other important factors or issues
may exist that are not covered here. In snowball sampling,
the sample is affected by the network of relationships that
exist. Accordingly, more well-connected populations are
more likely to be included in the sample (Patton 2002).
However, we assume that the proportion of stakeholders
(70%) to scientists (30%) sampled is an appropriate repre-
sentation of the target population. We found this purpos-
ive sampling method was suitable for achieving a high
level of participation among those who met the specific
criteria related to volcanic hazard maps and decision-
making, but acknowledge that potential biases could exist
within the sample. For example, no statistically significant
differences were recognised among age groups for all pa-
rameters. However, the 18 – 24 and 65+ year age categor-
ies may have been underrepresented for this spread of
occupational disciplines (Table 3). Findings may also con-
trast significantly among groups with a lower rate of ter-
tiary and postgraduate education (Table 3).  This study
focused on a New Zealand population sample, and im-
portant cultural differences may exist for other regions.
For example, although red is globally considered a potent,
emotional, active colour (Adams and Osgood 1973), it has
connotations of danger in many Western cultures, but is a
colour of joy in some Eastern ones, and a colour of life in
New Zealand Māori culture (e.g., Jackson 1972), and these
types of cultural meanings could influence the way users
interpret hazard depicted in red colours (Edsall 2007).
Ash fall hazard was investigated in this study because
probabilistic hazard analysis approaches are widely avail-
able and commonly employed for this type of volcanic
hazard (e.g., Scollo et al. 2008; Folch 2012). Other import-
ant volcanic hazards, such as lahars (volcanic mudflows)
and lava flows are becoming closer to having widely ap-
plied probabilistic analysis toolsets, but a probabilistic
approach is not yet as common for mapping these gravity-
and topography- driven volcanic hazards. Some of the re-
sults and findings presented here may be different for
probabilistic volcanic hazard maps depicting these and
other hazards.
Implications for volcanic hazard map design
Results presented here indicate that stakeholders hold
strong views about certain hazard map properties, and
highlight the importance of considering user perspec-
tives in hazard map development. Opening the map de-
sign process to user contemplation, criticism, and testing
in times of volcanic dormancy can help build stronger,
more reliable maps and can prevent miscommunications
and mistrust during a crisis, when maps are likely to be
drafted, disseminated, and duplicated rapidly. The
Page 21
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 21 of 24
quality of visual graphics and maps presented for decision-
making can play a vital and significant role in the outcomes
of a crisis (Tufte 1997). A collaborative and iterative design
process which considers diverse user perspectives can help
identify key issues, and may help contribute to the develop-
ment of a more valuable end product.
Our findings suggest that the representation of data
classification, colour scheme, key expression, and con-
tent, and map presentation format all have an influence
on interpretation and communication of probabilistic
volcanic hazard map information. These properties have
varying influence on map preference, understanding,
trust, and application, which could have important ef-
fects for hazard management decision-making and in-
corporation into risk reduction strategies, particularly if
a reader relies on intuitive gist or feeling for the infor-
mation presented to some degree (Reyna and Brainerd
1991; Finucane et al. 2000). Accordingly, while research
into user preference is important, as readers are more
likely to use a map which appeals to them, complemen-
tary empirical measurements of map interpretation are
also important because the subjectively preferred map
may not always be the most effective map for decision-
making (Mendonça and Delazari 2011).  For example,
our results show that although stakeholders preferred
the diverging colour scheme (Figure 5C),  a diverging
colour scheme may convey unintended or false messages
of risk (Figure 12C).
Our results also emphasise that there is no one-size-fits-
all map presentation. One map cannot comprehensively
meet the precise needs of a diverse audience of stake-
holders. For example, different ash thresholds may be of
concern to different stakeholder groups, and each group
may use the map for different modes of communication
with different audiences and communities. However, giv-
ing a voice to different stakeholder groups in an inclusive
approach to hazard mapping can help map makers strive
for the most integrative map possible to mediate this issue.
Empirical investigation into the interplay of different map
properties and how they cumulatively affect the appeal and
interpretations of a map with different stakeholder groups
can help map makers work towards achieving the most col-
laborative and effective map possible. A more consentient
map can facilitate consistent messaging among stakeholder
communities and stakeholder audiences, and reduce the
circulation of potentially conflicting information.
Although it is important to communicate a consistent
message, it may often be appropriate to create a set of
maps instead of a single map, for example, a map set com-
prising a fixed ash threshold map (Figure 3A) and a fixed
probability threshold map (Figure 3B) supplemented with
available hazard curves (Figure 4). It is also important to
consider that probabilistic volcanic hazard maps are built
on the results of a particular input model, which uses a 
particular set of parameters, assumptions, and limitations.
In many circumstances, it may be appropriate to present
the results of more than one model. In all cases, explana-
tory text should be provided on the visual itself to ensure
the information is contextually supported.
We further note that the challenges of displaying un-
certain information on a map is not unique to volcanic
hazards, but has also been discussed in fields such as
hurricane hazards (Broad et al. 2007),  seismic hazard
(Newman et al. 2001),  and health hazards (Severtson
and Myers 2013).  Although the target audiences and
messages vary for each discipline, many of these visual-
isation and communication challenges are analogous or
shared, and research undertaken in one field can serve
as a valuable resource for guiding enquiries and applica-
tions in other hazard-related fields.
Future work
Few significant differences were recognised between
stakeholder and scientist participants in this study,
which may be due to limitations in sample size of the
study and design of the survey questionnaire (Table 2).
Recommendations for future work in this area would be
to focus on identifying any key differences affecting haz-
ard map perception among various stakeholder groups
(e.g.,  scientists, emergency managers, and the public).
People living in areas potentially exposed to volcanic
hazard are very important stakeholders in hazard map
information, and are a primary audience for hazard
maps in the event of volcanic unrest. However, in many
cases, these people are likely to be less familiar with
visualisations of volcanic hazard and probabilistic data.
As such, future research exploring how volcanic hazard
map design influences hazard communication and un-
derstanding among these people should be undertaken
in order to improve the successful transfer of important
hazard information to the wider at-risk community. Fur-
ther work also needs to be undertaken to identify any
further properties which may influence hazard map
communication and interpretation, in addition to a
more probing investigation of the parameters explored
here, such as testing more colour schemes and map
content types. We propose that future studies in other
volcanic regions or on other natural hazards could
adopt a similar methodology to that presented here, and
refer the reader to Additional file 1 for a full copy of the
online survey.
Conclusion
It is impossible to achieve a wholly objective representa-
tion of complex reality on a map. However, empirically-
informed representation choices can help probabilistic
volcanic hazard maps be designed with an enhanced
level of ethical intersubjectivity and transparency which
Page 22
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 22 of 24
may help reduce miscommunication and misunder-
standing. There are few existing guidelines available for
how to choose appropriate representations of volcanic
hazard data on a map, as no previous studies have
assessed the impact of such choices on hazard commu-
nication. Here, we do not propose a universal standard-
isation for probabilistic volcanic hazard map properties.
We do, however, suggest ten important considerations,
in the context of the results of this New Zealand- and
volcanic ash-based study, for map makers to take into
account when creating maps to be used by stakeholders,
such as emergency managers, for high-stakes decision-
making:
 Using an isarithmic map comprised of gradational
shaded stretched data classification with smoothed
and labelled 10% interval probability isopleths can
be an effective format for conveying the gradual
nature of ashfall hazard and for encouraging critical
analysis of the data with a high level of accuracy.
 Red-yellow sequential colour schemes are
commonly associated with volcanoes and hazard,
and reduce the potential for confusion with
hydrological hazard map types. The colour scheme
can effectively convey the message that areas
depicted as low hazard areas still have some level of
hazard present.
 Diverging colour schemes may facilitate unwanted
associations with volcanic risk concepts, and may
enable use of the map as a reference tool for risk-
based response decisions based on the transition
area between hues. The colour scheme may convey
messages of hazard absence in low hazard areas, and,
depending on colour, may also be confused with other
hazard map types (e.g., flooding hazard map). However,
this scheme may be helpful for facilitating the
interpretation of a high hazard “zone”.
 Color Brewer ([URL: "http://www.colorbrewer2.org"] www.colorbrewer2.org, Brewer et al.
2013) is a helpful free online tool for selecting
colour blind safe, appropriately balanced map colour
schemes. Any colour scheme should be tested using
a colour blind filter tool, such as those offered
through Color Oracle (Jenny and Kelso 2007) or
Adobe Photoshop®, before dissemination. Including
labels of probability on the map face also assists
vision deficient users.
 When expressing uncertainty in a dataset, the
concept of “confidence” may be grasped more easily
and more clearly by stakeholders than lower and
upper percentile data ranks, particularly in hazard
curve graphics.
 A percent (e.g., 25%) “probability” is a trusted
numerical-verbal expression of probabilistic volcanic
hazard, which is considered familiar and reliable. 
Including a natural frequency (e.g., 1 in 4) in
addition is likely to help to increase understanding
of the expression among a broader audience and
may reduce the tendency to interpret very low
hazard as “no hazard”.
 Qualitative hazard descriptors (e.g., “low”, “medium”,
and “high”) are less sensitive than numerical hazard
values (e.g., 30%, 45 - 50%), and may not accurately
reflect users’ perceived change in hazard probability.
 Both fixed probability and fixed ash threshold maps
are valuable probabilistic volcanic hazard map
content types for organisational stakeholder groups.
 Static PDF format is a convenient, popular, and
preferred format for receiving and sharing volcanic
hazard maps, emphasising the importance of map
property representation choices.
 Some differences exist in probabilistic volcanic
hazard map interpretation between scientists and
stakeholders, suggesting that engaging with users in
a multi-perspective bottom-up approach to hazard
mapping can complement and enhance traditional
top-down approaches.
Additional file
 Additional file 1: Copy of the 31-question online survey. The survey
was free to access using a one-time-use URL.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
MAT performed the interviews, surveys, analyses, and writing of the
manuscript under the guidance and support of JML and JCG. JML and JCG
contributed to editing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to express thanks and appreciation to the
participants of the interviews and surveys. Thanks to E. E. Hudson-Doyle and
D.M. Johnston for constructive feedback and discussion, and to S. Jenkins
and C. Fearnley for insightful and helpful reviews which improved this
manuscript. MAT acknowledges support from the University of Auckland
and the DEVORA Project (DEtermining VOlcanic Risk in Auckland) with
thanks. JML gratefully acknowledges support from the New Zealand
Earthquake Commission.
Received: 30 June 2014 Accepted: 6 January 2015
References
Adams FM, Osgood CE (1973) A cross-cultural study of the affective meanings of
color. J Cross-Cult Psychol 4(2):135–156
American Optometric Association (AOA) (2014) Colour vision deficiency.
 http://www.aoa.org/patients-and-public/eye-and-vision-problems/glossary-of-
 eye-and-vision-conditions/color-deficiency?sso=y. Accessed 11 June 2014
Bertin J (1983) Semiology of Graphics (translated by William J. Berg). University of
Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI
Blong RJ (1984) Volcanic Hazards: A Sourcebook on the Effects of Eruptions.
Academic Press Australia, North Ryde, Australia
Braun V, Clarke V (2006) Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol
3(2):77–101
Page 23
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6  Page 23 of 24
Brewer CA (1994) Color use guidelines for mapping and visualization. In:
MacEachren AM, Taylor DRF (eds) Visualization in Modern Cartography.
Elsevier, Tarrytown, New York, pp 123–147
Brewer CA (1996) Guidelines for selecting colors for diverging schemes on maps.
Cartogr J 33(2):79–86
Brewer CA, Harrower M, Sheesley B, Woodruff A, Heyman D (2013) ColorBrewer 2.0.
The Pennyslvania State University, State College, PA, [URL: "http://www.colorbrewer2.org"] www.colorbrewer2.org
Brewer CA, Pickle L (2002) Evaluation of methods for classifying epidemiological
data on choropleth maps in series. Ann Assoc Am Geogr 92(4):662–681
Broad K, Leiserowitz A, Weinkle J, Steketee M (2007) Misinterpretations of the
“Cone of Uncertainty” in Florida during the 2004 hurricane season. Bull Am
Meteorol Soc 88(5):651–667
Budescu DV, Broomell S, Por H-H (2009) Improving communication of uncertainty
in the reports of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Psychol Sci
20(3):299–308
Calder E, Wagner K, Ogburn S (2012) One hundred and one volcanic hazard
maps: what can we learn? In: Abstracts of Cities on Volcanoes 7. IAVCEI,
Colima, Mexico, pp 19–23, November 2012
Dent BD, Torguson J, Hodler TW (eds) (2009) Cartography: Thematic Map Design,
6th edn. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, New York
Dieckmann NF, Mauro R, Slovic P (2010) The effects of presenting imprecise
probabilities in intelligence forecasts. Risk Anal 30(6):987–1001
Donovan A, Oppenheimer C, Bravo M (2012) The use of belief-based probabilistic
methods in volcanology: scientists’ views and implications for risk
assessments. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 247–248:168–180
Doyle EEH, Johnston DM, McClure J, Paton D (2011) The communication of
uncertain scientific advice during natural hazard events. N Z J Psychol
40(4):39–50
Doyle EEH, McClure J, Johnston DM, Paton D (2014) Communicating likelihoods
and probabilities in forecasts of volcanic eruptions. J Volcanol Geotherm Res
272:1–15
Edsall R (2007) Cultural factors in digital cartographic design: Implications for
communication to diverse users. Cartogr Geogr Inf Sci 34:121–128
Finucane ML, Alhakami A, Slovic P, Johnson SM (2000) The affect heuristic in
judgments of risks and benefits. J Behav Decis Mak 13(1):1–17
Folch A (2012) A review of tephra transport and dispersal models; evolution, current
status, and future perspectives. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 235–236:96–115
Fournier d'Albe EM (1979) Objectives of volcanic monitoring and prediction.
J Geol Soc 136(3):321–326
Fisher A (1991) Risk communication challenges. Risk Anal 11(2):173–179
Frewer L, Salter B (2007) Societal trust in risk analysis: Implications for the
interface of risk assessment and risk management. In: Siegrist M, Earle T,
Gutscher H (eds) Trust in Cooperative Risk Management: Uncertainty and
Scepticism in the Public Mind. Earthscan, London
Harrower M, Brewer CA (2003) ColorBrewer.org: An online tool for selecting
colour schemes for maps. Cartogr J 40(1):27–37
Haynes K, Barclay J, Pidgeon N (2007) Volcanic hazard communication using
maps: an evaluation of their effectiveness. Bull Volcanol 70(2):123–138
Hoffrage U, Lindsey S, Hertwig R, Gigerenzer G (2000) Communicating statistical
information. Science 290(5500):2261–2262
Jackson M (1972) Aspects of symbolism and composition in Maori art. Bijdragen
tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 128(1):33–80
Jenny B, Kelso NV (2007) Color design for the color vision impaired. Cartographic
Perspectives 57:61–67
Kahneman D, Tversky A (1979) Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica 47:263–291
Keller C, Siegrist M (2009) Effect of risk communication formats on risk perception
depending on numeracy. Med Decis Making 29:483–490
Kunz M, Hurni L (2011) How to enhance cartographic visualisations of natural
hazards assessment results. Cartogr J 48(1):60–71
Leonard GS, Stewart C, Wilson TM, Procter JN, Scott BJ, Keys HJ, Jolly GE,
Wardman JB, Cronin SJ, McBride SK (2014) Integrating multidisciplinary
science, modelling and impact data into evolving, syn-event volcanic hazard
mapping and communication: A case study from the 2012 Tongariro
eruption crisis, New Zealand. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 286:208–232
Lipkus IM (2007) Numeric, verbal, and visual formats of conveying health risks:
suggested best practices and future recommendations. Med Decis Making
27(5):696–713
MacEachren AM (1992) Visualizing uncertain information. Cartographic
Perspective 13:10–19
MacEachren AM (1995) How Maps Work. The Guilford Press, New York 
Mader HM, Coles SG, Connor CB, Connor LJ (eds) (2006) Statistics in Volcanology,
vol 1. Special Publications of IAVCEI. Geological Society, London
Marzocchi W, Newhall C, Woo G (2012) The scientific management of volcanic
crises. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 247–248:181–189
MCDEM (2002) Civil Defence Emergency Management Act 2002 (CDEM Act).
Ministry of Civil Defence & Emergency Management, New Zealand, Public
Act 2002 No. 33
MCDEM (2010) Working from the same page: consistent messages for CDEM.
Ministry of Civil Defence & Emergency Management, Wellington,
New Zealand
Mendonça A, Delazari L (2011) What do People prefer and what is more effective
for maps: a decision making test. In: Ruas A (ed) Advances in Cartography
and GIScience. Volume 1. Lecture Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography.
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg
Monmonier M (1996) How to Lie with Maps. The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago
Morgan DL (2007) Paradigms lost and pragmatism regained: methodological
implications of combining qualitative and quantitative methods. J Mixed
Methods Res 1(1):48–76
Nairn IA, Self S, Cole JW, Leonard GS, Scutter C (2001) Distribution, stratigraphy,
and history of proximal deposits from the c. AD 1305Kaharoa eruptive
episode at Tarawera Volcano, New Zealand. N Z J Geol Geophys 44:467–484
Nave R, Isaia R, Vilardo G, Barclay J (2010) Re-assessing volcanic hazard maps for
improving volcanic risk communication: application to Stromboli Island, Italy.
J Maps 2010:260–269
Newhall CG, Hoblitt RP (2002) Constructing event trees for volcanic crises. Bull
Volcanol 64:3–20
Newman A, Schneider J, Stein S, Mendez A (2001) Uncertainties in seismic hazard
maps for the New Madrid Seismic Zone and implications for seismic hazard
communication. Seismol Res Lett 72(6):647–663
Olson JM, Brewer CA (1997) An evaluation of color selections to accommodate map
users with color-vision impairments. Ann Assoc Am Geogr 87(1):103–134
Patton MQ (ed) (2002) Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods, 3rd edn.
Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA
Reyna VF, Brainerd CJ (1991) Fuzzy-trace theory and framing effects in choice:
Gist extraction, truncation, and conversion. J Behav Decis Mak 4(4):249–262
Reyna VF, Brainerd CJ (2008) Numeracy, ratio bias, and denominator neglect in
judgments of risk and probability. Learn Individ Differ 18(1):89–107
Robinson AH (1967) Psychological aspects of color in cartography. International
Yearbook of Cartography 7:50–59
Robinson AH, Morrison JL, Muehrcke PC, Jon Kimerling A, Guptill SC (1995)
Elements of Cartography, 6th edn. John Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York
Scollo S, Folch A, Costa A (2008) A parametric and comparative study of different
tephra fallout models. J Vol Geother Res 176:199–211
Scott BJ, Potter SH (2014) Aspects of historical eruptive activity and volcanic
unrest at Mt. Tongariro, New Zealand: 1846–2013. J Volcanol Geotherm Res
286:263–276
Severtson DJ, Myers JD (2013) The influence of uncertain map features on risk
beliefs and perceived ambiguity for maps of modeled cancer risk from air
pollution. Risk Anal 33(5):818–837
Severtson DJ, Vatovec C (2012) The theory-based influence of map features on
risk beliefs: Self-reports of what is seen and understood for maps depicting
an environmental health hazard. J Health Commun 17:836–856
Slocum TA (1999) Thematic Cartography and Visualization. Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle, NJ
Spiegelhalter D, Pearson M, Short I (2011) Visualizing uncertainty about the
future. Science 333(6048):1393–1400
Stone ER, Yates JF, Parker AM (1994) Risk communication: absolute versus relative
expressions of low-probability risks. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process
60(3):387–408
Thompson MA, Lindsay JM, Sandri L, Biass S, Bonadonna C, Jolly G, Marzocchi W.
(under review) Exploring the influence of vent location and eruption style on
tephra fall hazard from the Okataina Volcanic Centre, New Zealand.
Tonini R, Sandri L, Thompson MA (in press) PyBetVH: a Python tool for
probabilistic volcanic hazard assessment and for generation of Bayesian
hazard curves and maps, Computers and Geosciences.
Tufte ER (1997) Visual and statistical thinking: displays of evidence for making
decisions. In: Visual Explanations: images and Quantities, Evidence and
Narrative. Graphics Press, Chesire, Connecticut
UNISDR (2009) UNISDR Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction. United Nations
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), Geneva, Switzerland
Page 24
Thompson et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:6
Wachinger G, Renn O, Begg C, Kuhlicke C (2013) The risk perception paradox—
Implications for governance and communication of natural hazards. Risk Anal
33(6):1049–1065
Walker GPL, Self S, Wilson L (1984) Tarawera 1886, New Zealand - A basaltic
phinian fissure eruption. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 21:61–78
Wolfe JM, Horowitz TS (2004) What attributes guide the deployment of visual
attention and how do they do it? Nat Rev Neurosci 5:495–501
Woo G (2008) Probabilistic criteria for volcano evacuation decisions. Nat Hazards
45:87–97
Woo G (2009) A New Era of Volcano Risk Management. Risk Management
Solutions, Inc, Newark, CA 
Page 24 of 24
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁ t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
