Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
Title: Training in crisis communication and volcanic eruption forecasting: design and evaluation of an authentic role-play simulation
Keywords: The volcanic hazards simulation,Education,Role-play,Simulation,Volcanic hazards,Emergency management,Communication competence,Risk communication
ModDate: 2015/04/16 00:55:23+02'00'
Subject: 2015, :. doi:10.1186/s13617-015-0030-1
Author: Jacqueline Dohaney; Erik Brogt; Ben Kennedy; Thomas M Wilson; Jan M Lindsay
CreationDate: 2015/04/16 04:55:12+08'00'
xmp:xmp:Label: 2015, :. doi:10.1186/s13617-015-0030-1
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2015-04-16T04:55:12+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2015-04-16T00:55:23+02:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2015-04-16T00:55:23+02:00
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13617-015-0030-1
xmp:dc:rights: � 2015 Dohaney et al.; licensee Springer.
xmp:dc:description: 2015, :. doi:10.1186/s13617-015-0030-1
xmp:dc:subject: The volcanic hazards simulation; Education; Role-play; Simulation; Volcanic hazards; Emergency management; Communication competence; Risk communication
xmp:dc:title: Training in crisis communication and volcanic eruption forecasting: design and evaluation of an authentic role-play simulation
xmp:dc:creator: Jacqueline Dohaney; Erik Brogt; Ben Kennedy; Thomas M Wilson; Jan M Lindsay
xmp:xmpRights:Marked: True
xmp:prism:doi: 10.1186/s13617-015-0030-1
xmp:prism:copyright: � 2015 Dohaney et al.; licensee Springer.
xmp:prism:aggregationType: journal
xmp:pdf:Keywords: The volcanic hazards simulation,Education,Role-play,Simulation,Volcanic hazards,Emergency management,Communication competence,Risk communication
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:ae6c9244-f8a4-4362-9721-a28e4dcefdb6
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:571ebf60-99f7-438c-b4bd-ca596425d627
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:ae6c9244-f8a4-4362-9721-a28e4dcefdb6
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-1b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2015-04-16T05:41:04+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 1
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://www.aiim.org/pdfa/ns/id/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfaid
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/A ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Part of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: part
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Integer
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Amendment of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: amd
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: conformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmp
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Basic
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: exterBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction
Background
  Previous studies
  Basic design of the volcanic hazards simulation
Methods I. Theoretical framework
  Motivation
  Cognitive load
  Organisational behaviour
  Iterative design research – identifying and manipulating design variables
  Communication competence
Methods II. Evaluation of the volcanic hazards simulation
  Study participants
  Data collection
    Observations
    Interviews
    Communication assessment
  Data analysis
Results & discussion: evolution of the volcanic hazards simulation
  Pre-simulation preparation
    Results
    Discussion
  The pace of the simulation
    Results
    Discussion
  Role assignment
    Results
    Discussion
  Structuring communication & teamwork tasks
    Results
    Discussion
  Improving Students’ communication competence
    Results
    Discussion
  Improving Students’ transferable skills for the professional sector and volcanic crisis management
  Limitations of the study
Conclusions and recommendations
Appendixes
  Appendix 1. Instruments used
    Appendix 1A. Iteration 1 post-interview questions
    Appendix 1B. Iteration 2 post-questionnaire
    Appendix 1C. Iteration 3 and 4 post-questionnaire (feedback part)
    Appendix 1D. SPCC (McCroskey and McCroskey 1988)
  Appendix 2. Role questionnaire
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgements
Author details
References
Page 1
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12
DOI 10.1186/s13617-015-0030-1
RESEARCH  Open Access
Training in crisis communication and volcanic
eruption forecasting: design and evaluation of
an authentic role-play simulation
Jacqueline Dohaney1,3*, Erik Brogt1,2, Ben Kennedy1,3, Thomas M Wilson1,3 and Jan M Lindsay4
Abstract
We present an interactive, immersive, authentic role-play simulation designed to teach tertiary geoscience students
in New Zealand to forecast and mitigate a volcanic crisis. Half of the participating group (i.e., the Geoscience Team)
focuses on interpreting real volcano monitoring data (e.g., seismographs, gas output etc.) while the other half of the
group (i.e., the Emergency Management Team) forecasts and manages likely impacts, and communicates emergency
response decisions and advice to local communities. These authentic learning experiences were aimed at enhancing
upper-year undergraduate students’ transferable and geologic reasoning skills. An important goal of the simulation was
specifically to improve students’ science communication through interdisciplinary team discussions, jointly prepared,
and delivered media releases, and real-time, high-pressure, press conferences.
By playing roles, students experienced the specific responsibilities of a professional within authentic organisational
structures. A qualitative, design-based educational research study was carried out to assess the overall student experience
and self-reported learning of skills. A pilot and four subsequent iterations were investigated.
Results from this study indicate that students found these role-plays to be a highly challenging and engaging learning
experience and reported improved skills. Data from classroom observations and interviews indicate that the students
valued the authenticity and challenging nature of the role-play although personal experiences and team dynamics
(within, and between the teams) varied depending on the students’ background, preparedness, and personality.
During early iterations, observation and interviews from students and instructors indicate that some of the goals of the
simulation were not fully achieved due to: A) lack of preparedness, B) insufficient time to respond appropriately, C)
appropriateness of roles and team structure, and D) poor communication skills. Small modifications to the design of
Iterations 3 and 4 showed an overall improvement in the students’ skills and goals being reached.
A communication skills instrument (SPCC) was used to measure self-reported pre- and post- communication competence
in the last two iterations. Results showed that this instrument recorded positive shifts in all categories of self-perceived
abilities, the largest shifts seen in students who participated in press conferences. Future research will be aimed
at adapting this curricula to new volcanic and earthquake scenarios.
Keywords: The volcanic hazards simulation; Education; Role-play; Simulation; Volcanic hazards; Emergency
management; Communication competence; Risk communication
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:jdohaney@gmail.com"] jdohaney@gmail.com
1Geoscience Education Research Group, The University of Canterbury,
Christchurch, New Zealand
3Department of Geological Sciences, The University of Canterbury,
Christchurch, New Zealand
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Dohaney et al.; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 2 of 26
Introduction
During natural hazards crises, geoscientists and emer-
gency managers work together to assess the scientific,
commercial, environmental, political and cultural interests
of their community (Fiske 1984; Voight 1990). Events such
as the 1985 Nevada Del Ruiz lahar (Sigurdsson and Carey
1986), the 1991–1992 eruptions of Pinatubo (e.g., Tayag
et al. 1996),  ash impacts of the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull,
Iceland eruptions (Harris et al. 2012) and the 2009
L’Aquila Earthquake (Jordan et al. 2011) highlight the
difficult and crucial role that scientists play in disaster
communication and mitigation. Effective communication
is important during volcanic crises (IAVCEI Subcommit-
tee for Crisis Protocols 1999; Haynes et al. 2007) and has
been identified as a key disaster risk reduction practice
(a.k.a.,  skill or competency) (Integrated Research on
Disaster Risk (IRDR) 2011).
The geoscience and engineering community have long
recognized the deficit of quality teamwork and commu-
nication skills in their graduates (Dannels 2002; Heath
2000; 2003; Ireton et al. 1996; McMasters and Matsch
1996; Sageev and Romanowski 2001; Seat et al. 2001).
These competency gaps in geoscience and engineering
students specifically deal with information-sharing, cooper-
ation, as well as ethical decision-making and behaviour 
(Meier et al. 2000). To acquire and perfect these skills, re-
search suggests students need to practice them in au-
thentic scenarios (Cox et al. 2012).
In this paper, we report on and discuss the iterative de-
sign of the Volcanic Hazards Simulation (i.e., an authentic,
scenario-based role-play simulation) which was designed
with the explicit purpose of teaching the skills and con-
cepts necessary to predict and mitigate a volcanic eruption
(Table 1). Our research aims focused on the evaluation
of the simulation using a design-based research method
(Barab and Squire 2004; Edelson 2002; Sandoval and
Bell 2004). Design-based research provides a flexible, inter-
connected, complex line of inquiry that is required to
understand the environment, input, social dynamics and
outputs of complex learning activities (Brown 1992). The
design method is guided by theoretical and practical con-
siderations and supported by student and instructor
feedback in order to develop a learning activity which
challenges students’ knowledge and skills, but does not
overwhelm them to the point of failure.
Background
The effectiveness of role-play and simulation for learning
has been reported in a number of studies (e.g.,  DeNeve
and Heppner 1997; van Ments 1999).  They have been
Table 1 Learning Goals of the Volcanic Hazards Simulation
1a. Prior to the simulation, students should be able to....  1b. After the simulation, students should be able to...
1. Describe and explain the variety of volcanic hazards associated with
different types of volcanism.
2. Read and interpret geological and topographical maps. 
1. Observe volcanic monitoring data and social media in ‘real-time’, record
observations and communicate these observations to a team (orally and
in writing).
3. List, describe and explain volcanic monitoring data types and  2. Collaborate within a team, by using multiple streams of data in
interpretation of these data.  ‘real-time’ to develop a working-model (inclusive of scientific and
4. Explain how different monitoring data go together to form a ‘working
model’ of what’s happening in the volcano.
5. Describe the New Zealand Volcanic Alert levels. 
social-economic data) together in order to: a.) assess the current state
of volcanic activity; b.) identify major changes in volcanic activity;
c.) judge if changing conditions threaten the human population; d.) use
a-c to assign appropriate GNS alert levels and e.) respond to
6. Describe the basic duties of the GNS and Emergency Management community concerns.
teams during a crisis. 
3. Estimate and illustrate the distribution of volcanic products (e.g., volcanic
ash) based on the eruptive style (column height and explosivity) in order
to create volcanic hazard maps using geological and socio-political map
data (i.e., geology map, geological history and contoured topographic
map).
4. Estimate the impact to social and political sectors based on the
distribution and style of volcanic activity, given the alert level of the
volcano in question. Respond to crises (in a timely manner) in order to
mitigate the impact before/during/and after a volcanic disaster.
5. Communicate effectively (orally and written) within your team and to the
other teams and to the public (newsfeed) in order to effectively handle any
possible volcanic threat. These are assessed by: a.) press conferences
(questions and responses); b.) effective group discussions; c.) media
releases; d.) volcanic impact reports and e.) effective inter-agency (between
GNS and Emergency Management) conversations and meetings.
6. Explain the importance of a.) Scientists and Emergency Managers
responsibilities, agendas and expertise; b.) Team structures, hierarchy
and protocols; c.) External agencies that assist Emergency Managers; and
d.) The public’s concerns during a simulated volcanic crisis.
Page 3
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 3 of 26
Table 2 Role-play scenarios1 and associated design
variables
Scenarios  Design variables
Students will practice…  Content/Scenarios:
Simple scenarios
Complex2 scenarios 
Design a simple (usually linear) narrative
that aims at accomplishing few, learning
goals.
Design a complex narrative that aims
at many inter-related goals (affective,
cognitive and skills-based).
Role/job behaviour Include scenarios (structured or
unstructured) that focus on the need for
appropriate/authentic behaviour.
Applied scenarios Design a narrative with scenarios
designed for students to apply familiar
cognitive and skills-based knowledge.
New (exploratory) scenarios Design a narrative that is meant to
introduce ideas/concepts/skills/topics to
students.
Sensitive/controversial topics Include scenarios that create conflict or
require role-players to explain or defend
sensitive topics.
The different sides of a
viewpoint 
Students are required on more than one
role, at different times to see both sides
of a perspective.
Ambiguous or ‘scripted’
scenarios 
Ambiguity of the information requires
(or does not require) students to
produce/or imagine the appropriate
actions or attitudes.
Un-aided or supportive
scenarios 
Instructors/participants are asked to
support role-players; step-in to help;
or leave participants to their own
decision-making.
“Best practices”  Include introduction of scenarios to
practice specific best practices of
discipline-based or transferable skills.
in particular
circumstances… 
Logistics:
Static (controlled) or dynamic Outcomes of the role-play are either
conditions  static (structured, controlled) or dynamic
(semi-structured to unstructured or
open-ended).
Under time constraints Time/pace is controlled and allotted to
specific tasks (more time, or less time).
No time constraints Tasks are not allotted time constraints.
‘Stop-and-go’, or continuous Role play occurs continuously, or is
conditions  periodically interrupted in order to let
players reflect or rest.
Multi-tasking and/or Task
delegation 
Require players to be presented with
several tasks at once, requiring them to
multi-task or delegate the task to another
player.
Relying on oneself, or others Role-players are set in an independent
to achieve an outcome or dependent (group) scenarios.
Public or private scenarios Roles are required to play-out scenarios in
a (range of) public or in private (one-on-
one with instructors, tutors or in pairs). 
Table 2 Role-play scenarios1 and associated design
variables (Continued)
while playing (in)…  Roles:
‘Real-life’ roles  Include roles in the simulation that
values, agenda and responsibilities are
realistic.
Themselves Include roles that purpose is to act out
personally-driven agendas, attitudes or
emotions.
‘Real-life’ Role hierarchies Include roles within an organized
structure that is near-real life.
Inter-Role interactions Include roles and scenarios that focus
on informal and formal interactions and
behavior.
1Compiled from Van Ments (1999) and Blake (1987) with additions from the
results of this study.
2Bolded items were identified as being relevant to the design of the Volcanic
Hazards Simulation.
found to require more active participation from students
than traditional, lecture-based teaching techniques and
intend to teach practical and theoretical skills that are
transferable to different future situations (e.g., Lunce 2006;
Roth and Roychoudhury 1993). In this section, we define
role-play, simulation, previous studies and outline the basic
design of the Volcanic Hazards Simulation.
Previous studies
We define ‘simulation’ as a learning experience that occurs
within an imaginary or virtual system or world (van Ments
1999) and ‘role-play’ as the importance and interactivity of
roles in pre-defined scenarios (Errington 2011; Errington
1997). Research shows that role-play and simulation im-
prove student attitudes towards learning (DeNeve and
Heppner 1997; Livingstone 1999; Shearer and Davidhizar
2003) and interpersonal interactions (Blake 1987; van
Ments 1999; Shearer and Davidhizar 2003), generic trans-
ferable skills (problem-solving and decision-making skills
(Errington 1997; Barclay et al. 2011); communication skills
(Bales 1976; Hales and Cashman 2008; van Ments 1999);
and teamwork skills (Maddrell 1994; Harpp and Sweeney
2002)), as well as discipline-specific knowledge (DeNeve
and Heppner 1997; Livingstone 1999) and volcanic
eruption forecasting skills (Hales and Cashman 2008;
Harpp and Sweeney 2002).
This simulation is a capstone activity emulating and
integrating pedagogical elements (Table 2) from many of
the above studies. The research here shows how a
design-based approach can be used to iteratively im-
prove and assess a simulation where student learning is
a product of many elements. Table 2 lists the scenarios,
settings, conditions and accompanying design variables
that can be used in any role-play and the italicized parts
of table were all identified as being relevant in the design
of the Volcanic Hazards Simulation.
Page 4
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 4 of 26
Basic design of the volcanic hazards simulation
Our original design of the simulation was based on Harpp
and Sweeney’s (2002) Eruption Simulation. Multiple vol-
canic monitoring datasets were researched and ‘streamed’
in real-time and were presented in several labeled tabs on
a custom-designed website interface (Figure 1). These data
sets included: seismic activity, ground deformation, visual
surveillance of eruptions (including imagery and auditory
data), ash distribution and thickness, volcanic gases (CO2
and SO2
), weather conditions, and social media. We adapted
the Eruption Simulation to focus more specifically on
the roles, protocols and challenges from an authentic New
Zealand geoscience and emergency management perspective.
Our understanding of these roles and protocols was
obtained via interviews and consultation with volcanic
hazards professionals at the Institute of Geological and Nu-
clear Sciences (GNS Science) and the Civil Defence and
Emergency Management sector (CDEM) of New Zealand.
It should be noted here that emergency management
protocols, roles and responsibilities of scientists, cultural
and societal expectations, and other important aspects
of disaster management are unique to each nation and set-
ting. This simulation models the New Zealand organisa-
tional structure and responsibilities, largely because the
students who participate are potential future employees. 
A review of the New Zealand emergency management
paradigm can be found in Britton and Clark (2000) and
Hudson-Doyle et al., (this issue).
The Tongariro Volcanic Complex (e.g.,  Cole 1978;
Hobden et al. 1999) was chosen as the host-volcano as it
is a primary field site for the student participants enrolled
in a 4th year physical volcanology field trip (see Table 3:
Pilot, Iteration 2 and 3). As modelled in Eruption Simu-
lation (Harpp and Sweeney 2002), the volcanic activity
progresses from a quiescent stage, through small
eruptions (i.e., ‘unrest’) concluding with a very large
event, based on the 1991 Mt Pinatubo eruptions (e.g.,
Wolfe and Hoblitt 1996).  This eruption scenario was
chosen because there was existing volcanic monitoring
data available for streaming the data ‘real-time’,  it pro-
gresses through forecasting stages (which can be denoted
by precursors that students could identify),  and results
in a ‘blockbuster’  climax (which is exciting to the
participants).
The simulation consists of a series of complex, intercon-
nected team tasks. One team focuses on recording, pro-
cessing and interpreting the monitoring data mentioned
above, while the other manages and mitigates the effects
of volcanic eruptions on local communities. This requires
effective use of the students’ cognitive skills (Bloom et al.
Figure 1 Web interface of the volcanic hazards simulation. The Volcanic Hazards Simulation webpage includes tabs with streaming data (top
left of the screen) and graphs (lower left), a social media ‘Newsfeed’ (right), and a play/pause function (top right).
Page 5
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 5 of 26
Table 3 Volcanic hazards simulation data collection summary
Pilot (2010) Iteration 1 (2010) Iteration 2(2011) Iteration 3(2012)  Iteration 4(2012)
n of students 12  27  26  23  20
n of instructors 5  7  5  7  6
n of teams  1  3  2  2  2
Data collected observations
(written) 
observations
(video-taped) 
observations
(written) 
observations (video-taped) observations
(video-taped)
post-interviews
(unstructured) 
post-interviews
(structured)
Appendix 1A 
post-questionnaire post-questionnaire Appendix 1C
Appendix 1B 
post-questionnaire
Appendix 1C
n = 8; 3 instructors, n = 22 post-interview n = 26
5 students with 2 instructors
(unstructured) 
n = 22 Pre-post SPCC (Self-perceived n = 20 Pre-post
communication competence scale) SPCC (Appendix 1D)
Appendix 1D
Activity was
embedded in a …  field course lecture course field course field course  lecture course
1956; Isaacs 1996; Lord and Baviskar 2007), and effective
communication within the teams and between the two
teams and to the local communities. For example, one
task might require the students to weigh and judge the
impacts of a volcanic event (e.g., an ash-producing eruption,
which deposits ash onto road networks), and evaluate which
impact(s) are of greater priority. The simulation is typically
run in a single 4 to 6-hour session with between 15 and 40
students. At various stages during the simulation, injects are
placed to trigger group tasks. The target audience for
the simulation is upper-year undergraduates (300-level)
and postgraduates (400-level and Masters) geoscience
and hazards management students. The simulation is
assessed slightly differently in each course within which
it is offered; typically it comprises 5-10% of the final
course mark. Suggestions for assessment can be found
in the Instruction manual (Files can be found on the
VHUB website; [URL: "https://vhub.org/resources/3395"] https://vhub.org/resources/3395).
Over a three year period from 2010 to 2012 we have
developed and adapted the simulation in an iterative
process guided by a design-based method and educa-
tional theory and practices to achieve the desired learn-
ing goals (Table 1).
Methods I. Theoretical framework
The design of the simulation was guided by three main
areas of science education and educational psychology
research:
1. Motivational theories, and in particular the concept
of subjective task value (e.g., Eccles and Wigfield
2002; Eccles 2005; Ryan and Deci 2000);
2. Cognitive load theory (e.g., Chandler and Sweller
1991; Sweller et al. 1998);
3. Team and group behaviours (e.g., Michaelsen and
Sweet 2008; Turner 2014) and organisational theory
(e.g., Argote et al. 2000) 
In the later iterations of the simulation we also focused
on the development and assessment of communication
skills and utilised research from the risk communication
literature to guide our design process (e.g., Morgan et al.
2002; Todesco 2012; Tully 2007).
Motivation
An educational psychology concept relevant to our design
is the theory of motivation. At its simplest level, motiv-
ation is to strive for something. An individual’s motiva-
tions in educational endeavours primarily stem from
feelings of recognition, responsibility, personal growth, au-
tonomy and overcoming challenges (Beard 1972). Situated
learning experiences include authentic contexts, activities,
multiple roles and perspectives, supportive collaborative
construction of knowledge leading to motivating and ef-
fective means of teaching complex tasks (Herrington and
Oliver 1995).  If the learning activity is realistic and the
tasks are perceived as personally useful, each student will
weigh and associate value (consciously or subconsciously)
in participating as part of his or her long term academic
and professional development (Eccles and Wigfield 2002;
Eccles 2005). The design components that were most con-
cerned with aspects of motivation were the perceived
challenge and authenticity of the tasks, roles and social
interactions.
Cognitive load
The theory of how an individual manages a set of tasks
in their working memory is referred to as cognitive load
theory (Chandler and Sweller 1991; Sweller 2003). Re-
search shows that when students cope with learning
tasks many intrinsic and extrinsic factors affect motiv-
ation, perceptions and performance (Eccles and Wigfield
2002; Matsumoto and Sanders 1988).  Characteristics
of the task itself such as the level of complexity (van
Merriënboer et al. 2006; Kirschner et al. 2009), perceived
Page 6
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 6 of 26
difficulty (Kuhl and Blankenship 1979; Slade and Rush
1991),  length of the task (Peterson and Peterson, 1959)
and task interconnectivity (van Merriënboer et al. 2006)
all affect the cognitive load of a given learning activity.
Authentic, complex learning tasks are often over-
whelming for novice learners (i.e.,  students who are
learning a new concept or skill; van Merriënboer and
Sweller 2005), as they commonly require the learner to
incorporate multiple tasks which are interconnected.
The design components of the simulation that were
most concerned with aspects of cognitive load were
those developed to manage the pace of the simulation,
and the preparation of students so that the tasks presented
were not overwhelming.
Organisational behaviour
Another major influence in our design stemmed from
management and organisational studies involving team-
based learning and performance. As a complex simulation,
the workings of the learning activity are heavily influenced
by the behaviour of individuals within an interactive team
environment. There are several key interdependent ele-
ments that an effective team must have: 1) team members
must be aware of and share task and value-based goals
(Chou et al. 2008); 2) team members must be worthy of
trust (trustworthiness) and show trust for other members
(trustfulness) (Webber 2002; Chou et al. 2008);  and 3)
people need to feel satisfied by the other members work
(Chou et al. 2008) which results in a joint potency or belief
in the team (Campion et al. 1996). Negative team behav-
iour arises when there is a substantial rift in any of the
above elements. The design components concerned with
team dynamics were preparing students for the teamwork
skills needed (through preparation activities), structuring,
and clarifying the tasks presented so that students could
tackle the challenge in a manageable way.
Iterative design research – identifying and manipulating
design variables
Design-based research (‘design experiment’  or ‘develop-
ment research’) is theoretically framed, empirical research
of learning and teaching based on particular designs
for instruction (Barab and Squire 2004; Sandoval and
Bell 2004; Edelson 2002).  Design-based research pro-
vides a flexible, interconnected, complex line of inquiry
that is required to understand the environment, input,
social dynamics and outputs of the simulation (Brown
1992) and allows the participants’  behaviour (actions,
decisions) and their perceptions of these behaviours to
be incorporated into the development of the learning
activity (e.g., Barab and Squire 2004). We adopted this
approach, as the simulation’s design was new and its
effects were untested. 
Like other design-based projects, the simulation aimed
to achieve multiple goals and the evaluation research
component of this project was aimed at enabling students
to better achieve the intended learning goals (Table 1).
Because of the complex nature of the simulation, each
iterative design modification decision was a comprom-
ise between the scenario authenticity and the learning
goals of the simulation. Figure 2 shows the evolution of
the design foci throughout the different iterations of
the simulation.
Communication competence
Research shows that the use of methods such as role-
playing, modeling, coaching, rehearsal, reinforcement and
feedback, enable individuals to improve their communica-
tion competence (Richmond et al. 2013). Feedback, mod-
eling, and rehearsal are all integral to the simulation and it
became increasingly clear that communication competence
was vital to the success of the simulation. Our understand-
ing of communication competence and communication
apprehension was guided by the work of McCroskey (e.g.,
McCroskey et al. 1977; McCroskey 1982). McCroskey and
McCroskey (1988) investigated communication compe-
tence through self-reported evaluation of one’s ability to
communicate (self-perceived communication competence).
Communication draws on content knowledge and inter-
personal skills to convey information appropriately. They
developed a self-perceived communication competence
scale (SPCC) to obtain information concerning how compe-
tent people feel when communicating (McCroskey and
McCroskey 1988). The instrument considers several dimen-
sions of communication: communication contexts (public,
meeting, group, and dyad (or pair)) and receivers of the
communication (strangers, acquaintances, and friends).
Previous research has shown that a person’s self-perceived
communication competence is substantially correlated to
and a reliable measure of actual communication compe-
tence (McCroskey and McCroskey 1988).
Methods II. Evaluation of the volcanic hazards
simulation
The many different (interacting) variables at play in the
simulation required careful data collection and analysis.
We opted for a mixed-methods approach, involving both
qualitative and quantitative data and analysis, to generate
a rich data set to minimise the effects of confounds and
biases in any one data collection method.
Study participants
Data were collected from both facilitators (i.e., instructors)
and students in the simulation. Student participants
(n = 108) were recruited from third and fourth year
physical volcanology and hazards management courses
which hosted the volcanic hazards simulation as part
Page 7
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 7 of 26
Figure 2 The Volcanic hazards simulation design and iteration evolution. The development of the simulation focused on three major
components: reducing the individual and collective cognitive load of the students (Iteration 1 and 2), increasing role and team authenticity
(Iteration 1 to 3), and improving the students’ communication skills (Iteration 3 and 4).
of their curricula. They were mixed cohorts of American
study-abroad students (Pilot, Iteration 2, 3) and New
Zealand students (Iteration 1–4) who attended the
University of Canterbury. Students ranged in age, gen-
der, nationality, race and geosciences background. All
students were encouraged to participate, but were told
explicitly that the study was confidential and that if
they opted not to participate, they would not be nega-
tively affected in any way. Instructors and facilitators of
the simulation were study participants in the sense that
they provided data through formal interviews as well as
informal discussions with the research team. Informed
consent was obtained from all participants in line with
the University of Canterbury Human Ethics protocols.
Data collection
The data collection is summarised in Table 2. In order
to ascertain if our design was effective, we collected and
analysed student feedback (through interviews and ques-
tionnaires) and behaviour (self-reported through feedback
and questionnaires and observed by the researchers). This
allowed us to characterise the successes or failure of our
design which was determined through observed individual
and team positive behaviours (sophisticated decision-
making and effective communication and teamwork
strategies) and self-reported indications of engagement,
enjoyment and changed perceptions. All iterations 
included a short demographic questionnaire which asked
students basic questions about their nationality, level of
study, gender, age, and geology background.
Observations
We collected approximately 37 hours of observation foot-
age including 17 hours of simulation activities and 20
hours of pre-simulation activities such as lectures and
group exercises. Data collection was overt (Jorgensen
1989): Observers were introduced to the students and
their purpose for being present was explained. Almost
all of the iterations were done in a multi-room setting
and required multiple observers. Observation summary
notes (explained in more detail, below) were taken in
all iterations, with increments of approximately 2 minute
‘checks’.  Written observations were relied upon for the
Pilot and Iteration 2 (as the video files were damaged dur-
ing the Feb 22, 2011 Christchurch earthquake).
Observations of the Pilot were aimed at reviewing stu-
dent and instructor behaviour with regard to the core ele-
ments of the simulation pedagogy. Several questions were
set out that would help us characterise the learning
experience: 1. What is the simulation trying to achieve? 2.
What are the individual students’ behaviours? 3. How are
the students behaving as a team? 4. How are the instruc-
tors behaving? 5. Are they supporting the learning goals
Page 8
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 8 of 26
that were set out? 6. What elements support learning and
what elements may be detrimental to learning?
Observations of the remaining iterations were more fo-
cused on specific design variables: 1. How does the pace
of the tasks and data streaming affect the success of the
simulation? 2. Are students prepared for the tasks pre-
sented to them? 3. Does the use of role-play positively
affect the student’s learning experience and ensure a suc-
cessful simulation? 4. Does the use and assignment of the
roles and structure of the teams ensure a successful simula-
tion? Are more/different roles needed? 5. How can the stu-
dent’s teamwork and communication skills be characterised?
For example: What elements of the simulation create learn-
ing opportunities for teamwork and communication? 6. Do
the instructors support learning in these new designs?
Interviews
Due to the exploratory nature of the Pilot, we used infor-
mal, unstructured interviews immediately following the
simulation to gather reflective experiences from both the
instructors and students. The interviews were in a focus
group format and some of the interviews were conducted
with the instructors present with the students. The two in-
terviews ranged from 10 to 25 minutes. There were sev-
eral open questions posed to the participants: 1. What do
you think went well? 2. What did not go so well? 3. What
can we improve on in the future? and 4. What would you
keep the same? Unscripted follow-up questions were used
to probe valuable lines of inquiry.
In Iteration 1 we used semi-structured one-on-one in-
terviews (see Appendix 1A).  The interview questions
were set out prior to the simulation. The topics in the
interview were aimed at deriving a student’s character-
isation of their experience (in their team, and assigned
role). The interviews (n = 22) were conducted by two re-
searchers (Dohaney and Hearne).  All of the interviews
were audio-recorded and transcribed later for analysis.
There were two feedback questionnaires designed for
this study. The questionnaires (refer to Appendix 1B for
Iteration 2 questionnaire (n = 26); and refer to Appendix
1C for Iteration 3 (n = 22) and 4 (n = 20)) were adminis-
tered directly following the simulation activities. Students
were given unlimited time to fill out the questionnaires.
The questions probed specific aspects of the pedagogy.
Our focus in Iteration 2 was to understand the effect of
the pace, the nature of role-play and the team structures.
Our focus in the questionnaires for Iteration 3 and 4 was
to gather final feedback and probe into the students’ per-
ceptions of how they communicated within the simulation.
Communication assessment
We used McCroskey and McCroskey’s (1988) self-perceived
communication competence instrument (12-item question-
naire; Appendix 1D) to develop baseline efficacies of 
students communication, and report whether there were
changes to their competence after participating in the simu-
lation. The simulation targeted and included examples of
the different communication situations (public, meetings),
aside from interpersonal communication (dyad) so we could
investigate how successful each element was in our design.
Data analysis
Written observation summaries of each iteration were inde-
pendently transcribed, collated, and analysed for specific
lines of inquiry and themes. The primary goal was to docu-
ment ‘what happened’ and assign a timeline to the student
behaviours with accompanying perceived successes and fail-
ures of individuals and the teams. These observations were
then correlated to the interview and questionnaire data.
The purpose of correlation is to match what we observed
and how the students perceived those circumstances.
Analysis of the interviews focused on assessing overall
student experiences and identifying quotations that were
representative of the range and majority of perceptions
and observed behaviour. Specifically, we aimed at charac-
terising the design variables that influenced the overall
success of the simulation and allowed students to achieve
the primary learning goals.
In the Pilot, due to a low number of participants (n = 8),
saturation (i.e., when data analysis reaches a point where
no new themes or insights emerge; Bowen 2008; Corbin
and Strauss 1990) was not achieved. However, based on
experience with data from the successive iterations, we
conclude that the feedback collected from the Pilot was
likely a representative sample.
With a larger number of participants, Iteration 1 allowed
us to explore the design and themes in more depth through
interview data. Thematic and response saturation for these
students was achieved through constant comparison of ori-
ginal themes that emerged from the Pilot, to each subse-
quent data set. In Iteration 1, analysis of the 22 interviews
began by characterising and grouping the responses to each
question posed; these were categorised based on the role of
the student, their team and matched to their observed
behaviour in the simulation. These results were later
collated and compared to and combined with the post-
questionnaire results from Iteration 2, 3, and 4).  The
subsequent iterations (2–4) themes were identified, sorted
and further refined with questionnaires. Data saturation
occurred for the specific themes (i.e., design variables), by
probing specific qualities of the simulations design and
the students’ perceptions of their experiences.
Results of the SPCC measure in Iteration 3 and 4 were
assessed based on the criteria set out by McCroskey and
McCroskey (1988; e.g., scoring, noted thresholds between
high and low categories, and reliability and validity). Indi-
vidual student’s pre and post-SPCC scores were consid-
ered and factors that may have contributed to changes in
Page 9
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 9 of 26
efficacy (before and after the simulation) were explored.
The small cohort numbers in Iterations 3 and 4 (n = 18
and 19, respectively) with differing treatments regarding
communication meant that an effect size and t-test statis-
tical analysis was not appropriate. Further study will allow
us to capture communication-focused data from larger
populations of students.
Results & discussion: evolution of the volcanic
hazards simulation
In this section we thematically present our results and dis-
cussion in a combined fashion. We do this for ease of
reading as results and discussions from one iteration are
relevant for other iterations. Excerpts indicate the iteration
from which the data was derived and the role the re-
spondent played. Note that excerpts are typical or majority
responses.
Generally, student feedback on the simulation experi-
ence illustrated that students valued its challenging na-
ture and authenticity although their personal experience
varied according to the roles they played and groups
they worked with. One student recalled the benefits of
the role-play itself: “I think it’s a really good simulation.
I think you get put in a position to make super import-
ant decisions and I think, with having all the different
teams and having to communicate with them in other
rooms. It really adds to the realistic aspects of it”. (Iteration
1, Group Controller).
Other students noted that they enjoyed taking on roles
that were new to them, this allowed them to explore new
topics and gain new perspectives: “… [this role] was dif-
ferent and it opened my eyes to a different perspective”
(Iteration 2, Ministry of Transport). Students reported an
ability to see the bigger picture and how their role fit into
it: “It was great for understanding how each small role is
vital to the bigger picture understanding and manage-
ment” (Iteration 2, Meteorologist).
From our observations and interviews, four key vari-
ables were found to be crucial for the success of the simu-
lation: 1. student pre-simulation preparation; 2. the pace
of the simulation; 3. role assignment; and 4. effectiveness
of the students’  teamwork and communication skills
(Table 4). The following sections describe each of these
variables, the theoretical underpinnings of the design, and
the instructor and student data which supports improve-
ment of the design to result in more successful simula-
tions. A summary of the design research and supporting
evidence is shown in Table 4.
Pre-simulation preparation
Results
In Table 1A we identified several fundamental concepts
and skills that students must bring with them into the
simulation in order to effectively play their roles and 
perform basic tasks included in the simulation. Because
items 3–6 in Table 1A were not likely to be covered in
previous geology courses, we anticipated this lack of
knowledge and created preparatory activities (i.e.,  add-
itional readings, lectures and exercises) for the Pilot to
give students the necessary background. The main pre-
paratory exercise was the Hazard Map Activity. Students
worked on creating a detailed volcanic hazards map from
the literature for the Tongariro Volcanic Complex. This
activity was designed to give students the needed back-
ground of the region, community, place names, landscape,
and geologic history of the volcano. They were also re-
quired to designate and explain hazard zones on their
maps with relevance to (and introduction to) the New
Zealand Volcanic Alert Levels (GeoNet 2014). In addition
to the Hazards Map activity, students were given a short
lecture with basic instructions on what to do during the
simulation.
Feedback from instructors and students in the Pilot in-
dicated that more ‘background’ was required to help stu-
dents communicate better and perform the simulation
tasks (e.g.,  Instructor quote, Table 4).  As a result, the
background lectures became more detailed. As the com-
plexity of the role-play increased (Iterations 1–4), student
feedback indicated the need for more preparation materials,
in particular in relation to the roles and responsibilities: “I
[would have liked] a better definition of the role expecta-
tions beforehand, the simple descriptions did not do much
for me” (Iteration 1, Public Information Officer).  This
resulted in a set of additional preparation materials which
accompany the simulation: the Student Library (contain-
ing additional geology and emergency management back-
ground readings) and Flow of Information Maps (see
Figure 3),  and Science Communication Best Practices
(see Section Improving Students’  Communication Com-
petence). Table 5 summarises the evolution of preparation
activities in the simulation.
In Iteration 1, the students were assigned roles and were
expected to research their job titles, organisation proto-
cols, and media release writing using online resources
(which we provided to them).  As a result of providing
preparation readings and instructive materials to the stu-
dents, the preparation-related feedback from Iteration 1
improved from the Pilot. Examples of improvement in-
cluded better quality and efficiency in the writing of media
releases and general awareness of what the roles and
teams were intended to do during the crisis.
To provide better expectations of role responsibilities,
team structure, and required skill sets we developed Role
Profiles. These were implemented in Iteration 3 and 4 and
were modelled after the New Zealand Civil Defence and
Emergency Management Role Maps used for professionals
(Ministry of Civil Defence and Emergency Management
2013). Each Role Profile includes the job’s purpose, duties,
Page 10
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 10 of 26
Table 4 Design variables and summary of results
Final design 
Theoretical-
underpinnings 
Representative
instructor quote(s) 
Representative
student quote(s)
Preparation
The preparation prior to
the simulation included
a sequence of learning
activities which prepared
students for what to expect,
and to review concepts
which were needed to
perform at their best 
Implemented several
preparation activities to
match the skills needed:
a. Student library
(content knowledge),
b. Role Profiles (roles
and responsibilities),
c. Science communication
best practices lecture
(improved communication skills) 
Provide scaffolding (Wood
et al. 1976) of the roles,
teams and geoscience
concepts needed through
preparation activities
completed prior to the
simulation to lessen
cognitive load (e.g.,
Chandler and Sweller
1991; Sweller et al. 1998)
and increase the students’
confidence 
“…The student’s needed
some more general
background to [volcanic]
hazards and to the
[geologic background of
the] volcano. If I had
been a real Press
[person], I would have
wondered what this is all
about. I would want
some type of
background from the
geologists on what
could happen at the
volcano, in the
beginning of the
‘unrest’… There was a
need for more
background” (Pilot,
Instructor 1)a 
Literature: “Yes the literature,
lectures all helped. I felt about
as prepared as I could have
been (given my lack of
experience in these situations)”
(Iteration 2, Volcanic Section
Manager)c
Roles: “The description of
the role was most helpful,
[I had a] clear understanding
of my role, responsibilities
and whom I needed to
communicate with”
(Iteration 4, Duty Manager)c
Pace
The pace of the simulation Reduced timeline (number
is defined as the time of days) Reduced number of
which students are given to eruptions Increased number
carry out a given number and length of pauses
of tasks: Speed and length
of streaming data, Pauses,
Number of eruptions and
academic tasks 
Managing the cognitive Fewer volcanic events: Not enough time to think:
load (see above) of the “We [the instructors] felt it “Yea, it should go slower.
students by providing the could have gone a little I mean just about when we
right number of and time slower and had a few less thought ‘there might be an
to perform the tasks. ‘events’. We had an awful eruption coming’, we would
Matching students skills lot of eruptions, but that think about it. And then, it
to the level of challenge is what actually happened would just happen… It didn’t
of the tasks (i.e., fast-paced at Pinatubo”
activities are more (Pilot, Instructor 1)a 
give us a time to anticipate or
think about it” (Pilot, Student 1)b
challenging) to optimise
the learning experience
(Csikszentmihalyi et al.
2005; Vygotsky 1978) 
Adding more pauses: Missed information: “Yea, it
“[The students] needed was really fast. I would go off
more pauses to convey and talk to one of the
what was going on. While [Emergency Management]
[streaming] was great to people and then I would come
‘keep the pressure’ on, back and there had been 2 cm
there were so many of ash and we would be so stuck
things happening” (Pilot, into what we were doing, that
Instructor 2)a  we would miss that” (Iteration 1,
Public Information Officer 1)b
Role assignment
Use of a role questionnaire Role Questionnaire, Flow
(self-reported geology of Information Maps,
interests and leadership, (Figure 3; i.e., Team structures)
communication abilities) and
other tools to match each
student to the right role. 
Role Profiles – to improve
knowledge of responsibilities
ahead of time 
To lessen the collective
cognitive load (via
workload division) (see
above) and provide
immersive experiences
(i.e., getting into the
learning experience; e.g.,
Lessiter et al. 2001) Role
identification (i.e., feeling
that they relate to that
role; sense of belonging
and commitment e.g.,
Handley et al. 2006) 
“The students used the
new roles to organize
themselves, handled the
pressure that was put on
them, and staying calm.”
(Pilot, Instructor 3)a 
Individual responsibilities:
“I loved that we had roles…
everyone had roles, they
knew what they were
supposed to be doing,
like where to draw the
line between you and your
mate” (Iteration 1, Welfare
Officer)b;
Helping students to focus:
“Yes playing roles was helpful
because we could focus just on
that job and understand it”
(Iteration 2, Public Information
Officer)c.
Dividing the workload:
“We were good at dividing
up the tasks and finishing
up our own responsibilities”
(Iteration 2, Ministry of Health)c
Page 11
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 11 of 26
Table 4 Design variables and summary of results (Continued)
Final design 
Theoretical-
underpinnings 
Representative
instructor quote(s) 
Representative
student quote(s)
Structured teamwork and communication:
Structure teamwork tasks
and model science
communication best
practices to increase
student autonomy and,
thus, ensure success
through increased
communication skills
capability and quality. 
Developed Challenge
questions which structured
the communication and
teamwork tasks (i.e., were
more timely and explicit)
Provided best practices to
students prior to the
simulation.
Added roles to improve
communication pathways
between the team. 
Provide task structure and
lessen the individual and
collective cognitive load
(see above).
Model (i.e., demonstrate)
science communication
best practices to increase
student efficacy (Kuhl and
Blankenship 1979),
teamwork skills, and
perceived communication
competence (McCroskey
and McCroskey 1988) of
the students. 
“I think the real good
thing was to see them
improve over the course
of the exercise, and the
importance of
communication and
delegation. At the start it
was chaos, but as they
got into their roles, they
got good at passing the
information to whom it
was needed.” (Pilot,
Instructor 1)a “…And the
three students who
acted as the [public
information managers],
they really built up
confidence over the
simulation” (Pilot,
Instructor 3)a 
Negative group dynamics:
“There were intense points
when everyone was talking
all at the same time. This
obviously made it impossible
to think and to make good
decisions” (Iteration 2,
Planning and Intelligence)c
Positive group dynamics:
“It was a real collaboration,
the leader didn’t just override
us, he/she considered our
opinions” (Iteration 2, Public
Information Officer)c
Communication improvement:
“[Our team] adapted. People
learned and towards the end
our communication had gotten
much better” (Iteration 3, Ash
Specialist)c
adata derived from instructor interviews; bfrom student interviews and focus groups; cfrom student questionnaires.
to which they report to, who they are responsible for, and
the key competencies (i.e., skills) needed. One of the Iter-
ation 4 students noted how the Role Profiles helped: “The
description of the role was most helpful, [I had a] clear
understanding of my role, responsibilities and whom I
needed to communicate with” (Iteration 4, Duty Manager).
In order to improve preparedness and match the prepar-
ation readings to the specific roles and responsibilities, we
created a Student Library. Several students reported finding
it helpful: “I think the literature was the most helpful because
it provided us with the necessary background information
for our roles” (Iteration 3, Department of Conservation).
The other preparation activities (i.e., lectures and Hazards
Map Activity) also helped students develop expectations for
their roles and tasks: “I felt very prepared. All my readings
and researching beforehand really helped as I then had a bet-
ter understanding of the team dynamics and the science”
(Iteration 3, Volcanology Section Manager).
In Iteration 2, the majority of students continued to
exhibit specific and general lack of preparedness that af-
fected their abilities to achieve the learning outcomes.
For example, students were unaware of the importance
and sensitivity of Alert Levels (i.e.,  the general conse-
quences of raising and lowering Alert Levels) and some
students could not perform the main tasks to which they
were assigned (e.g.,  the Ash Specialist could not draw
accurate ash maps and the Infrastructure Manager was
not aware of the main transport conduits of the North
Island of New Zealand). However, in Iterations 3 and 4,
by increasing the students’  prior knowledge through
preparation activities, we observed fewer examples of 
cognitive overload. Students who did the preparatory ac-
tivities reported feeling prepared in later iterations (e.g.,
“I felt very prepared. All my readings and researching
beforehand really helped as I then had a better under-
standing of the team dynamics and the science” (Iter-
ation 3, Volcanic Section Manager).
Discussion
In the early iterations of development, we observed that
some students did not possess the content and skills-based
knowledge needed for the simulation. Therefore, we in-
ferred that preparation was a crucial aspect of the overall
pedagogy, in supporting all of the learning goals. An effect-
ive approach is to prepare students by scaffolding the
discrete topics and skill sets prior to and during the simula-
tion. Scaffolds include all devices or strategies that support
students’  learning (Rosenshine and Meister 1992; Wood
et al. 1976). The support enables a learner to reduce their
cognitive loads and achieve their goals. Gradually, support
can be reduced as students learn to cope with increased
cognitive load (van Merriënboer et al. 2003). Preparation
activities also served motivational purposes: to further im-
prove a student’s self-efficacy (Schunk 1991) and to foster
positive expectations before participating in the simulation.
Despite implementing the pre-simulation preparation ac-
tivities, some of the students exhibited less geologic reason-
ing and content knowledge. We observed that this poorer
content knowledge inhibited sophisticated problem-solving
and synthesis skills needed to support the team’s complex
reasoning. In Iteration 4, this was evident when the team
discussing possible outcomes of the volcanic unrest needed
Page 12
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12
A. 
Page 12 of 26
B.
Figure 3 Flow of Information Maps. Caption: The roles, team structures, and ‘flow of information’ used in the volcanic hazards simulation.
A. The Geoscience (a.k.a., GNS Science) team, and B. The CDEM (Civil Defence and Emergency Management) team. Student quotes within the
manuscript are matched to the roles shown here.
to look-up the definition of ‘Plinian’  (i.e.,  a classification
term to describe a very large-scale eruption). The students’
lack of knowledge contributed to the team’s inability to cre-
ate a working hypothesis of the volcanic activity and an in-
structor was required to step in and help assist the group.
In conclusion, the team’s combined reasoning skills are im-
pacted by the level of preparation of some of the individual 
students. This led us to more closely explore role assign-
ment (Section Role Assignment).
The pace of the simulation
Results
The Pilot was largely improvised with little structure
(i.e.,  in roles, teams, tasks).  The pace of the Pilot was
Page 13
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 13 of 26
Table 5 History of preparation activities for the volcanic hazards simulation
Pilot  Iteration 1  Iteration 2
Time to prepare  Entire day prior, Activities posted
(on field trip) 1 week prior; online 
Entire day prior,
(on field trip)
Simulation was embedded in: Field Course Lecture course Field Course
Preparation Activities Hazards Map Hazards Map Activity Hazards Map Activity
Activity (Basic) (More detailed)
Lectures Lectures (course based) Lectures
Simulation Instructions
Role Specific materials 
Basic
N/A
Student Library
Flow of Information
Maps (i.e., Figure 3) 
No
No 
More Detailed
Very basic.
Students had to
research their own
online.
No
No 
Complex
Basic
descriptions of roles
Role Questionnaire
Yes, basic
No 
Iteration 3
Entire day prior
(on field trip)
Field Course
Hazards Map Activity
Lectures Science
Communication Best
Practices (Detailed)
Complex
Role Profiles
Role Questionnaire
Yes, detailed
Yes 
Iteration 4
Activities posted
1 week prior; online
Lecture Course
Hazards Map Activity
(half of the class)
Lectures (course-based)
Science Communication
Best Practices (Brief)
Complex
Role Profiles
Role Questionnaire
Yes, detailed
Yes
very quick, with a simulated day lasting about one mi-
nute in actual time. The pace of the simulation was de-
fined by the rate of the streaming data, the number and
length of pauses from monitoring tasks, and the number
of and spacing of events (e.g., volcanic eruptive events).
While it was our intention for the simulation to be
fast-paced, we did not want it to be so fast as to inhibit
students’ ability to react to the scenarios.
There were many suggestions from students and instruc-
tors on potential ways to decrease the pace and lessen the
overwhelming nature of the experience. In the Pilot, the
students interviewed said that the pace severely affected
their decision-making and their abilities to react to the
events occurring. During the Pilot, two ‘pauses’  were im-
provised by the instructors allowing students to take more
time to prepare and organise their thoughts and strategies
in order to make comprehensive and measured decisions.
For example, student-led working models of the volcano
and evacuation plans require multiple datasets to be
discussed, weighed, and scrutinised as a team and pre-
sented to a critical audience during press conferences.
These types of higher-level cognitive tasks require time
and careful consideration, leading to well thought out
decisions and actions. Never in any of the simulations
observed, did a student or team make drastically wrong
decisions.
Based on these observations and the feedback received
we slowed the pace by reducing the number of events
(from 30 to 26) and adding pauses (from 2 to 4) to allow
students more time to make quality decisions and com-
munications. However, even at a ‘slower’ pace, many other
students continued to struggle to ‘follow-along’,  causing
them to miss important events. One student explained
this: “Yea, it was really fast. I would go off and talk to one
of the [Emergency Management] people and then I would 
come back and there had been 2 cm of ash and we would
be so stuck into what we were doing, that we would miss
that” (Iteration 1, Public Information Officer 1).  Other
students suggested that the quality of their work was af-
fected. For example: “It was so rushed, sometimes, that it
was like “OK, someone grab a pen and just write some-
thing” ” (Iteration 1, Public Information Officer 2).
In Iteration 1, we observed and noticed from feedback
that the students could use more time when an event (i.e.,
an eruption) occurred, but not in-between (i.e.,  during
normal monitoring tasks) therefore we kept the streaming
speed the same for all subsequent iterations. Based on re-
sults from Iteration 1, we decreased the simulation run-
ning time by 24 days, reduced the number of events (from
26 to 24) and increased the number (from 4 to 6) and dur-
ation (from ~5-10 minutes to 10–20 minutes) of pauses.
Pauses were present after important events in order to
allow students to perform tasks. The number and length
of pauses were increased to allow students more time to
complete a task. In Iteration 2, pauses became a respite
from the quick pace’  moments to reflect, respond and
‘enjoy’: “[The simulation] flew by. I was shocked, espe-
cially after the eruptions started. The pauses were awe-
some!” (Iteration 2, Field Geologist); “It was always nice
to pause when something exciting happened” (Iteration
2, Ash Specialist).  However, several students indicated
that they continued to describe issues keeping up with
the simulation and its demands. Optimising the pace ul-
timately rested with assessing how much time students
needed to react to a given event. For example, one student
noted: “The compressed time period was good, but, maybe
more time was needed for processing each event. Maybe
pause after every event?” (Iteration 2, Meteorologist).
In Iteration 1 and 2, several students noted that they per-
formed ‘just fine’  under the circumstances: “It was good
Page 14
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 14 of 26
having a lot thrown at us” (Iteration 1, Welfare Officer) and
“I thought it was perfect for me, because I was kept think-
ing the whole time, but not uncomfortably overwhelmed”
(Iteration 2, Ministry of Economic Development). This in-
dicates that some students’ skills were matched to the tasks
that they needed to carry out.
In the final design of the simulation (used in Iteration
3 and 4) we reduced the number of events (from 26 to
24) and increased the duration (to 15–30 minutes) of
pauses to provide more time for adequate reasoning.
When asked specifically how the pace affected their
learning and their abilities during the simulation, fewer
students (7 of 27, compared to previous iterations) stated
they felt they needed more time. We observed that the
new pace used in Iteration 3 and 4 allowed the students
(20 of 27) to enjoy the excitement of the simulation and
cope with the number of tasks and respond accord-
ingly. Many students noted ‘the excitement’:  “It kept
the adrenaline going and it was exciting” (Iteration 3,
Group Controller);  “… the feeling of being thrown into
the thick of it, added to the overall experience” (Iteration
2, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry).
Discussion
Authentic educational activities can be very powerful
learning and motivational tools. We set out to design an
exercise which was fast-paced and immersive, where stu-
dents react and make decisions under pressure, in a
manner similar to professionals during a volcanic crisis. In
order to ascertain if the pace was optimal or detrimental
to student learning, we explored how the pace affected
their behaviours and perceptions.
Flow theory states that a task (or set of tasks) in which
the level of challenge is matched to the individual’s skills
and capabilities can lead to highly motivating, immersive
experiences (Csikszentmihalyi et al. 2005). Cognitive load
theory suggests that an individual’s working memory can
store seven elements, but can manipulate only two to four
elements at any given time (Kirschner et al. 2011; Sweller
et al. 1998). When the processing capacity of a student’s
working memory is exceeded, their cognitive system might
become overloaded by the high number of interacting ele-
ments needed to be processed (e.g., Paas et al. 2003). This
manifests itself as incapacity to react to the situation ef-
fectively (i.e., self-reported or observed qualities of being
‘overwhelmed’ or ‘stressed out’) resulting in poor perform-
ance. By increasing the time that students were given to
carry out the tasks, we decreased the cognitive load of the
individual student and the collective cognitive load of the
team. In conclusion, the final design included longer
pauses and fewer volcanic events (24 in total) to pro-
vide optimal time for reasoning, reactions and decision-
making. 
Role assignment
An integral aspect of the design was the authenticity of
the roles and teams (i.e., real life science and emergency
management protocols, structures, and responsibilities
during volcanic crises; modelled after New Zealand roles
and teams). These were fundamental to creating an au-
thentic experience and were an explicit learning goal to
introduce and reinforce how these disciplines interact
during a crisis. The final team and role structures are
shown in Figure 3A, and B. These team structures were
included in the instructions in a Flow of Information Map,
which illustrated the roles, teams, and communication
pathways. A more detailed description of communication
and team dynamics is given in Section Structuring Com-
munication & Teamwork Tasks.
Results
In the Pilot, there were no pre-defined roles. We observed
that in order to cope with the stress, the students self-
organized into roles that included: the ‘Data’  people and
the ‘Press’  people. Prior to students self-organizing, the
group was visibly unorganized and inefficient. Students
did not have defined tasks, responsibilities and therefore
students did not lead or divide the workload to accom-
plish the tasks. The simulation was in danger of getting off
track and the instructors were required to intervene to
help students delegate tasks and responsibilities. These
observations were the primary motivation for introducing
a structured role-play.
Role-play related feedback collected from the remaining
iterations described how students valued the role and
team structure of the exercise. This is highlighted by the
following themes and representative excerpts.
1. Individual responsibilities: “I loved that we had
roles… everyone had roles, they knew what they were
supposed to be doing, like where to draw the line
between you and your mate” (Iteration 1, Welfare
Officer), and dividing the workload: “We were good at
dividing up the tasks and finishing up our own
responsibilities” (Iteration 2, Ministry of Health);
2. Role immersion: “it was good having different teams
and everyone having a different role so that you
could really, like, get into one aspect” (Iteration 1,
Volcano geophysicist); and
3. Helping students to focus and stay on task: “Yes
playing roles was helpful because we could focus just
on that job and understand it” (Iteration 2, Public
Information Officer).
Beginning in Iteration 1, we observed that some roles
were more ‘pivotal’  than others (i.e.,  those that greatly
affected the success of the simulation). Pivotal roles were
those of leadership (Group Controller, Volcanic Section
Page 15
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 15 of 26
Manager),  those responsible for more quantitative tasks
(Ash Specialist), and for the communication links or liai-
sons between the teams (Public Information Managers, In-
frastructure Manager and the Duty Manager). In order to
assign students to roles matched to their personality and
skills, we designed and implemented a Role Assignment
Questionnaire (Iteration 2; Appendix 2),  which asked
students about their background, interests and comfort
with leadership and communication situations. The main
criteria of interest in the Role Questionnaire were their
self-reported abilities to lead, perform quantitative tasks,
and communicate (i.e., qualities of the pivotal roles). In-
structors used the questionnaire to help assign roles that
challenged students appropriately, but ensured that the
exercise ran smoothly, although they acknowledged that
they did not always succeed.
Students in pivotal roles made major decisions and
acted as the bridges for information to flow efficiently
between the teams. These tasks are crucial working parts
of the simulation. These roles were carefully assigned in
Iteration 3 and 4 and resulted in observed and self-
reported positive team dynamics (e.g.,  Iteration 4, “We
all provided our individual ideas of events, contributing
to all aspects” (Iteration 4, Infrastructure Manager)).
The team leaders had many responsibilities. One team
leader recalled all the tasks that he/she needed to per-
form: “[I had to] make final decisions, to hold meetings
and synthesize the various datasets, to keep the team or-
ganized and running smoothly, to communicate with the
media and the public officials” (Iteration 2, Volcanic Sec-
tion Manager). We observed that the students assigned
to pivotal roles became overwhelmed during the simula-
tions and we concluded that there were too many tasks
for students in some roles to carry out simultaneously.
A Duty Manager role was implemented in Iterations
3 and 4, to help manage and delegate tasks (Ministry
of Civil Defence and Emergency Management 2002).
This new role manages the staff and controls the infor-
mation going to the Group Controller (the Emergency
Management team leader). They share the responsibilities
previously assigned to the Group Controller, thereby
decreasing the overall stress of this position. The instruc-
tors involved in Iterations 3 and 4 noticed a significant
change in the effectiveness of communication in the
Emergency Management team following the introduction
of this role.
One element of the role-play that we did not anticipate
would have a negative impact was the level to which stu-
dents became immersed in their roles in the simulation.
The drawback to role immersion is that some students be-
came introspective and ‘put their blinders on’: “It helped
me learn more about my specific role, but I did not know
what the others did” (Iteration 2, Volcano Geophysicist)
and “I did well at focusing on my specific role, but I didn’t 
do well at thinking about other people’s roles” (Iteration 4,
Department of Conservation).
The data collected for this study does suggest that many
students noted the phenomena of role immersion (i.e., get-
ting into the learning experience; e.g., Lessiter et al. 2001)
and role identification (i.e., feeling that they relate to that
role or sense of belonging and commitment e.g., Handley
et al. 2006). For example: “… it was easy to slip into the
role for the game” (Iteration 3, Department of Conserva-
tion); “People got really into their roles” (Iteration 2, Public
Information Officer); [My role] just seemed to fit naturally
with me and I sort of eased my way in and ‘got stuck right
in’, as the activity increased” (Iteration 2, Visual Surveil-
lance). One of the students in Iteration 2 explained why
this experience could be negative: “I think sometimes that
if you get really into your role, you think “Oh yea, like
everything depends on me and my role”,  rather than
looking about at what everyone else is doing, the effects
of their roles and what they are monitoring” (Iteration 1,
Gas Geochemist). Whilst wishing to retain the positive as-
pects of role immersion, there were efforts in the later it-
erations to emphasize the team structure and best
practices of teamwork.
Discussion
Students from every iteration reported that having the op-
portunity to play a professional geologist or emergency
manager for the afternoon was a positive aspect of the ac-
tivity. We showed here that assigning students to roles tai-
lored to their interests and capabilities (using the Role
Questionnaire), resulted in students being more likely to
identify with the role and to operate more successfully.
Self-actualization (c.f.,  Maslow 1943; Maslow 1970) is a
powerful motivator therefore playing the role of a poten-
tial future career should produce a highly motivating ex-
perience. Additionally, overcoming challenges encourages
a sense of self-efficacy and autonomy in the students, who
may choose to continue to take on increasing challenges
in the future (Kuhl and Blankenship 1979).
Student feedback indicated that the students immersed
themselves into these roles by researching them prior to
and ‘getting into it’ during the simulation. The roles were
progressively better defined (with customized readings,
skill sets, and responsibilities) with each iteration. Role as-
signment was therefore also successful in team-wide issues
such as reducing conflict, balancing team work loads, and
improving the communication within and between the
teams. These will be discussed below.
Structuring communication & teamwork tasks
Results
Communication and teamwork were identified as primary
learning goals of the volcanic hazards simulation (Table 1).
We aimed to design a crisis scenario that provided a
Page 16
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 16 of 26
platform upon which students can discover the quality, ef-
ficiency, urgency, and importance of these skills. In the
Pilot, the instructors recognized the need for communica-
tion and teamwork skills: “Seeing the chain of command
appearing and taking charge of what needed doing and
seeing [the students] effectively disseminate the informa-
tion. I think as soon as they realized that teamwork and
communication was important, it worked a lot better”
(Pilot, Instructor 2).
In Iteration 1–4, the students expressed times when the
team communicated effectively and times when commu-
nication within and between teams was not effective.
When asked about teamwork students frequently men-
tioned the team and leaders abilities to compile everyone’s
thoughts and to listen to one another. Students also noted
that good teamwork required supporting and being sup-
ported by the team leader: “We listened to the [Group]
Controller and went with his/her calls” (Iteration 2, Public
Information Officer); “We had a definitive leader in our
team” (Iteration 2, Gas Geochemist); “It was a real collab-
oration, the leader didn’t just override us, he/she consid-
ered our opinions”  (Iteration 2, Public Information
Officer).
Other students disagreed saying that they frequently
talked over one another and exhibited poor listening
skills. This led to an increased difficulty to make deci-
sions: “There were intense points when everyone was
talking all at the same time. This obviously made it im-
possible to think and to make good decisions” (Iteration
2, Planning and Intelligence, italics are for emphasis).
A primary source of stress was the amount of informa-
tion that needed to be processed by leader roles. This oc-
curred in both teams, across the iterations. For example:
“There were six people yelling [information] to [the team
leader] and he/she would write it down, but I don’t think
there was enough time for him/her to react to what was
happening” (Iteration 3, Field Geologist).  Effective com-
munication pathways or information ‘infrastructure’ (Celik
and Corbacioglu 2010) is vital for a team to work effi-
ciently. We aimed to engineer more effective communica-
tion pathways (through specific roles, increased awareness
of team structure and preparation activities) resulting in
more straightforward information transfer and thus suc-
cessful decision-making and mitigation of the impending
disaster. By scaffolding (i.e., providing guidance, support
and advice) the students communication skills prior to
(delivery of best practices) and during the simulation
(through instructor interventions) more quality communi-
cations were observed in later iterations. The best prac-
tices presented to students focused specifically on being
terse and contextual, but ‘packaging’ only the relevant in-
formation into a communiqué was a large challenge
reported by many students. Only through meaningful
practice (during the simulation) were the students 
observed to achieve this learning outcome (“I relayed
only the ‘need-to-know’  information” (Iteration 3, Vol-
cano geophysicist)).  Providing strong team and role
structure (through role assignment and pre-simulation
preparation) improved communication pathways and
communication efficiency, allowing members to
think about the quality of the communications.
By providing more nodes (or in our case more students
and more roles) we observed that the student’s efficiency
increased and therefore improved the flow of information,
and reduced ‘bottlenecks’. This prevented major oral mis-
communications, although a lack of efficiency during
times of stress persisted: “[The Emergency Management]
team didn’t get stuff from the scientists fast enough” (Iter-
ation 3, Infrastructure), when information was not passed
along quickly enough.
However, negative group dynamics continued for some
of the teams in later iterations (3, 4) and this was mostly
due to strong or overbearing personalities of individual stu-
dents. The team leaders were chosen for their self-reported
abilities of teamwork, leadership and confidence with public
speaking, but some of the leader students, however, exhib-
ited domineering behaviour. For example: “I wasn’t able to
[speak at the press conferences] because of my ‘Boss, who’
wanted to be in the spotlight the entire time” (Iteration 3,
Volcano geophysicist). Other issues arose during team dis-
cussions: “Initially, I struggled slightly in discussion involve-
ment as there were several more dominant team members”
(Iteration 4, Infrastructure).
Communication efficiency improved throughout the
simulation. In each iteration, we observed students grad-
ually acquiring familiarity with the correct protocols and a
level of comfort with this structure. The students reported
frustration with the inefficiency of their communications.
Information ‘bottlenecks’ promoted inefficiency: “The com-
munication between us and the other geologists was hard
because we had to communicate through [the team leader].
And [the team leader] was too busy with everything some-
times to relay it” (Iteration 1, Field Geologist). Building
awareness of the importance and inherent difficulties of
information transmission was one of our major learning
goals (Table 1, goal 5) and was reported by the students in
all simulation iterations.
The simulation consists of interdependent tasks (where
team members relied on one another to complete a task
or outcome; Wageman 2000) which requires a collabora-
tive approach (Rousseau et al. 2006; Wageman 1995)). We
aimed to establish clear, transparent boundaries between
roles, which allowed students to focus on their tasks and
make complex tasks into discrete, manageable tasks.
In later Iterations (2, 3 and 4), we used the role ques-
tionnaire to identify and assign students with positive
leadership skills and or well-established geological know-
ledge to pivotal roles so that the teams could manage tasks
Page 17
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 17 of 26
more efficiently and effectively and so that the intercon-
nectivity of discrete tasks became less burdensome. Im-
proving the students’  awareness of what each role is
responsible for and whom they should interact with
(through the Role Profiles and the Flow of Information
Maps (Figure 3), used in Iteration 3 and 4) was used to
reduce the time (and subsequently, the cognitive load)
spent in the beginning acclimatising and allowed them
the freedom to tackle the tasks at hand.
Discussion
Effective teamwork skills were found to be fundamental to
the success of the simulation. There is a call for geoscience
graduates to excel at communication and teamwork skills
(e.g., Ireton et al. 1996). The two teams have large student
numbers (ranging from 8 to 20 members depending on
the class size) and rely on all members performing opti-
mally. Students working in group educational settings are
not uncommon in higher education, though activities with
large teams (more than 8 or 10 students) are rarer, as they
are structurally and logistically more difficult to facilitate.
A strong motivational aspect is the general attraction to
working with others (i.e., relatedness; Ryan and Deci 2000),
in an interdependent and supportive learning environment.
Recognition among colleagues is a documented motivator
(Maslow 1943) and in general, this induces an element of
pressure to perform at one’s best (Cruz and Pil 2011;
Hamilton et al. 2003; Slavin 1984). Peers, team leaders and
instructors all observe the collective effort that they make to
complete the tasks. Holding each student accountable
provides the incentive for teaching and learning with
one another.
Research shows that team learning can be more effective
when structured and scripted (e.g.,  Dillenbourg 2002).
Therefore, division of tasks, job sharing and assigning more
students to pivotal roles was implemented and shown to re-
duce individual students’ cognitive load, freeing up resources
to make and communicate decisions. We did observe and
accept that some of the roles were less ‘important’ and that
this may have created differential levels of motivation, ac-
countability and feelings of group cohesiveness. More time
working together as a team prior to the simulation allowed
students to assess capabilities better and in general student
feedback was very positive about job sharing, helping each
other out and the interdependency on one another.
Effective collaboration and crisis mitigation, requires team
members to actively communicate and interact with each
other with the intention of establishing a common focus and
achieving a common goal (Beers et al. 2006; Akkerman et al.
2007). Effective decision-making requires all team members
to have access to all relevant information (Beers et al. 2006;
Sellnow et al. 2009). To create and disseminate successful
communications, valuable knowledge and information held 
by each team member must actively be shared (i.e., retrieving
and explicating information), discussed (i.e., processing the
information) and remembered (i.e., personalizing and storing
the information) (Kirschner et al. 2009). The leader of the
team was responsible for coordinating this effort.
There were examples of strong and poor team leadership
throughout the iterations. Team leaders who displayed poor
leadership skills negatively affected the team’s decision-
making ability. This is likely due to the inability to guide
the decision making process and help the team members
reach a consensus. In the future, we plan to improve team
structure and cohesiveness through team-bonding prepara-
tory activities. If the team structure and norms are estab-
lished prior to this intense experience, perhaps we would
observe more positive and sophisticated behaviours.
Improving Students’ communication competence
Results
A primary learning goal of the Volcanic Hazards Simu-
lation is to improve student’s communication skills. We
propose that communication competence is impacted by
several variables: A) one’s self-perceived ability to commu-
nicate (i.e.,  confidence);  B) content knowledge of the
geoscience topics being discussed; C) knowledge of
communication best practices; D) appropriate percep-
tions (a.k.a., conceptions) of communication best prac-
tices, and E) communication experience.
This study used a self-report of communication compe-
tence (SPCC; McCroskey and McCroskey 1988) as a
proxy for communication competence. Figure 4A shows
the overall results from pre- and post-simulation SPCC
scores. Most students in both iterations scored within the
average range of communication competence in the pre-
simulation (Iteration 3 = 11/19; and Iteration 4 = 13/18).
Several demographic factors were investigated to look for
any correlations between reported competencies. Previous
studies have indicated that there may be some relationship
between gender and competency (university women re-
port lower competency; Donovan and Maclntyre 2004).
No correlations were found between gender, age, geology
background (i.e., number and nature of previous geology
courses), and nationality.
By looking at the changes between pre- and post-
simulation scores we can examine any affect that the simu-
lation may have had on the students perceived commu-
nication competence. Overall, students reported improved
competence following the simulation with an average
change of 4 points (±13), but 40% of the students from all
iterations reported negative shifts. The large shifts from
low competency to average or high competence (6 stu-
dents from Iteration 3 and 4 from Iteration 4) were mostly
amongst students that participated in press conferences
(not all roles within the simulation are called upon to
present information in front of the entire class; See
Page 18
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12
A. 
Page 18 of 26
B.
Figure 4 (See legend on next page.)
Page 19
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 19 of 26
(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 4 Student’s self-reported scores in communication competence from Iterations 3 and 4 of the simulation. A. Overall scores from
both iterations including the average scores from each cohort. Thresholds between High (scores > 87) and Low (scores < 59) competence are
indicated, as well as a line that represents no change between pre- and post-scores (i.e., students above the line scored higher in the post-test).
Iteration 3 had a wider range of student scores and more students with larger shifts. Students who participated in press conferences (denoted by
outlined symbols) scored mostly positive, and some negative changes, while students who did not participate did not change competence
between pre- and post-tests. B. The SPCC instrument (Self-perceived communication competence; McCroskey and McCroskey 1988) allows the
student responses to be broken down into subcategories. All subcategories, on average, showed positive shifts from pre-test to post-test in both
iterations. Iteration 3 illustrated higher shifts in most categories, and both iterations showed notable shifts in the public speaking category.
Figure 4A). Conversely, the largest negative shifts (Iter-
ation 3 = 2, and Iteration 4 = 4) were also from students
asked to present information at the press conferences.
Students who exhibited little/no change in competence
were dominantly students who did not participate in
the press conferences. This aspect suggests that in
order for competence to be impacted, students must
experience the public speaking aspects of the simula-
tion. Further research will allow us to follow this line of
inquiry. While the values of change may seem minimal,
previously reported studies which analysed changes in
competency over an entire semester of communication
class, also resulted in similar magnitude of change (e.g.,
Rubin et al. 1997).
Figure 4B illustrates the individual categories (commu-
nication context and receiver) for Iteration 3 and 4, pre-
and post-simulation. Both iterations illustrate overall posi-
tive shifts on every category, and the largest shifts seen in
the public speaking communication context. Iteration 3
shows larger shifts in all categories.
Discussion
Iteration 3 was embedded in a field course which spent
extensive time on the day prior to the simulation cover-
ing volcanic hazards topics and the best practices of sci-
ence communication; while Iteration 4 students received
a science communication best practices lecture, but did
not focus at the same length or depth on these practices
as the Iteration 3. This is likely why Iteration 3 shows
more individual student and category positive shifts than
Iteration 4; however more research will be needed to
confirm whether increased preparation affects perceived
improvement.
The amplification (i.e.,  large shifts in competency) in
some student’s scores may be due to a peer comparative
effect, where students compare the different student’s
abilities to communicate and give themselves a negative
or positive self-perceived appraisal following the simula-
tion. Also, during the simulation students are provided
with feedback, and then given additional opportunities
to improve. Feedback is noted as vital for communica-
tion improvement in field such as medicine (Maguire
et al. 1996; Maguire and Pitceathly 2002) and it is likely 
that some of the participants received more meaningful
feedback during the simulation than others.
The SPCC scale and other communication instruments
(e.g., PRCA-24; McCroskey et al. 1985) are typically used
in communication training courses, where participants are
given extensive coaching in communication. Students
with high confidence in their abilities are more likely to
engage in communication experiences (McCroskey et al.
1977), so even a small number of positive shifts in per-
ceived competency are a success. Future research will be
carried out with more students, and we will explore design
and cohort factors which may impact the students SPCC.
Improving Students’ transferable skills for the
professional sector and volcanic crisis management
Transferable skills (such as communication) in the natural
hazards sector are essential and they align with the needs
of other sectors such as engineering, medical sciences and
management sciences. Effective communication is identi-
fied as a key practice in creating more disaster resilient
communities (Bryner et al. 2012; Tully 2007). Crisis com-
munication research and practice has focused on how the
message is delivered, distributed (accurately, timely)
and its relevancy during an event (Garcia and Fearnley
2012; Fearnley et al. 2012; Seeger 2006; Valenti and
Wilkins 1995).
This study evaluated the students’ abilities to commu-
nicate orally within their teams, between the teams and
to the public, in press conferences. The focus was on
feedback-rich opportunities to establish best practices of
communication (in content and delivery) and not on
other important aspects of risk communication such as
trust-building, participatory or dialogic formats (e.g.,
townhalls and community meetings).  However, during
and following press conferences there are reflective op-
portunities to talk about how communication is used to
build resilience during or as a response to these events
and we plan to develop new simulations which are expli-
citly addressing the use of communications to build
trust, awareness and resilience of communities.
To acquire and perfect these skills, students need to
practice them in authentic scenarios. Cox et al. (2012)
suggests that, “engaging students in authentic projects
that will allow them to explore the implications of
Page 20
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 20 of 26
their work for engineering and for other sectors (e.g.,
the larger society)… [to] engage in projects that relate
to engagement with diverse stakeholders” (Cox et al.
2012, page 68).  The interconnected tasks in the role-
play required the coordination and integration of constitu-
ent skills from the very beginning and pushed learners to
quickly develop a holistic vision of the whole task (a more
expert-like strategy).  Self-reported and actual effective
communication skills are also linked to student academic
success (McCroskey et al. 1989),  high self-esteem
(McCroskey et al. 1977), and success with employment
(Krzystofik and Fein 1988).  Thus, this approach to
learning communication skills through authentic chal-
lenges builds confidence, performance and resiliency
in students who are likely to become a part of the geo-
logic and emergency management community.
Further research will come out of this study, which
considers the connection (if there is one) between com-
munication, geologyexpertise (i.e.,  content knowledge),
geology and communication experience (i.e.,  number
and nature of previous field, class and communication
experiences) and other factors.
The results of our evidence-based educational study of a
role-play simulation indicate that such exercises represent
a robust and powerful tool that can be used in the tertiary
sector to train entry-level geologists. Furthermore, the op-
portunity exists for professional development for volcanic
monitoring scientists and emergency managers. Such ex-
ercises both convey the importance of communication
during a disaster scenario and simultaneously up-skill this
workforce in communication. Further research on their
design and efficacy should be explored by our research
community.
Limitations of the study
Design-based research presents difficulties different to
those of controlled or clinical experimental research. The
interconnectivity of participants and outcomes makes seg-
regation of causal relationships difficult. Further study is re-
quired to isolate and address specific causal relationships
around student success at achieving specific learning goals.
In addition, it is important to acknowledge that the
lead author (Dohaney) was heavily embedded in the
learning environment (as a teacher, colleague and peer to
the participants and the instructors).  Validity of the
research is difficult to achieve if the researcher cannot
identify bias and manipulative control over what results
are deemed relevant to the study (Creswell and Miller
2000).  As the researcher is intimately involved with
conceptualization, design, development, implementation
and researching of the pedagogical approach, then ensur-
ing trustworthy assumptions is a challenge (Barab and
Squire 2004). 
There were however safeguards to eliminate bias
and gain an objective perspective on the results and
interpretations:
1. With the exception of the Pilot, The lead author
(the researcher) did not participate directly (as a
role-player) in the simulations. Dohaney was a
passive observer and did not interrupt, change,
alter or intervene during the activity.
2. In Iteration 3 and 4, Dohaney was the primary
instructor of the communication best practices
(provided to students prior to the simulation) as
there was no other appropriate instructor with the
necessary expertise to implement this component.
However, the delivery and transfer of information
and skills from these preparation activities was not
the primary research question, but how that
information was used during the simulation.
3. To avoid bias in data selection, representative quotes
were taken that illustrated majority and minority
perceptions. They were selected based on data
‘richness’ and characterization of the themes identified.
For example, when asked about teamwork, students
who described any range of experiences (positive,
negative, descriptive, experiential, etc.) would be
identified and included in a ‘first pass’ of the data.
When saturation had been reached (i.e., no new
items/themes emerged; Bowen 2008), assessments
of ‘majority’, ‘minority’ and depth of responses were
culled and grouped based on the pedagogical themes.
There were significant logistical factors not discussed in
this manuscript, which are important for instructors
intending to use a simulation. Major considerations in-
clude: A. location, time and space available to the in-
structor; B. content knowledge of students regarding
background information and group and communication
skills; and C. time commitment from students and instruc-
tors, including all preparation activities (van Ments 1999).
Conclusions and recommendations
Our methodology and results suggest that pedagogy and
design grounded in real-world expertise and best prac-
tices can lead to educationally-useful learning strategies.
This work shows that the simulation helped students to
develop transferable skills while simultaneously, exem-
plifying their importance. In the role-play, students chal-
lenged themselves and moved outside of their ‘academic
comfort zone’  when required to rapidly synthesize new
information and prior knowledge at an appropriate level
of task difficulty. These types of learning activities can
be of great value for teaching and learning transferable
skills and promoting students’  self-efficacy and motiv-
ation. This study concludes that:
Page 21
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 21 of 26
1. The method of design and evaluation used in this
study can act as a guide for other researchers and
instructors to build, test, and refine complex role
play simulations, allowing researchers to develop
flexible, adaptive theory applicable to new contexts.
2. To achieve learning goals that are transferable to
future careers, an authentic immersive role-play
must ensure that students are sufficiently prepared,
the pace of the role play is appropriate, and that
roles and team structure are well-defined.
3. The simulation can elicit large shifts in individual
students self-perceived communication competency,
and overall has a positive influence on the students’
communication in different contexts (public speak-
ing, meetings).
Designing and evaluating this role-play exercise was
a time intensive process. Few geoscience educators or
practitioners can dedicate themselves entirely to exer-
cise development; however, this work demonstrates
how effective and motivating these activities are for
students. We recommend to educators and researchers
that long term investment in these sorts of learning
activities will add higher-level challenges to students
who will be soon entering the workforce and promote
greater learning of skills than more static and staid
teaching methods.
Although the simulation was designed around a strato-
volcano in the New Zealand context, replicable simula-
tions based on other hazards and contexts could be used
to teach transferable skills in the geosciences anywhere. A
companion simulation we developed based on an eruption
in the monogenetic Auckland Volcanic Field has also been
a very popular component of postgraduate courses at the
University of Auckland. These simulations promote teach-
ing of these transferable skills in a more explicit, struc-
tured manner, which is context-apparent and feedback-
rich (i.e.,  scenario-based learning).  Such scenarios allow
students to practice new skills prior to going into the
workplace, where it is expected that they will have these
graduate attributes. An open source digital version of
the full instruction manual and files can be found on the
VHUB website ([URL: "https://vhub.org/resources/3395"] https://vhub.org/resources/3395).  The
instruction manual discusses the materials, facilitator
notes, teachable moments, assessment and pre- and
post-simulation activities in great detail, and provides
practical ways to get the most out of the role-play. In
any simulation there will be meaningful, teachable mo-
ments, but due to the complexity of our study we do
not go into this in great detail – please refer to the in-
structor manual for more details. Further information
and assistance with how to run a simulation can be
obtained by corresponding with the primary author
(Dohaney). 
Appendixes
Appendix 1. Instruments used
Appendix 1A. Iteration 1 post-interview questions
Academic Background:
Can you tell me a little bit about your academic
background (degree program, courses)?
GEOL476, ENGE476 or Both? What motivated you to
take this/these course(s)?
What interests you about this/these course(s)?
Content:
List the 4 major volcanic hazards associated with
stratovolcanoes
Describe the 6 major data types used for monitoring
stratovolcanoes
Discuss the differences between two different eruptions
(the volume and distribution):
An eruption with a plume height of 2 km, and duration
of 20 minutes, vs.
An eruption with a plume height of 15 km, and
duration of 2 hours
Describe the short term impacts that 2 cm of ashfall
would have on an urban area
Describe the long term impacts that 2 cm of ashfall
would have on an urban area
Can you describe the New Zealand GNS Alert
Levels, and your thoughts on their use during this
exercise?
Feedback:
What ‘team’ were you a part of?
What individual role did you play? Tell me a little bit
about your role before and during the exercise.
Tell me a bit about your responsibilities.
How do you feel about your role / responsibilities…
Did you personally identify with your role? Explain
If not… would you have preferred to play another
role? Which one? Why?
Would you like to be hired as a __(role)____ in real
life, and work for GNS/or/Hazard Management/or/
Public Information/Relations? Explain.
What makes that role/job attractive/unattractive to
you? Why?
Do you think playing a specific role (with specific
responsibilities) helped you to learn? (about volcanic
monitoring, volcanoes, geology, haz management)
Explain.
Tell me about the communication between yourself,
your team and the other teams.
Tell me about the hazard map created by your class,
and its function throughout the activity
Page 22
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 22 of 26
Do you think this simulation reflects volcanic monitoring
and volcanic crisis management in reality? Why or why
not?
Based on your background education, and this exercise,
what do you think about the prediction of volcanic
activity?
Talk a little about your interaction with the ‘experts’?
What parts of the activity would you keep? What
would you change? Why?
Appendix 1B. Iteration 2 post-questionnaire
The format has been condensed to reduce the publication
length.
Volcano Questions:
Instructions: The following questions are about volcanoes.
Explain the best that you can, use your own words and
examples to help you. If you need more room, flip over the
page and continue.
1. List the 4 major volcanic hazards associated with
stratovolcanoes.
2. Describe how the 6 major data types are used for
monitoring stratovolcanoes.
3. Explain the differences between two different
eruptions (volume and distribution):
4. Describe the short term AND long term impacts
that 2 cm of ashfall would have on an urban
area.
Eruption A has a plume height of 2 km, and
duration of 20 minutes
Eruption B has a plume height of 15 km, and
duration of 2 hours.
5. Briefly describe the use and importance of Volcanic
Alert Levels. What circumstances were they raised
and lowered during the simulation?
Questions about your Experience:
Instructions: The following questions are open-ended
and are for us to understand how you experienced
the simulation and the role that you played. Use your
own words and please use examples to help you, if ne-
cessary. If you need more room, flip over the page and
continue.
1. Did you feel sufficiently prepared for the
simulation? Did the literature, lectures, exercises
help before the simulation? Which was most
helpful? Why?
2. Describe your role during the simulation: a. your
responsibilities and b. what you spent most of your
time doing.
3. Did you personally identify with the role that you
played? Explain. 
4. Could you see yourself working in this job in real
life? What makes this job attractive/unattractive to
you? Explain.
5. If you did not identify with your role, would you have
preferred to play another role? Which one, and why?
6. Self-evaluate your own personal communication and
collaboration skills during the simulation within your
team, AND with the public.
A. What did you do well?
B. What did you not do so well?
7. Evaluate your team’s ability to communicate and to
collaborate during the simulation.
A. What went well?
B. What did not go so well?
8. Based on your background knowledge and this
simulation, do you think it is possible to forecast
volcanic activity? Explain.
Your Feedback:
Instructions: This section is to inform us of your positive
and negative feedback about the simulation. Please be as
honest and informative as possible.
1. Do you think that playing a specific role (with specific
responsibilities) helped you to learn more about
volcanoes, volcanic monitoring, and/or emergency
management? Explain.
2. Do you think the simulation reflects volcanic
monitoring and crisis management in real life?
A. If so, what is the same?
B. If not, what is different?
1. In your opinion, describe the pace of the
simulation. (Example: too fast, too slow.. just right?)
2. How was the pace of the simulation relevant to…
A. Your overall experience
B. Your performance
3. Did you feel the simulation dragged on, or went by
very quickly?
4. Describe the level of difficulty that you personally
experienced.
A. Did you find the parts of the simulation really
hard? Too easy? Explain.
B. What aspects were really challenging?
5. Describe your interactions with your instructors
during the simulation. Did they help you and/or
challenge you? Did they behave ‘in role’?
6. What parts of the simulation would you keep the
same (in general and/or specific to your role)?
7. What parts of the simulation would you change
(in general and/or specific to your role)?
8. Any other final comments or feedback?
Page 23
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 23 of 26
Thank you so much your participation in this study,
please hand these materials to the Researcher! Please do
not discuss these responses with other participants.
Appendix 1C. Iteration 3 and 4 post-questionnaire
(feedback part)
The format has been condensed to reduce the publication
length.
Question 4: Media Release
1. Describe the short term AND long term impacts
that 2 cm (or 20 mm or 0.8 inches) of ashfall would
have on an urban area. Write your answer as if it
were part of a Media Release:
Question 5: Your Feedback
Instructions: The following questions are open-ended
and are for us to understand how you experienced the
simulation and the role that you played. Use your
own words and please use examples to help you, if
necessary. If you need more room, flip over the page
and continue.
1. Did you feel sufficiently prepared for the simulation?
Did the literature, lectures, and exercises help before
the simulation? Which was most helpful? Why?
2. List the most important ‘best practices’ (or good
methods) of communication that scientists should
use when talking with the public:
3. Self-evaluate your own personal communication
skills during the simulation within your team, AND
with the public.
A. What did you do well?
B. What did you not do so well?
4. Evaluate your team’s ability to communicate during
the simulation.
A. What went well?
B. What did not go so well?
5. What parts of the simulation would you keep the
same (in general and/or specific to your role)?
6. What parts of the simulation would you change
(in general and/or specific to your role)?
7. Any other final comments or feedback?
Appendix 1D. SPCC (McCroskey and McCroskey 1988)
The format has been condensed to reduce the publication
length. The term competent was replaced by the term
ability. We felt this is more common place wording for
our participants.
Question 1: Your ability to communicate in different
situations: Below are 12 situations in which you might
need to communicate. People’s abilities to communicate
effectively vary from person to person. Please indicate 
how STRONG you believe your abilities are to communi-
cate in each of the situations described below (Very strong
ability to communicate, Strong ability to communicate,
Average ability to communicate, Poor ability to communi-
cate, and Very poor ability to communicate).
Statements:
1. Present a talk to a group of strangers.
2. Talk with an acquaintance.
3. Talk/Discuss at a large meeting of friends.
4. Talk in a small group of strangers.
5. Talk with a close friend.
6. Talk/Discuss at a large meeting of acquaintances.
7. Talk with a stranger.
8. Present a talk to a group of friends.
9. Talk in a small group of acquaintances.
10.Talk/Discuss at a large meeting of strangers.
11.Talk in a small group of friends.
12. Present a talk to a group of acquaintances.
Appendix 2. Role questionnaire
The format has been condensed to reduce the publication
length.
Instructions: This questionnaire is used to assign you to
a role for the simulation. This is confidential and will
not be shared with other class members or instructors.
Fill in, or ‘bold’  the responses, and return to the re-
searcher. Thanks! (email to instructor)
Section 1 Basics: Name, Gender, Age, Nationality (What
country do you reside in normally?),  Current University
‘Year’ in 2013? 200-level, 300-level, 400-level, or Masters
Section 2 Statements:
Select if you “Agree”, “Are neutral”, or “Disagree” with
the following statements about yourself.
1. People that know me would say that I am
extroverted.
2. I am very comfortable presenting information in
front of the class and my peers.
3. I have strong leadership skills.
4. I enjoy working under pressure.
5. I am very good at multi-tasking and task-prioritizing.
6. I am a team player, and I like working with other
people.
7. I am very good at writing, and written
communications.
8. I am a Maths-Quantitative person.
Section 3 Other Comments:
Have you participated in a volcanic hazards simulation,
prior to this one? Yes/No?
1. If so, write your previously assigned role, and team:
2. List your three favourite geology-related topics:
Page 24
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 24 of 26
3. Are there any geology-related topics that you really
dislike? List these.
4. List three other non-geology topics that really
interests you.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
JD carried out the design study, participated in the collection and analysis of
student data and drafted the manuscript. EB and BK both helped with the
design study, interpretation of the data, and drafting and editing of the
manuscript. TW and JL both provided feedback during the design study and
helped with the drafting and editing of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This study was funded through a PhD scholarship for Dohaney, from Mighty
River Power Ltd. Additional support was provided by Frontiers Abroad and
the University of Canterbury Teaching and Development Grants. The authors
would like to thank Rebecca Hearne, Alison Jolley, Rebecca Fitzgerald and
Daniel Hill for research assistance. The web interface design was piloted by
Clay Hamilton, and adapted by Rob Ramsay and John Southward. We would
like to thank the reviewers for their helpful comments. Finally, thanks to all
the participants in the study throughout its development!
Author details
1Geoscience Education Research Group, The University of Canterbury,
Christchurch, New Zealand. 2Academic Services Group, The University of
Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand. 3Department of Geological Sciences,
The University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand. 4School of
Environment, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
Received: 7 July 2014 Accepted: 28 January 2015
References
Akkerman S, Van den Bossche P, Admiraal W, Gijselaers W, Segers M, Simons R-J,
Kirschner P (2007) Reconsidering group cognition: from conceptual confusion
to a boundary area between cognitive and socio-cultural perspectives? Educ
Res Rev 2(1):39–63, doi:10.1016/j.edurev.2007.02.001
Argote L, Ingram P, Levine JM, Moreland RL (2000) Knowledge transfer in
organizations: learning from the experience of others. Organ Behav Hum
Decis Process 82:1–8, doi: 10.1006/obhd.2000.2883
Bales RF (1976) Interaction process analysis: a method for the study of small
groups. 203. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Barab S, Squire K (2004) Design-based research: putting a stake in the ground.
J Learn Sci 13:1–14, doi:10.1207/s15327809jls1301_1
Barclay EJ, Renshaw CE, Taylor HA, Bilge AR (2011) Improving decision making
skill using an online volcanic crisis simulation: impact of data presentation
format. J Geosci Educ 59:85, doi:10.5408/1.3543933
Beard R (1972) Teaching and learning in higher education. 253. Penguin
Beers PJ, Boshuizen HPA, Kirschner PA, Gijselaers WH (2006) Common ground,
complex problems and decision making. Gr Decis Negot 15:529–556,
doi:10.1007/s10726-006-9030-1
Blake M (1987) Role play and inset. J Furth High Educ 11:109–119
Bloom BS, Engelhart MD, Furst EJ et al (1956) Taxonomy of educational objectives:
the classification of educational goals. Longmans, Green and Co Ltd., London
Bowen GA (2008) Naturalistic inquiry and the saturation concept: a research note.
Qual Res 8:137–152, doi:10.1177/1468794107085301
Britton NR, Clark GJ (2000) From response to resilience: emergency management
reform in New Zealand. Natural Hazards Review 1(3):145–150
Brown AL (1992) Design experiments: theoretical and methodological challenges
in creating complex interventions in classroom settings. J Learn Sci 2:141–178
Bryner V, Norris R, Fleming JS (2012) The greater Christchurch earthquakes of
2010 and 2011: a case study in the communication of science for disaster risk
reduction. 4th Int. Disaster Risk Conf. IDRC Davos 2012, Davos, Switzerland, pp 2–5
Campion MA, Papper EM, Medsker GJ (1996) Relations between work team
characteristics and effectiveness: a replication and extension. Pers Psychol
49:429–452 
Celik S, Corbacioglu S (2010) Role of information in collective action in dynamic
disaster environments. Disasters 34:137–154, doi:10.1111/j.0361
Chandler P, Sweller J (1991) Cognitive load theory and the format of instruction.
Cogn Instr 8:293–332
Chou L-F, Wang A-C, Wang T-Y et al (2008) Shared work values and team member
effectiveness: the mediation of trustfulness and trustworthiness. Hum Relations
61:1713–1742, doi:10.1177/0018726708098083
Cole JW (1978) Andesites of the tongariro volcanic centre, north island, New
Zealand. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 3:121–153
Corbin JM, Strauss A (1990) Grounded theory research: procedures, canons, and
evaluative criteria. Qual Sociol 13:3–21, doi:10.1007/BF00988593
Cox MF, Cekic O, Ahn B, Zhu J (2012) Engineering professionals’ expectations of
undergraduate engineering students. Leadersh Manag Eng 12:60–70
Creswell JW, Miller DL (2000) Determining validity in qualitative inquiry.
Theory Pract 39:124–130
Cruz KS, Pil FK (2011) Team design and stress: a multilevel analysis. Hum
Relations 64:1265–1289, doi:10.1177/0018726711409264
Csikszentmihalyi M, Abuhamdeh S, Nakamura J (2005) Flow. In: Elliott AJ, Dweck
CS (eds) Handb. Competence Motiv. Guilford, New York, pp 598–608
Dannels DP (2002) Communication across the curriculum and in the disciplines:
speaking in engineering. Commun Educ 51:254–268, doi:10.1080/03634520216513
DeNeve KM, Heppner MJ (1997) Role play simulations: the assessment of an
active learning technique and comparisons with traditional lectures. Innov
High Educ 21:231–246, doi: 10.1007/BF01243718
Dillenbourg PP (2002) Over-scripting CSCL: the risks of blending collaborative learning
with instructional design. Three worlds CSCL. Can we support CSCL?., pp 61–91
Donovan LA, Maclntyre PD (2004) Age and sex differences in willingness to
communicate, communication apprehension and self-perceived competence.
Commun Res Reports 21:420–427
Eccles JS (2005) Subjective task value and the Eccles et al. model of
achievement-related choices. In: Elliot A, Dweck CS (eds) Handb Competence
Motiv. Guilford, New York, pp 105–121
Eccles JS, Wigfield A (2002) Motivational beliefs, values, and goals. Annu Rev
Psychol 53:109–132, doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135153
Edelson DC (2002) Design research: what we learn when we engage in design.
J Learn Sci 11:105–121, doi:10.1207/S15327809JLS1101_4
Errington EP (1997) Role-play. 50. Higher education research and development
society of Australasia incorporated
Errington EP (2011) Mission possible: using near-world scenarios to prepare
graduates for the professions. Int J Teach Learn High Educ 23:84–91
Fearnley C, McGuire W, Davies G, Twigg J (2012) Standardisation of the USGS
Volcano Alert Level System (VALS): analysis and ramifications. Bull Volcanol
74(9):2023–2036, doi:10.1007/s00445-012-0645-6
Fiske RS (1984) Volcanologists, journalists, and the concerned local public: a tale
of two crises in the eastern Caribbean. Explos. Volcanism inception. Evol.
Hazards. National Research Council, Geophysics Study Committee, p 176
Garcia C, Fearnley CJ (2012) Evaluating critical links in early warning systems
for natural hazards. Environmental Hazards 11(2):123–137,
doi:10.1080/17477891.2011.609877
GeoNet (2014) New Zealand Volcanic Alert Levels. 1. [URL: "http://info.geonet.org.nz/display/volc/Volcanic+Alert+Levels"] http://info.geonet.org.nz/
[URL: "http://info.geonet.org.nz/display/volc/Volcanic+Alert+Levels"] display/volc/Volcanic+Alert+Levels. Accessed 1 Jan 2014
Hales TC, Cashman KV (2008) Simulating social and political influences on hazard
analysis through a classroom role playing exercise. J Geosci Educ 56:54–60
Hamilton BH, Nickerson JA, Owan H (2003) Team incentives and worker
heterogeneity: an empirical analysis of the impact of teams on productivity
and participation. J Polit Econ 111:465–497
Handley K, Sturdy A, Fincham R, Clark T (2006) Within and beyond communities
of practice: making sense of learning through participation, identity and
practice. J Manag Stud 43:641–653, doi:10.1111/j.1467-6486.2006.00605.x
Harpp KS, Sweeney WJ (2002) Simulating a volcanic crisis in the classroom.
J Geosci Educ 50:410–418
Harris AJL, Gurioli L, Hughes EE, Lagreulet S (2012) Impact of the Eyjafjallajökull ash
cloud: a newspaper perspective. J Geophys Res 117:35, doi:10.1029/2011JB008735
Haynes K, Barclay J, Pidgeon N (2007) The issue of trust and its influence on risk
communication during a volcanic crisis. Bull Volcanol 70:605–621,
doi: 10.1007/s00445-007-0156-z
Heath CPM (2000) Technical and non-technical skills needed by oil companies.
J Geosci Educ 48:605–617
Heath CPM (2003) Geological, geophysical, and other technical and soft skills
needed by geoscientists employed in the North American petroleum
industry. Am Assoc Pet Geol Bull 89:1275–1292
Page 25
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12  Page 25 of 26
Herrington J, Oliver R (1995) Critical characteristics of situated learning: implications
for the instructional design of multimedia. In: Pearce J, Ellis A (eds) ASCILITE95
conference proceedings., pp 253–262
Hobden BJ, Houghton BF, Davidson JP, Weaver SD (1999) Small and short-lived
magma batches at composite volcanoes: time windows at Tongariro volcano,
New Zealand. J Geol Soc London 156:865–868, doi:10.1144/gsjgs.156.5.0865
IAVCEI Subcommittee for Crisis Protocols (1999) Professional conduct of scientists
during volcanic crises. Bull Volcanol 60:323–334
Integrated Research on Disaster Risk (2011) Risk interpretation and action: a
conceptual framework for research in the context of natural hazards (IRDR
RIA publication No. 1). Integrated Research on Disaster Risk, Beijing
Ireton MFW, Manduca CA, Mogk DW (1996) Shaping the future of undergraduate
earth science education: innovation and change using an earth system
approach. American Geophysical Union.
Isaacs G (1996) Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives. Teaching and
Educational Development Institute. Queensland (Australia): University of
Queensland
Jordan TH, Chen Y, Garparini P (2011) Operational earthquake forecasting: state
of knowledge and guidelines for utilization. Report by the International
Commission on Earthquake Forecasting for Civil Protection. 319–384.
doi:10.4401/ag-5350
Jorgensen DL (1989) Participant observation: the methodology of participant
observation. 12–26. doi:10.4135/9781412985376
Kirschner F, Paas F, Kirschner PA (2009) A cognitive load approach to
collaborative learning: united brains for complex tasks. Educ Psychol Rev
21:31–42, doi:10.1007/s10648-008-9095-2
Kirschner F, Kester L, Corbalan G (2011) Cognitive load theory and multimedia
learning, task characteristics and learning engagement: the current state of
the Art. Comput Human Behav 27:1–4, doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.05.003
Krzystofik AT, Fein R (1988) Does your firm use the right approach in hiring
campus recruits? J Account 166(5):83–88
Kuhl J, Blankenship V (1979) The dynamic theory of achievement motivation:
from episodic to dynamic thinking. Psychol Rev 86:141–151, doi:10.1037/
0033-295X.86.2.141
Lessiter J, Freeman J, Keogh E, Davidoff J (2001) A cross-media presence
questionnaire: the ITC-sense of presence inventory. Presence 10:282–297
Livingstone I (1999) Role-playing planning public inquiries. J Geogr High Educ
23:63–76, doi:10.1080/03098269985605
Lord T, Baviskar S (2007) Moving students from information recitation to information
understanding-exploiting Bloom’s taxonomy in creating science questions.
J Coll Sci Teach 36(5):40
Lunce LM (2006) Simulations: bringing the benefits of situated learning to the
traditional classroom. J Appl Educ Technol 3:37–45
Maddrell AMC (1994) A scheme for the effective use of role plays for an
emancipatory geography. J Geogr High Educ 18:155–163
Maguire P, Pitceathly C (2002) Key communication skills and how to acquire
them. Br Med J 325:697–700
Maguire P, Booth K, Elliott C, Jones B (1996) Helping health professionals
involved in cancer care acquire key interviewing skills - the impact of
workshops. Eur J Cancer 32A:1486–1489
Maslow AH (1943) A theory of human motivation. Psychol Rev 50:370–396
Maslow AH (1970) Motivation and personality (L. Carr, Ed.): Longman, New York.
Matsumoto D, Sanders M (1988) Emotional experiences during engagement in
intrinsically and extrinsically motivated tasks. Motiv Emot 12:353–369,
doi:10.1007/BF00992359
McCroskey JC (1982) Communication competence and performance: a research
and pedagogical perspective. Commun Educ 31:7
McCroskey JC, McCroskey LL (1988) Self-report as an approach to measuring
communication competence. Commun Res Reports 5:108–113
McCroskey JC, Daly JA, Richmond VP, Falcione RL (1977) Studies of the
relationship between communication apprehension and self-esteem. Hum
Commun Res 3:269–277
McCroskey JC, Beatty MJ, Kearney P, Plax TG (1985) The content validity of the
PRCA‐24 as a measure of communication apprehension across communication
contexts. Commun Q 33:165–173, doi:10.1080/01463378509369595
McCroskey JC, Booth-Butterfield S, Payne SK (1989) The impact of communication
apprehension on college student retension and success. Commun Q 37:100–107
McMasters J, Matsch L (1996) Desired attributes of an engineering graduate - an
industry perspective. In: 19th American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Advanced Measurement and Ground Testing Technology Conference. Paper
96-2241, New Orleans, LA., p 2241 
Meier RL, Williams MR, Humphreys M (2000) Refocusing our efforts: assessing
Non-technical competency gaps. J Eng Educ 89:377–385, doi:10.1002/j.2168-
9830.2000.tb00539.x
Michaelsen LK, Sweet M (2008) The essential elements of team-based learning.
New Dir Teach Learn 2008:7–27, doi:10.1002/tl.330
Ministry of Civil Defence & Emergency Management (2002) CDEM groups and
their associated councils. 1. [URL: "http://www.civildefence.govt.nz/cdem-sector/capability-development/cdem-learning-and-development-tools/role-maps/"] http://www.civildefence.govt.nz/cdem-sector/
 capability-development/cdem-learning-and-development-tools/role-maps/
Ministry of Civil Defence & Emergency Management (2013) CDEM competency
framework: role map download. 20. [URL: "http://www.civildefence.govt.nz/memwebsite.nsf/wpg_url/for-the-cdem-sector-professional-development-role-map-download-page?opendocument"] www.civildefence.govt.nz/memwebsite.nsf/
 wpg_url/for-the-cdem-sector-professional-development-role-map-download-
 page?opendocument.
Morgan MG, Fischhoff B, Bostrom A, Atman CJ (2002) Risk communication: a
mental models approach. Cambridge University Press, New York, USA
Paas F, Renkl A, Sweller J (2003) Cognitive load theory and instructional design:
recent developments. Educ Psychol 38:1–4, doi:10.1207/S15326985EP3801_1
Peterson LR, Peterson MJ (1959) Short-term retention of individual verbal items.
J Exp Psychol 58:193–198
Richmond VP, Wrench JS, McCroskey JC (2013) Communication apprehension,
avoidance, and effectiveness, 6th edn., p 160
Rosenshine B, Meister C (1992) The use of scaffolds for teaching higher-level
cognitive strategies. Educ Leadersh 49(7):26–33
Roth W-M, Roychoudhury A (1993) The development of science process skills in
authentic contexts. J Res Sci Teach 30:127–152, doi: 10.1002/tea.3660300203
Rousseau V, Aubé C, Savoie A (2006) Teamwork behaviors: a review and an integration
of frameworks. Small Gr Res 37:540–570, doi:10.1177/1046496406293125
Rubin RB, Rubin AM, Jordan FF (1997) Effects of instruction on communication
apprehension and communication competence. Commun Educ 46:2 (April):
104–114. doi:10.1080/03634529709379080.
Ryan RM, Deci EL (2000) Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic
motivation, social development, and well-being. Am Psychol 55:68–78
Sageev P, Romanowski CJ (2001) A message from recent engineering graduates in the
workplace: results of a survey on technical communication skills. J. Eng, Educ
Sandoval WA, Bell P (2004) Design-based research methods for studying learning in
context: introduction. Educ Psychol 39:199–201, doi:10.1207/s15326985ep3904_1
Schunk DH (1991) Self-efficacy and academic motivation. Educ Psychol 26(3 & 4):207–231
Seat E, Parsons JR, Poppen WA (2001) Enabling engineering performance skills: a
program to teach communication, leadership, and teamwork. J Eng Educ 90(1):7–12
Seeger MW (2006) Best practices in crisis communication: an expert panel
process. J Appl Commun Res 34:232–244, doi:10.1080/00909880600769944
Sellnow T, Ulmer RR, Seeger MW, Littlefield RS (2009) Effective risk
communication: a message-centered approach. Springer Science & Business
Media, New York, NY
Shearer R, Davidhizar R (2003) Using role play to develop cultural competence.
J Nurs Educ 42:273–276
Sigurdsson H, Carey S (1986) Volcanic disasters in Latin America and the 13th November
1985 eruption of Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Columbia. Disasters 10:205–216
Slade LA, Rush MC (1991) Achievement motivation and the dynamics of task
difficulty choices. J Pers Soc Psychol 60:165–172, doi:10.1037/0022-3514.60.1.165
Slavin RE (1984) Students motivating students to excel: cooperative incentives,
cooperative tasks, and student achievement. Elem Sch J 85:53–63
Sweller J (2003) Evolution of human cognitive architecture. Psychol Learn Motiv
Adv Res Theory 43:216–261
Sweller J, van Merriënboer JJG, Paas FGWC (1998) Cognitive architecture and
instructional design. Educ Psychol Rev 10:251–296
Tayag J, Insauriga S, Ringor A, Belo M (1996) People’s response to eruption
warning: the Pinatubo experience, 1991–92. In: Fire and mud. Eruptions and
Lahars of Mount Pinatubo, Philippines, University of Washington Press, p 13
Todesco M (2012) On science, risk and communication, Email communication to
the Volcano Listserv: url: [URL: "http://www.spinics.net/lists/volcano/msg03013.html"] http://www.spinics.net/lists/volcano/msg03013.html
Tully J (2007) Challenging the future: connecting the words in risk
communication., p 118
Turner ME (ed) (2014) Groups at work: theory and research. Psychology Press,
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, USA
Valenti J, Wilkins L (1995) An ethical risk communication protocol for science and mass
communication. Public Underst Sci 4:177–194, doi:10.1088/0963-6625/4/2/005
van Ments M (1999) The Effective use of Role-play: practical techniques for
improving learning. 195
van Merriënboer JJG, Sweller J (2005) Cognitive load theory and complex
learning: recent developments and future directions. Educ Psychol Rev
17:147–177, doi: 10.1007/s10648-005-3951-0
Page 26
Dohaney et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:12
van Merriënboer JJG, Kirschner PA, Kester L (2003) Taking the load Off a Learner’s
mind: instructional design for complex learning. Educ Psychol 38:5–13
van Merriënboer JJG, Kester L, Paas F (2006) Teaching complex rather than
simple tasks: balancing intrinsic and germane load to enhance transfer of
learning. Appl Cogn Psychol 20:343–352, doi:10.1002/acp.1250
Voight B (1990) The 1985 Nevado del Ruiz volcano catastrophe: anatomy and
retrospection. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 44:349–386, doi:10.1016/0377-0273
(90)90027-D
Vygotsky LS (1978) Interaction between learning and development. In: Mind and
society. Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA, USA, pp 79–91
Wageman R (1995) Interdependence and group effectiveness. Adminstrative Sci
Q 40:145–180
Wageman R (2000) The meaning of interdependence. In: Turner ME (ed) Groups
Work Res. Theory., pp 197–217
Webber SS (2002) Leadership and trust facilitating cross-functional team success.
J Manag Dev 21:201–214
Wolfe EW, Hoblitt RP (1996) Overview of eruptions. Fire Mud Eruptions Lahars Mt.
Pinatubo, Philipp, pp 3–20
Wood D, Bruner JS, Ross G (1976) The role of tutoring in problem solving. J Child
Psychol Psychiatry 17:89–100 
Page 26 of 26
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁ t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
