BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Background
Methods
  VEPP and Monday Morning Meeting exercise
  Content learning from MMM
  Confidence development from MMM
Results and discussion
  Content learning: Multiple choice
  Content learning: open-ended responses
  Beginner learning gains (introductory students)
  GPS data example response
  Novice learning gains (volcanology students)
  Measures of confidence: beginner
  Measures of confidence: novice
  Connections between learning and self-efficacy with MMM
Conclusions and recommendations
  Themes of MMM training
  Recommendations
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgements
Author details
References
Page 1
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11
DOI 10.1186/s13617-015-0026-x
RESEARCH  Open Access
Using near-real-time monitoring data from Pu‘u
‘Ō‘ō vent at Kīlauea Volcano for training and
educational purposes
Rachel Teasdale1*, Katrien van der Hoeven Kraft2 and Michael P Poland3
Abstract
Training non-scientists in the use of volcano-monitoring data is critical preparation in advance of a volcanic crisis,
but it is currently unclear which methods are most effective for improving the content-knowledge of non-scientists
to help bridge communications between volcano experts and non-experts. We measured knowledge gains for
beginning-(introductory-level students) and novice-level learners (students with a basic understanding of geologic
concepts) engaged in the Volcanoes Exploration Program: Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō (VEPP) “Monday Morning Meeting at the Hawaiian
Volcano Observatory” classroom activity that incorporates authentic Global Positioning System (GPS), tilt, seismic, and
webcam data from the Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō eruptive vent on Kīlauea Volcano, Hawai‘i (NAGT website, 2010), as a means of
exploring methods for effectively advancing non-expert understanding of volcano monitoring. Learner groups
consisted of students in introductory and upper-division college geology courses at two different institutions.
Changes in their content knowledge and confidence in the use of data were assessed before and after the activity
using multiple-choice and open-ended questions. Learning assessments demonstrated that students who took part in
the exercise increased their understanding of volcano-monitoring practices and implications, with beginners reaching a
novice stage, and novices reaching an advanced level (akin to students who have completed an upper-division
university volcanology class). Additionally, participants gained stronger confidence in their ability to understand
the data. These findings indicate that training modules like the VEPP: Monday Morning Meeting classroom activity
that are designed to prepare non-experts for responding to volcanic activity and interacting with volcano scientists should
introduce real monitoring data prior to proceeding with role-paying scenarios that are commonly used in such courses.
The learning gains from the combined approach will help improve effective communications between volcano experts
and non-experts during times of crisis, thereby reducing the potential for confusion and misinterpretation of data.
Keywords: Volcano monitoring; Hazards training; Geoscience learning; Self-efficacy
Background
Communication between scientists and non-scientists
(e.g. policy makers, the general public) is a significant
challenge in volcanology (e.g., McGuire et al. 2009). The
two groups may not be familiar with each other’s ter-
minology, even to the extent that some words, such as
“tilt” and “eruption”, will have different meanings to dif-
ferent people. Data and scientific reports may be readily
available to the general public, but it is unreasonable to
expect non-science experts to efficiently navigate such
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:rteasdale@csuchico.edu"] rteasdale@csuchico.edu
1Geological and Environmental Sciences, California State University, Chico
400 W 1st St, 95929-0205 Chico, CA, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
resources, understand data-collection methods and lim-
itations, and comprehend how the data may relate to
hazardous events (especially those with low probabil-
ities, like caldera-forming eruptions). Leaving volcano-
monitoring data and conclusions open to interpretation
by untrained non-scientists (e.g. “non-experts” who are
represented here by introductory-level students) has
the potential to introduce needless confusion; or in the
worst-case scenario, improper action -or lack of action,
which during a crisis can have disastrous consequences
to life and infrastructure. The consequences of ineffect-
ive communication between scientists and policy
makers, planners, the media, and the public can be dire
(e.g. Fiske 1984; Voight 1990).  Effective interaction
© 2015 Teasdale et al.; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 2 of 16
between scientists and non-scientists regarding data
collection and application to eruption forecasting is
therefore of critical importance—but how can commu-
nication between these groups be bridged?
We addressed this question by testing the utility of
online near-real-time volcano-monitoring data as an
educational tool in college and university courses, with
two populations of students; non-geology majors (re-
ferred to as “non-experts”) and geology majors (consid-
ered “novices”).  Real- and near-real-time datasets,
including webcam imagery, earthquake locations, and
surface deformation, that are available via the Internet
are increasingly common for volcanoes around the
world and constitute a valuable, yet largely unrealized,
resource for formal and informal geoscience education.
Such data demonstrate the dynamic nature of the Earth
and are an effective means of connecting with students
and other non-experts, especially once they realize that
they are looking at the same information- at the same
time as professionals who are attempting to better
understand volcanic processes. Online datasets (e.g.
GEOROC, IODP/Janus, Marine Geoscience Data System,
Smithsonian GVN, and other databases),  are seldom 
comprehensive, presented in a format useful for in-class
adaptation, or accompanied by background information to
aid with interpretation—aspects that are critical for educa-
tional applications both in and outside of the classroom.
The Volcanoes Exploration Program: Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō (VEPP)
is a website that was established to address the need for an
organized and up-to-date educational resource in volcan-
ology (United States Geological Survey 2009; Poland et al.
2010b,c; Poland et al. 2011).  The VEPP website hosts
near-real-time monitoring data from the active Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō
eruptive vent on Kīlauea Volcano, Hawai‘i, along with
background and context information (Figure 1).  A
strength of VEPP is the common theme of the Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō
eruption (ongoing since 1983; Heliker and Mattox 2003;
Orr et al. in press), which allows the website to be revisited
multiple times to demonstrate different principles of
eruption monitoring and integration of many types of data
used in volcano monitoring.
The VEPP website is home to a variety of data and
ancillary materials concerning the Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō vent of
Kīlauea. Near-real-time datasets include webcam im-
agery, tilt, GPS, and seismic amplitude, while maps of
lava flow activity and results from episodic kinematic
Figure 1 Example of VEPP website showing option tabs such as Data, Techniques, and Updates.
Page 3
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 3 of 16
GPS surveys covering a network of benchmarks
around Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō are made available as those measure-
ments are collected. The time-series data (e.g. seismic
amplitude, tilt, and GPS) can be queried through the
VALVE (Volcano Analysis and Visualization Environ-
ment; Cervelli et al. 2002) interface, which allows a
user to plot data from various monitoring stations
over user-defined time periods. Webcam imagery is
available via a searchable database, while lava flow
maps and kinematic GPS results can be downloaded
for the specific dates on which they were collected.
The data are supported on the VEPP site by informa-
tion including the history of the Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō eruption,
how various monitoring data are collected, and how
monitoring data relate to eruptive activity. The vision
for VEPP is that students and other users can examine
a diversity of monitoring data from a period that they
define—either collected recently or spanning some
past event of interest—and use those data to interpret
the volcanic processes that are responsible for the
observed signals.
We explored the impact of VEPP on improving students’
understanding of volcano monitoring and hazards through
the use of a teaching module that simulates the weekly staff
meeting at the U.S. Geological Survey’s Hawaiian Volcano
Observatory. We developed the “VEPP: Monday Morning
Meeting at the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory” (MMM)
activity to give students the opportunity to work in small
groups to use VEPP data to monitor an eruptive event at
Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō.  The goal of this work is to determine if the
MMM VEPP activity effectively results in transitioning be-
ginner or novice level students to the advanced level on
the spectrum of comprehension for volcano monitoring
techniques and if their ability to interact with experts
increases.
The learning goals of the activity are for students to be
able to “interpret a multidisciplinary dataset for monitor-
ing volcanic activity and to use that data to make a fore-
cast for a potential eruption” (Poland et al. 2010a). We
found that exposure to VEPP data through the MMM
activity advanced non-expert students to a level where
they could communicate effectively with experts. Our re-
sults suggest that to improve exchanges between scien-
tists and non-scientists, it is important to gain the
perspective of how non-experts think, how they can
learn, and how information may best be targeted to dif-
ferent levels of non-experts, which should reduce a
source of misunderstanding when scientists and non-
scientists interact during a volcanic crisis. The VEPP ap-
proach to educating non-experts is unique compared to
other training exercises because the student participants
work with real volcano-monitoring data, as opposed to
mock monitoring results (even though these are usually
based on real eruption experiences).  Other methods 
used to enhance communication between groups or the
understanding level of non-experts such as tabletop
exercises (e.g.,  Haynes et al. 2008; Solana et al. 2008;
Pierson et al. 2013) and direct-delivery courses with
role-playing scenarios used in the Federal Emergency
Management Agency course on Volcanic Crises Aware-
ness (B. Houghton, written communication, 2014) may
benefit from including VEPP or similar online volcano-
data resources. Including a VEPP-based activity that uti-
lizes real volcano-monitoring data in such courses prior to
an eruption role-playing project would provide important
background to beginner and novice participants, allowing
them to get more out of the role-playing exercise, and take
better advantage of the monitoring experience. The VEPP
data and related activities may also work well leading up
to other simulation activities such as the eruption crisis
simulation of Harpp and Sweeney (2002) or in addition to
other volcano-related simulations such as Hales and
Cashman (2008) for training or classes focused on diverse
volcano hazards.
Methods
VEPP and Monday Morning Meeting exercise
To support use of the VEPP website, a week-long work-
shop was held at Kīlauea Volcano in July 2010. The 25 par-
ticipants from the United States and Canada represented a
diverse cross section of higher learning institutions, from
community colleges to research universities, and they in-
cluded geology faculty who teach introductory non-major
classes (both large and small),  laboratories, discipline-
specific upper-division courses, and graduate seminars. An
outcome of the workshop is that 20 new volcanology
teaching modules that incorporate the VEPP site were
developed and made available for community use via
the Science Education Resource Center (SERC) website
(National Association of Geoscience Teachers 2010;
Poland et al. 2011). We developed the “VEPP: Monday
Morning Meeting at the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory”
activity (Poland et al. 2010a) and have assessed how
student learning can be improved through the use of
online volcano-monitoring data that are supported by
background materials and use of effective and research-
based pedagogical methods.
The Monday Morning Meeting (MMM) activity is
intended to simulate the weekly staff meeting of the
USGS Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, during which ex-
perts from different disciplines (typically geology, geo-
desy, seismology, and gas geochemistry) present data
collected over the previous week, and discuss implica-
tions for volcanic activity. The MMM exercise is a jigsaw
activity (Aronson et al. 1978; Shulman and Sherin 2004),
in which students in small groups (3–4 students) are
given one type of monitoring data, either tilt, GPS, web-
cams, or seismic data associated with the July 21, 2007,
Page 4
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 4 of 16
fissure eruption on the east flank of the Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō erup-
tive vent (Figure 2; Poland et al. 2008). We chose to use
archive data available on the VEPP website because an
interpretation of that eruptive activity has already been
published, providing the opportunity for classes to
complete the MMM exercise to predict volcanic activity
and then to read the real outcome (Poland et al. 2008).
The same exercise can be run using near-real-time data,
in which students interpret volcanic activity as it is hap-
pening. Student groups discuss their assigned data type
in terms of what the data indicate is happening on the
volcano. A handout included in the activity (available at
 http://nagt.org/nagt/teaching_resources/vepp/examples/
 48383.html) guides student discussion. After a set period 
of time for discussion, new groups are formed consisting
of at least one student from each discipline. The stu-
dents describe their data to one another and are then
tasked with developing an interpretation of the vol-
canic activity that can satisfy all the datasets they have
examined. Instructors can use a handout included in
the activity to guide the second set of student discus-
sions, which can be followed by a whole-group discus-
sion led by the instructor. The timing of each student
discussion session can be determined by the instructor,
based on our use of the MMM activity, we recommend
30–50 minutes each. As with any jigsaw activity (e.g.
Aronson et al. 1978), the distribution of each data type
is governed by the number of students and groups
Figure 2 Examples of GPS, Tilt, Seismic and Webcam data used in MMM activity for July 1–31, 2007.
Page 5
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 5 of 16
participating in the two discussion sessions. Grading is at
the discretion of the instructor, an additional writing as-
signment is provided, which asks student participants to
read the EOS-Transactions article that describes the
eruption event they had been asked to interpret from the
activity (Poland et al. 2008) and compare their final inter-
pretation based on VEPP data with actual events.
Students in seven different undergraduate geoscience
courses participated in the MMM activity during 2011–13
(Table 1) and took a pre- and post- MMM activity survey.
In each of these classes, learning gains ((Post%-Pre%)/(100-
Pre%) from Hake 1998) were measured for students who
completed surveys that include multiple choice and
open-ended responses, which were qualitatively analyzed
for learning (Tables 2 and 3). Participants at the two-year
college (2yc) included students in a geologic hazards intro-
ductory course, in which students engaged in the activity
administered during three separate classes, and in two
physical introductory geology courses, in which students
engaged in the activity in just one class period. Partici-
pants at the comprehensive university (4yc) used the
MMM exercise in a large lecture setting for the introduc-
tory physical geology course during two class periods and
in a small upper-division volcanology course during two
class periods. All classes at the 2yc were taught by one
instructor and all classes at the 4yc were all taught by a
second instructor.
Our intent for administering this range of populations,
class settings, and time frames was to assess if time, class
size, or level of background expertise played a role in
the ability for the students who started as non-experts to
improve their knowledge of volcano monitoring as a re-
sult of using the MMM activity. For the purpose of ana-
lyzing learning in the MMM activity, we defined four
categories of learners. Introductory students started at a
beginner level with minimal amounts of prior knowledge
based on pre-MMM survey results. It is this population
that we liken to the non-expert, general population (i.e.,
public decision makers, news media, and the general 
Table 2 Statistical analysis of results of MMM multiple
choice question
Classes Paired t-test Cohen’s d (effect size) p-value
2yc (111) Hazards 5.11  2.19  <0.001
2yc (101 a) Intro 4.28  1.01  <0.001
2yc (101 b) Intro 5.87  1.67  <0.001
4yc (101 a) Intro 4.68  1.81  <0.001
4yc (101 b) Intro 13.31  1.91  <0.001
Volcanology 2.07  0.72  0.05
Introductory 15.70  2.07  <0.001
Statistical comparison of pre-MMM and post- MMM scores, effect sizes and
p-values. Significance was tested at the 0.05 level, all p-values less than 0.05
are considered to be statistically significant. All d values over 0.8 are considered
to have a large effect size (Cohen 1969).
public) with whom volcanologists may need to interact
during times of planning and crisis. The volcanology stu-
dents had some prior knowledge both from the course
content as well as other courses where some of the meth-
odology and content may have been provided in other
contexts, such as the use of GPS in a Structural Geology
class. We consider these students to be novices; they have
more knowledge than a beginner. Advanced learners are
able to apply appropriate terminology to the collection
and use of specific volcano-monitoring techniques and
have a basic ability to interpret the data. As such, the
knowledge of advanced learners is similar to what is de-
sired for civil defense personnel and other professionals
with whom planning and communication often occurs in
volcanically active regions. Experts are volcanologists who
actively work with volcano monitoring data. The notion of
a beginner- to- expert continuum is similar to those de-
scribed in other contexts (Chi et al. 1981; Bransford et al.
2000; Petcovic and Libarkin 2007). The goal of this work
was to determine if the MMM activity effectively allows
for a beginner or novice to advance on the spectrum of
comprehension for volcano-monitoring techniques and
become more literate in conversing with experts.
Table 1 Results of MMM multiple-choice question #1
Classes (and student ID numbers)  Time (mins) N  Class total N  Pre- mean Pre- s.d. Post- mean Post- s.d.
2yc (GLG111) Hazards (A1-A12)  200  12 13  −1.25  2.23  2.25  0.97
2yc (GLG101a) Intro (A14-A31)  75  18 23  −1.39  1.82  1.33  1.81
2yc (GLG101b) Intro (A33-A46)  75  14 14  −1.07  2.40  2.64  1.39
4yc (GEOS101a) Intro (C4-C48)  100  16 105  −1.25  1.06  2.38  1.63
4yc (GEOS101b) Intro (C50-C98)  100  49 57  −1.92  1.64  2.35  1.74
Volcanology (2011 & 2013) (GEOS436) (10-392-10-409) 100  17 21  2.00  1.06  2.77  1.09
All introductory  –  109 –  −1.56  1.97  2.21  1.65
Descriptive statistics of the quantitative measure of student learning gains from multiple-choice (MC) question #1 that asked students to identify monitoring
techniques. Time (min) is the amount of time each class spent on the activity; N is the number of participants who gave permission for data to be used and
completed both pre- MMM and post- MMM surveys; Class Total N is the total number of students enrolled in the class. Scoring is described in the text. Pre- MMM
mean, Post- MMM mean and SD columns report the before and after scores for the MC question. Minimum score = −8, Maximum score = 4.
Page 6
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 6 of 16
Table 3 Learning gains for question 1 on MMM survey
Classes  Pre %  Post % Learning
(mean) (mean) gains
2yc (GLG111) Hazards  51.28  78.85  0.49
2yc (GLG101a) Intro  50.85  71.79  0.38
2yc (GLG101b) Intro  53.30  81.87  0.59
4yc (GEOS101a) Intro  51.92  79.81  0.50
4yc (GEOS101b) Intro  46.78  79.59  0.59
Volcanology (2011 & 2013) GEOS436) 76.92  82.81  0.14
All introductory  49.54  78.55  0.53
Learning Gains is the (Post%-Pre%)/(100-Pre%) and ranges from a possible gain of
−1 to +1 (Hake 1998). Class mean % for pre and post scores once normalized out
of 12 points. Learning gains are class mean gains based on each participants Post
% - Pre %/100- Pre % score. Lower Learning Gains for Volcanology students may
be associated with a ceiling effect associated with higher pre-MMM survey scores,
as discussed in the text.
Content learning from MMM
Our primary method for measuring learning gains was
from the use of a pre-MMM and post-MMM survey ad-
ministered to students (electronically or paper format,
see discussion below) prior to and following the MMM
activity (Table 4). The post-MMM survey was adminis-
tered between 1–3 weeks after the activity. Pre- MMM-
and post- MMM surveys were delivered in hard copy
during all three classes at the 2yc (GLG111, GLG101a,
and GLG101b) and the 2011 volcanology course at the
4yc (GEOS436). Electronic versions were offered to stu-
dents in two introductory courses (GEOS101a and
GEOS101b) and the 2013 volcanology course at the 4yc.
Not all enrolled students completed both the pre-MMM
and post- MMM surveys offered electronically, with re-
sponse rates of 28% (spring 2013) and 47% (fall 2012)
for the introductory courses and 70% for the volcanology
students. While the response rate in the spring 2013 
introductory class was low, respondents received the
same range of final grades as the whole class, and their
survey scores were statistically consistent with the fall
2012 class (which had a 47% response rate).
The MMM curriculum and survey were developed
through an iterative process of consultation between
content experts and education specialists. The MMM
survey is tied to the content taught within the MMM
module and is designed to capture student learning
gains about methods used to monitor and forecast vol-
canic eruptions through multiple questions.
The multiple-choice question in both the pre- MMM
and post- MMM survey asked students to identify which
of “the following data types are used to monitor volcanic
eruptions?”  Possible answers included widely used
methods and distractor responses that are not commonly
used for monitoring purposes. The scoring for this ques-
tion was one point for each correctly identified method
and a loss of a point for each inaccurate method identified
and each unidentified correct method. The lowest possible
score was −8 and the highest possible score was +4. We
completed basic statistical tests (number of participants,
pre-MMM and post- MMM survey scores, mean, and
standard deviation) and t-test comparisons for each class
and between beginner (introductory classes) and novice
(volcanology classes) levels to assess prior knowledge and
overall learning gains for all student participants. Identifi-
cation of beginner, novice, and advanced level learners are
for the purposes of distinguishing learner types before
and after the use of the MMM activity and do not
imply knowledge beyond the scope of the pre-MMM
and post- MMM surveys completed here.
In addition to the multiple-choice question, we mea-
sured student responses to open-ended questions about
the collection and use of GPS, tilt, and seismic data,
Table 4 Questions from the pre-MMM and post-MMM surveys
Multiple choice: The following data types are used to monitor volcanic eruptions (circle all that apply)
Tilt  Continuous GPS  Earthquakes Jacob’s Staff  Webcams
Potentiometric GPS Mineral alteration  Strike & Dip  Gravity
Open ended response:
GPS:  Describe how GPS data are used to monitor volcanoes, including the following:
a) How are the data collected?
b) How the data are used in volcano monitoring (e.g. what is a sign of an impending eruption?)
Tilt:  Describe how tilt data are used to monitor volcanoes, including the following:
a) How are the data collected?
b) How the data are used in volcano monitoring (e.g. what is a sign of an impending eruption?)
Seismic  Describe how seismic data are used to monitor volcanoes, including the following:
a) How are the data collected?
b) How the data are used in volcano monitoring (e.g. what is a sign of an impending eruption?)
Before-After:  Describe and interpret changes in tilt patterns expected before, during, and after an episode of lava effusion at Pu’u ‘Ō’ō.
Questions from the pre-MMM and post-MMM surveys described in the text.
Page 7
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 7 of 16
which provided greater insights into student understand-
ing of these concepts (Table 5).  Student participants
were asked to briefly describe how each of the three
monitoring data types (GPS, tilt, seismic) was collected
and used to monitor volcanoes. A summative, short-
answer question asked students to, “Describe and inter-
pret changes in tilt patterns expected before, during, and
after an episode of lava effusion at Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō (a volcanic
vent of Kīlauea)”.  This last question provided students
the opportunity to tell a more holistic story of events as-
sociated with volcanic activity in the context of a specific
method used for volcano monitoring and forecasting.
Open-ended responses from students were analyzed
for overall learning gains by comparing responses from
pre-MMM to post- MMM surveys. Changes in learning
scores were determined from a thematic level of analysis
(Miles and Huberman 1994). Thematic analysis is an ap-
proach of looking at trends within the data to identify
responses used by students that illustrate common
learning themes. Common phrases revealed two themes
across the student responses: a) use of vocabulary,
through increased use of appropriately applied termin-
ology (e.g., inflation/deflation, radial/tangential tilt) or b)
overall conceptual gains when pre-MMM and post-
MMM responses from the same student were compared.
Answers that indicated an increase in understanding
(e.g.,  a pre-MMM survey answer of “I don’t know” or
“seismographs” in response to the question of how seis-
mic data are collected would be considered improved if
the student’s post-survey response was more detailed,
such as, “using seismometers to detect an increase in
earthquake activity” [student A34]) were scored as +1.
Responses that were categorized as the same or no
change in understanding received a score of “0”.  Re-
sponses received a −1 score if there was evidence of a
decrease in understanding or use of language, or if they
reflected a misconception that was not evident in the
pre-MMM survey. For example, one student (10–394)
applied the term “potentiometric GPS” in the post-survey
response, which was one of the distractors in the pre-
MMM and post- MMM survey multiple-choice ques-
tion. Responses to the open-ended questions were 
initially scored separately by the individual instructors
and were subsequently evaluated jointly. If there was a
disagreement in the scoring, a common score was
agreed upon through discussion. It was possible for a
student to improve their understanding and also gain a
new misconception, so there were some students who
received both a +1 and −1 score. Counts of values were
used to determine percent of learning gains, loss, or no
changes and correlated to student learning gains for the
multiple choice question results. The total possible range
of change from pre-MMM to post- MMM survey re-
sponses to open-ended questions is +7 (increase in all
seven questions) to −7 (decrease in all seven questions).
Confidence development from MMM
Self-efficacy is the confidence in one’s ability to be suc-
cessful with a specific task in the ability to understand
content largely based on prior experiences (Bandura
1986; Zimmerman 2000),  and it consistently predicts
student performance in different subjects, including
introductory science courses (e.g.,  Chemistry, Zusho
et al. 2003; Geology, McConnell et al. 2010). While self-
report data is dependent on the experiences and prior
knowledge of the student, such data are valuable in help-
ing to determine changes in the perception of student
learning, and can be predictive of performance (Assor
and Connell 1992).  Self-efficacy of student participants
was measured in pre-MMM and post- MMM surveys
from self-ratings on a Likert Scale (Likert 1932) for state-
ments, “I understand [seismic/tilt/GPS/webcam] data and
how to interpret it regarding eruptive conditions”.  An
additional set of data are from self-ratings on a Likert
Scale for the statement, “I understand that assessments of
volcanic activity are based on multiple datasets, and can
describe how different datasets complement one another”.
In all cases, students were asked to rate their level of con-
fidence using a scale of 1 (not at all),  3 (somewhat),  5
(I could look at this data and assess the state of activity).
Changes in self-efficacy are from comparison of indi-
viduals’ scores in their pre-MMM and post- MMM survey
responses (Table 6).
Table 5 Results of MMM Written results from pre-MMM and post- MMM surveys
Change in open-ended question scores from pre- MMM to post-MMM survey*
Class  Multiple choice GPS (a) GPS (b) Tilt (a) Tilt (b) Seismic (a) Seismic (b) Before- -After Sum of score
changes**
Average introductory (2yc) 3.77  0.40  0.26  0.39  0.43  0.25  0.26  0.50  2.45
Average introductory (4yc) 4.11  0.55  0.70  0.54  0.56  3.77
Average volcanology 0.76  0.63  0.65  0.35  0.53  0.35  0.53  0.41  3.41
*Note: Possible scores are −1 (decreased quality answer), 0 (same quality answer), +1 (improved answer).
**4yc written questions asked on basis of 4 questions by topic (without (a) and (b) designations, scores normalized to 7 points possible for easy comparison with
2yc introductory and volcanology student scores.
Summary of comparison of student pre-MMM and post- MMM scores for open-ended (written) questions, which address (a) the collection of data and (b) the use
of data in monitoring volcanoes.
Page 8
Teasdale 
et 
al. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Volcanology 
(
2015) 
4:
11
Table 6 Results of MMM self-efficacy scores for pre-MMM and post- MMM surveys
Pre-MMM survey 5 pt Likert scale  Post-MMM survey 5 pt Likert scale  Difference pre- to post- Likert score
Classes  Seismic Tilt GPS Webcam Multiple Pre-score Seismic Tilt GPS Webcam Multiple Post-score Seismic Tilt GPS Webcam Multiple Average
data sets total (/30)  data sets total (/30)  data sets post-pre
difference
2YC GLG111 Intro-Hazards 1.7  1.3  1.6  1.7  1.8  9.2  3.1  3.5  3.4  4.0  3.6  19.7  1.4  2.3  1.8  2.3  1.8  1.9
2YC GLG101a Intro  1.6  1.1  1.1  1.3  1.8  6.9  2.9  3.1  2.8  3.6  4.0  16.3  1.3  1.9  1.7  2.3  2.2  1.9
2yc GLG101b Intro  1.5  1.1  1.1  1.3  1.5  6.5  3.2  3.1  3.3  3.8  4.0  17.4  1.7  2.1  2.1  2.5  2.5  2.2
4yc GEOS101a Intro  2.4  2.3  2.4  1.8  2.8  13.8  4.3  4.1  3.9  4.0  4.3  23.7  1.9  1.8  1.6  2.2  1.5  1.8
4yc GEOS101b Intro  2.3  2.1  2.4  2.2  2.8  14.1  3.7  3.4  3.6  3.9  3.8  20.9  1.3  1.3  1.2  1.8  1.0  1.3
All volcanology. 3.4  2.9  3.4  3.6  3.6  19.7  4.1  4.1  4.3  3.9  4.6  23.7  0.7  1.2  0.9  0.4  0.9  0.8
Average - Intro (all)  2.0  1.7  1.9  1.8  2.4  9.9  3.5  3.4  3.4  3.9  3.9  18.1  1.5  1.7  1.5  2.1  1.5  1.7
Average - Volcanology 3.4  2.9  3.4  3.6  3.6  16.9  4.1  4.1  4.3  3.9  4.6  21.1  0.7  1.2  0.9  0.4  0.9  0.8
Self-Efficacy ratings of students in pre-MMM and post- MMM surveys, using Likert Scale (1 = low confidence to 5 = high confidence in the use of volcano monitoring data). 
Page 
8 
of 
16
Page 9
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 9 of 16
Results and discussion
Content learning: Multiple choice
In order to compare the introductory students (beginners)
to students enrolled in the volcanology course (novices),
we compared the mean pre MMM values for both popula-
tions. The pre MMM survey for the beginners was −1.56
(normalized to 6.44) and for the novices was 2.00 (normal-
ized to 10.00). An independent t-test comparison between
these two populations determined that the pre-MMM
survey responses for the beginners was significantly
different from the novice pre-MMM survey results
(t = −11.16, df = 36.28, p < 0.001, with non-equal vari-
ances assumed due to the large difference in popula-
tion sizes). The effect size illustrates the magnitude of
the difference between these populations with a 1.89
Cohen’s d-value, where general convention is that any-
thing over 0.8 is considered to be a large effect size
(Cohen 1969). As a result, we have including a general
category of “introductory” that treats all of the intro-
ductory students at both the two-year college and the
four-year college as one population.
An independent t-test compares the means between
the two populations in order to determine if the differ-
ence in means is significantly different than zero
(Coladarci et al. 2008).  A paired t-test compares the
difference in mean scores for each participant and de-
termines if that difference is significantly different
from zero (Coladarci et al. 2008). Cohen’s d is a meas-
ure of the effect size, which is to say, how much the
means between two populations vary as a function of
their standard deviations, this measure is more mean-
ingful than significance which is a function of the size
of a given population (Coe 2002).  Learning gains are
calculated by normalizing the pre and post scores out
of 12, so a pre score of −3 would result in a value of a
normalized score of 5 and would be the equivalent of
a pre % score of 38.46%.  As a result, learning gains
were calculated as a function of the formula from
Hake (1988) of (Post%-Pre%)/(100-Pre%).  This allows
one to examine the learning gains as a function of the
maximum possible learning gains. As such, it has pre-
viously been posited that any gain over 0.7 is a large
learning gain, between 0.7 and 0.3 is a medium learn-
ing gain and less than 0.3 is a small learning gain
(Hake 1998).  Table 3 illustrates the learning gain
means for each class. Figure 3 illustrates the learning
gains, converted to percent as compared to the initial
pre-score values, which illustrates the high incoming
knowledge of the volcanology (novice) students. The
results of this difference in incoming population sup-
ports the importance of the follow-up details from the
written responses in an effort to better understand
what these learning gains represent in a more nuanced
fashion. 
In identifying monitoring methods in the multiple-
choice question, all of the beginners (introductory) had
significant changes in their MMM survey scores. While
the extent of learning for novices (volcanology) was not
statistically significant, both the small sample size and
high pre-MMM survey score may have impacted this re-
sult. Beginner learners increased their scores from −1.56
to 2.21 and novice learners increased scores from 2.00 to
2.77 (Table 1). Novice-student scores indicate that they
started where the beginner’s knowledge ended. Because
this item only scored to a maximum of 4 points, the
total growth for the novice learners was limited. Stu-
dents who started at the novice level may have experi-
enced a ceiling effect on the multiple choice question of
the post-MMM survey in that their pre-MMM survey
scores were high, which may have limited how high their
post MMM score could improve (e.g., Deslauriers et al.
2011). This limitation in demonstrating learning was rein-
forced with the learning gains, which were both positive,
but was 0.53 for the beginner population and 0.14 for the
novice population on a scale from −1 to +1 (Table 3).
Content learning: open-ended responses
For the purposes of this paper, in which we are examining
the learning of two populations —beginners and novices—
we find that the open-ended responses reveal more than
the quantitative results from the multiple choice question
analyzed. In particular, we note different degrees of shifts in
understanding of the content between the pre-MMM and
post- MMM survey. Students shifted from a beginner to a
novice level of understanding and from a novice to an ad-
vanced level of understanding. Examples of these shifts are
presented below, selected to illustrate shifts in learning
across a range of monitoring topics. For all open-ended
response questions, minor spelling errors were cor-
rected provided they did not change the meaning of the
student’s statement (e.g.,  “erution” was corrected to
“eruption” [student 10–404], whereas “satiles” was not
changed to “satellites” [A-7] as it may or may not repre-
sent an understanding of satellites).
Beginner learning gains (introductory students)
Introductory students, who generally lacked prior know-
ledge of volcano monitoring, had small improvements in
understanding, improving, on average, by 1 point. We
categorize this shift as beginner to novice. While their
understanding grew, it lacked the larger conceptual
framework within which volcano-monitoring data are
used and inform interpretations; however, these shifts
are important for students who are starting from the
lowest level of experience and understanding. Examples
of student responses are presented below to illustrate
that students often started with little to no knowledge
about the subject, and in some cases started with
Page 10
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 10 of 16
Figure 3 % Learning gains vs. % Pre-MMM score gains, which illustrates the overall learning gains for most student participants, even
with the higher pre-scores for the volcanology (novice) students.
incorrect knowledge, but gained a greater familiarity
with the data-collection method and how it is used to
monitor volcanoes after participating in the MMM activ-
ity. Pre- MMM and post-MMM survey responses below
are from students in introductory courses at the two
year college (class: GLG101) for questions that ask how
data are collected (question a) and how they are used in
volcano monitoring (question b).
GPS Data Example Response: 
These kinds of small shifts in understanding, while not
completely correct, represent partial shifts similar to
those seen in other beginner populations engaged in
active-learning scenarios (Lewis et al. 2010).
In some cases, beginner students who had some prior
knowledge demonstrated a more obvious shift in learn-
ing. An example of this prior knowledge from a 2yc
introductory-course student is:
Seismic Data Example Response:
Pre: “a) satellites, b)?”
Post: “a) Through certain points that change GPS location
during an eruption, b) A shift in the position” [A39]
Tilt Data Example Response:
Pre: “a) unsure, b) unsure”
Post: “a) The data is collected through a machine that
can detect if the magma underground is moving, b) The
sign that a volcano might erupt would be if the tilt was
increasing and increasing all around the volcano”. [A37]
Seismic Data Example Response:
Pre: “a) minerals, b) I don’t know”.
Post: “a) by how much the earth shake, b) the graphs
it comes out with” [A45] 
Pre: “a) seismic waves are collected from plate
movement; b) a sign would be significant seismic
waves (an earthquake)”
Post: “a) seismic data is collected by use of
seismographs, place strategically around or on the
volcano; b) A change in earthquake activity tends to
signal an impending eruption, so if a change or
increase in earthquake activity would occur, it would
signal an impending eruption”. [A26]
This example illustrates how possessing prior know-
ledge on a topic can lead to greater advances in overall
conceptual understanding (Chinn and Brewer 1993;
Lewis et al. 2010).
Students in the 2yc introductory hazards course
(GLG111) had more time (200 minutes vs 100 or 75 mi-
nutes spent in other courses) to spend with the MMM
activity, which led to opportunities to engage more deeplyPage 11
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 11 of 16
with the content and allowed for greater overall shifts in
learning gains. Examples below represent responses for
students from the introductory hazards course:
GPS data example response
Tilt Data Example Response:
Pre: “a) GPS trackers are placed on the volcano to see
if it is moving or shifting, b) unsure”,
Post: “a) GPS nodes are placed around the volcano
and send information of their location to a satellite
and then to us, b) If there is increased or decreased
distance between the GPS nodes then you know it is
active/possible eruption”. [A8]
Pre: “a) I don’t know, b) I don’t know”,
Post: “a) Using tiltmeters on or just below the surface,
they measure if the ground is ‘tilting’ up or out (radial-up,
tangential-out), b) The tiltmeters will show that the
magma underneath is expanding, causing the ground to
balloon out”. [A5]
This student [A5] also greatly improved the explanation
of how tilt data varies before, during, and after an eruption
with:
Pre: “I don’t know”
Post: “Before: The tilt patterns showed radial and
tangential tilt prior to the eruption, showing that the
magma was expanding, During: The tilt patterns
showed more radial tilt than tangential, due to the
pressure of the magma being released, After: The tilt
patterns lowered and show little sign of tilt”. [A-5]
Responses like these suggest that the amount of time
spent on the activity may help support beginners in de-
veloping more sophisticated understanding. Both prior
knowledge and increased time spent on the MMM activ-
ity are important factors that should be considered in
the development of training courses or other situations
that involve working with non-experts.
Novice learning gains (volcanology students)
Novice learners (volcanology students in GEOS436) start
the MMM activity with greater prior knowledge (pre-
MMM survey multiple choice average scores = 2, Table 1)
and fewer “I  don’t  know” responses than beginner
learners (e.g., introductory students), although the learn-
ing gains of novices are lower for the multiple choice
question (0.14) than for beginners (0.53). Novice learners
outperform beginner learners in conceptual knowledge 
following the MMM activity, as measured by the average
increase in open-ended (written) responses to questions
about the collection and use of monitoring data—novice
learners improved on average by 3.4 points (compared
to 1 point for beginner learners). These results indicate
that the novice learners increased their knowledge to
what we have defined as “advanced” levels (able to apply
appropriate terminology to the collection and use of spe-
cific volcano-monitoring techniques and have a basic
ability to interpret the data) as a result of the MMM ac-
tivity. For example, student 10-404’s pre-MMM survey
answer about the use of GPS data, “GPS data points are
used as a source to determine the amount of tectonic
movement within a specific area” reflects knowledge of
GPS in the context of monitoring tectonic displace-
ments, but is not phrased in the context of volcano
monitoring. Following the MMM activity, this student’s
response to the same question in the post-survey is,
“The increased movement between two specific data
points are imminent signs of an impending eruption.” In
this case, the student began the activity with a grasp of
how GPS is used, but increased the sophistication of the
post-survey answer by providing additional detail with
regard to the volcanological applications of GPS.
The open-ended responses indicate that the novice
learners’ knowledge level becomes much more sophisticated
and nuanced and represents a shift towards that of ad-
vanced learners. This is an important consideration in the
design of training for civil-defense or emergency-planning
personnel who might already be familiar with using scien-
tific data but not in the context of a volcanic crisis.
Measures of confidence: beginner
Based on self-efficacy responses in the pre-MMM and
post- MMM surveys (Table 6), student confidence in the
use of each type of volcano-monitoring data increased
for all beginner learners (introductory classes) following
the MMM activity. Average increases for beginners range
from 1.5 (seismic data) to 2.1 (webcam data). The webcam
change may be an indicator of the simplicity in applying
webcams to volcano monitoring and research. While most
students are likely familiar with webcams, they initially
lacked the confidence in applying them to volcano-
monitoring scenarios, but were able to rapidly grasp the
applications once they were exposed to the data. Efficacy
increases were well aligned with increased knowledge in
this beginner population. For example, pre-MMM survey
responses to questions of how monitoring data are
collected and used were left blank or had “I don’t know”
responses. In particular, 55–100% of students in the intro-
ductory hazards class (GLG111) started with “I don’t
know” responses (depending on the particular monitoring
method),  but in the post-survey, only 40% or fewer
responded with “I don’t know” for the same questions.
Page 12
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 12 of 16
Measures of confidence: novice
The confidence of novice learners (volcanology students)
starts higher than for beginner learners prior to the
MMM activity, which is consistent with novices starting
from more sophisticated content knowledge. Confidence
ratings for most novice learners increased following the
MMM activity, with gains ranging from average 0.35
points (on the 5 point scale) for webcam data to average
gains of 1.2 for tilt data (Table 6). Comparisons of pre-
MMM and post- MMM self-efficacy data reveal lower
increases for novices than for beginner learners for every
data type. This may be the result of a ceiling effect in
which novices are more confident with data prior to the
MMM activity, resulting in smaller changes following
the activity—in other words, they do not have as far to
go in their confidence rankings in the post-survey. When
compared with their learning gains in the written pre-
MMM and post- MMM scores, novice learners show
much larger improvement than beginner learners, so
we suspect that with the MMM activity, novice learners
increase their knowledge to the advanced level and
come to recognize there is more to know about a par-
ticular monitoring technique than they first realized.
Their post-survey responses, therefore, reflect a more-
sophisticated understanding that the monitoring tech-
niques are complex. In particular, as they gain a greater
understanding of where their ability is on the expert
continuum, they may be less likely to indicate confidence
at a full level (score of 5), which may also dampen the im-
pact of self-efficacy scores with the novice population. As 
learners recognize that the use of monitoring data is more
complex and contains more uncertainty than they previ-
ously thought, they may be more cautious as they assess
their ability to use the data for volcano-monitoring
purposes—in essence, as students have better models to
construct their understanding, they can more accurately
gauge their abilities and limitations (Bandura 1986).
Connections between learning and self-efficacy with
MMM
Post-MMM survey scores for open-ended questions
show improved content knowledge accompanied by im-
proved self-efficacy measured for all classes (Figure 4).
Beginner learners all start the MMM activity with simi-
larly low self-efficacy in seismic, tilt, and GPS data, but
high confidence in the use of webcam data. Post-data in-
dicate that all classes increased in self-efficacy for all
types of data, with the largest increase for webcam data.
The multiple-choice scores for beginner learners in-
creased by 22-29%, which is nearly the same as increases
in their Likert-scale scores, by 22%-30% from before to
after using the MMM activity (Tables 1 and 6).
A prevailing informal assumption is that training/teach-
ing in smaller class sizes results in greater learning for be-
ginners, but there is evidence that with the MMM activity,
learning can happen just as well with beginners in larger
classes (e.g. >100 students) as in smaller classes (e.g., 13 stu-
dents), particularly if enough time is spent on the activity.
Figure 5 illustrates that multiple-choice learning gains oc-
curred in all ranges of class sizes (from 13 to 105 students).
Figure 4 Comparison of multiple choice (MC) and Self-Efficacy scores in post-surveys, after students use MMM activity. Classes are
designated by colors as indicated, monitoring data types are designated by symbols.
Page 13
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 13 of 16
Figure 5 Increase in learning from multiple choice and written responses for classes based on number of students enrolled.
Class time spent on the activity may be an important
factor for increasing student learning gains (Figure 6),
which is particularly apparent with the open-ended ques-
tions. Students who had at least 100 minutes to spend on
the activity at the beginner level were more likely to have
higher overall learning gains than beginners who spent
75 minutes. This becomes an important consideration
when introducing non-experts to volcano-monitoring
methods. Brief overviews and one-time exposures are
probably insufficient if attempting to shift beginners’ un-
derstanding to a novice level. Longer time periods spent
with the MMM module were also correlated with stronger 
knowledge retention. Beginner learners who spent at least
100 minutes on the MMM activity retained their ability to
identify monitoring techniques at a 98% success rate for
the final exam, which was three weeks after the conclusion
of the activity. Of that group, 88% were able to identify
how inflation and deflation patterns related to eruptive
activity on the final exam. This suggests that the MMM
scenario provides a meaningful experience for beginners
to learn about volcano monitoring beyond a superficial
awareness. For learners that started at the novice level, the
shift to an advanced level following the MMM activity ar-
gues that increased background knowledge (Chinn and
Figure 6 Increase in learning from multiple choice and written responses for classes based on amount of time (in minutes) spent on
the MMM activity.
Page 14
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 14 of 16
Brewer 1993; Zimmerman 2000) and increased expos-
ure to information enhances learning and efficacy levels
(Pintrich and Zusho 2007).
Conclusions and recommendations
Themes of MMM training
Beginners (introductory students) show the greatest
learning gains in the use of volcano-monitoring data but
showed smaller gains in open-ended written responses,
which represents their lower-level ability to articulate
new-found knowledge. Scores on Pre-MMM surveys re-
flect their unfamiliarity and lack of confidence in the use
of scientific volcano monitoring data, but their increase to
the novice level with very large learning gains (0.38-0.59)
demonstrates their improved understanding of informa-
tion provided by expert scientists.
Our results reinforce the idea that novice learners (vol-
canology students) with some prior knowledge improve to
advanced levels of understanding through use of the
MMM activity. Novice learners had a stronger shift to
advanced conceptual understanding (especially in com-
parison to beginners) and also appear to realize the
limits of their knowledge, which may explain the
smaller increases in self-efficacy scores from those of
beginners.
An overriding theme of our work with the MMM ac-
tivity in college-level courses is that the more time that
is spent with the module, the greater the learning gains
and retention, especially for beginner learners. This re-
sult supports the idea that training intended to prepare
non-experts to deal with volcanic activity should dedi-
cate an appropriate amount of time to the subject. Based
on the learning and the increase in self-efficacy docu-
mented here, using an activity like the VEPP MMM in
situations where participants have the opportunity to
work with real monitoring data from an active volcanois a good complement to eruption scenario exercises.
For beginner students, using archived data that are asso-
ciated with a well-characterized past event may be pref-
erable so they can compare their interpretations to the
actual volcanic activity (in other words, an “answer”
already exists) in Poland et al. 2008. More advanced stu-
dents would benefit from using near-real-time data (also
available on the VEPP website), allowing their interpreta-
tions to evolve over time along with the activity they are
tracking, and the uncertain nature of the outcome would
be a lesson in itself. This use of near-real time-data and
the sophisticated nuances that come with it could
address some of the ceiling effect observed in the novice
population.
Recommendations
Based on our experience using VEPP and the MMM ac-
tivity with beginning- and novice-level undergraduate 
students, we recommend that those who engage in
volcano-monitoring training programs for non-science
experts such as emergency managers, land use planners,
members of the media and civil defense experts consider
the following:
1. Volcano-monitoring reports and data are currently
made available to the public but aren’t necessarily
incorporated into training modules designed to
familiarize beginners with the use or understanding
of those data (e.g Kokelaar 2002, Setting,
Chronology and consequences of the eruption of
Soufrière Hills Volcano, Montserrat 1995–1999
Activities like MMM provide beginners with
instruction and active engagement that guide them
through the interpretation of real data, resulting in
improved learning. The fact that working with real
volcano-monitoring data is clearly tied to increases
in understanding of how such data can be used to
assess volcanic unrest argues that the practice
should be integrated into training that targets
improving communication between scientists and
non-scientists. For example, using the MMM or
similar activity based on real monitoring data could
be used in exercises that bring together volcanologists
and land managers, emergency response officials,
members of the media (who relate reports of volcanic
activity to the general public), and others whose work
may involve understanding hazards and risk (e.g.
insurance agents). When used in conjunction with
role-playing scenarios especially, non-experts are likely
to increase their comprehension and retention of
volcano monitoring with the MMM activity. We
therefore recommend that activities similar to MMM
be developed for other volcano-eruption scenarios,
and that such an approach may be useful in other
hazard situations (e.g., responses to earthquakes,
tsunami, and severe weather).
2. The amount of time that participants (and beginners
in particular) are engaged in training activities is
critical to their success. Beginners who engaged with
the MMM activity for 100 minutes or more showed
improved learning over those who had less time
with the activity. We therefore recommend that
training activities like MMM should be of sufficient
time for trainees to engage with data in a meaningful
way.
3. Experts (volcanologists, in this case) should be
cognizant of the level of understanding of their
audience when communicating volcano-monitoring
information to avoid confusing or unintentionally
overwhelming non-expert media, civil-defense, or
planning personnel. Based on learning observed
from MMM, we recommend that beginner- and
Page 15
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11  Page 15 of 16
novice-level populations of civil-defense and other
public safety officials or media personnel be trained in
the interpretation of volcano-monitoring data through
activities that use real data in an interactive format
such as MMM and others (e.g. Hales and Cashman
2008, the FEMA Volcanic Crises Awareness).
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
All authors drafted, revised the MMM activity RT, KvdHK collected data on
student learning for the activities All authors reviewed and interpreted the
data All authors drafted and revised the manuscript All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
Initial funding for VEPP was provided by a NASA New Investigator Program
grant to M. Poland via the U.S. Geological Survey’s (USGS) Hawaiian Volcano
Observatory and the University of Hawai‘i, Mānoa, in 2007; following the end
of the NASA grant in 2010, funding to maintain the VEPP Website was
provided by USGS. Site design and implementation was completed by Reid
Townson, and database and server maintenance have been performed by
Loren Antolik and Lopaka Lee. The NAGT-SERC staff maintains the VEPP
Activities Web site and workshop pages, with particular thanks to John
McDaris and Molly Kent. We are grateful for the 25 participants of the VEPP
workshop in July 2010, whose dedication and support helped to establish a
repository of activities that have facilitated use of the VEPP Website. We also
would like to acknowledge our students for participating in this investigation
on their learning experience.
Author details
1Geological and Environmental Sciences, California State University, Chico
400 W 1st St, 95929-0205 Chico, CA, USA. 2Geology Faculty Whatcom
Community College, 237 W Kellogg Rd., 98226 Bellingham, WA, USA.
3Hawaiian Volcano Observatory USGS, 51 Crater Rim Drive, 96718 Hawaii
National Park, HI, USA.
Received: 17 April 2014 Accepted: 26 January 2015
References
Aronson E, Blaney N, Stephan C, Sikes J, Snapp M (1978) The Jigsaw Classroom.
Sage, Beverly Hills, CA
Assor A, Connell JP (1992) The validity of students’ self-reports as measures
of performance affecting self-appraisals. In: Schunk DH, Meece JL (eds)
Student perceptions in the classroom. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Hillsdale, NJ, pp 24–47
Bandura A (1986) Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive
Theory. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ
Bransford JD, Brown AL, Cocking RR, Donovan MS, Pellegrino JW (eds) (2000)
How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School (expanded edn)
National Academy Press Washington D.C.
Cervelli DP, Cervelli PF, Miklius A, Krug R, Lisowsk, M (2002) VALVE: Volcano
Analysis and Visualization Environment. Eos Trans. AGU 83(47): Fall Meeting
Suppl Abstract (U52A-01)
Chi MTH, Feltovich PJ, Glaser R (1981) Categorization and representation of
physics problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science 5(2):121–52
Chinn CA, Brewer WF (1993) The role of anomalous data in knowledge
acquisition: A theoretical framework and implications for science instruction.
Rev Educ Res 63(1):1–49
Coe R (2002) It’s the effect size, stupid. Paper presented at the Annual
Conference of the British Educational Research Association, University of
Exeter, Exeter, England, [URL: "http://www.leeds.ac.uk/educol/documents/00002182.htm"] http://www.leeds.ac.uk/educol/documents/
 00002182.htm
Cohen J (1969) Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Academic,
New York NY
Coladarci T, Cobb CD, Minium EW, Clarke RB (2008) Fundamentals of statistical
reasoning in education. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ 
Deslauriers L, Schelew E, Wieman C (2011) Improved learning in a large-enrollment
physics class. Science 332(862):862–4
Fiske RS (1984) Volcanologists, Journalists and the concerned Local Public: A Tale
of Two Crises in the Eastern Caribbean. In: Explosive volcanism: Inception,
Evolution, and Hazards. National Academy Press, Studies in Geophysics,
Washington DC, pp 170–6
Hake RR (1998) Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods: A six-
thousand-student survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics
courses. Am J Phys 66(1):64–74
Hales TC, Cashman KV (2008) Simulating social and political influences on hazard
analysis through a classroom role playing exercise. J Geoscience Education
56(1):54–60
Harpp K, Sweeney WJ (2002) Simulating a volcanic crisis in the classroom.
J Geoscience Education 50:410–8
Haynes K, Barclay J, Pidgeon N (2008) The issue of trust and its influence on risk
communication during a volcanic crisis. Bull Volcanol 70:605–21
Heliker C, Mattox TN (2003) The first two decades of the Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō-Kūpaianaha
eruption: Chronology and selected bibliography. In: Heliker C, Swanson DA,
Takahashi TJ (eds) The Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō-Kūpaianaha Eruption of Kīlauea Volcano,
Hawai’i: The First 20 Years, United States Geological Survey Professional
Paper 1676 pp 1–27
Kokelaar BP (2002) Setting, Chronology and consequences of the eruption of
Soufriere Hills Volcano, Montserrat (1995). In: Druitt TH, Kokelaar BP (eds) The
eruption of Soufriere Hills Volcano, Montserrat, from 1995–1999. Geological
Society, London, pp 1–43, Memoirs 21
Lewis EB, van der Hoeven Kraft KJ, Watts NB, Baker DR, Wilson MJ, Lang
MG (2010) Elementary teachers’  comprehension of flooding through
inquiry-based professional development and use of self-regulation
strategies. Int J Sci Educ 33(11):1473–512
Likert R (1932) A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of
Psychology 140:1–55
McConnell DA, Stempien J, Perkins D, van der Hoeven Kraft KJ, Vislova T,
Wirth K (2010) The little engine that could: less prior knowledge but
high self-efficacy is equivalent to greater prior knowledge and Low
self-efficacy. Paper presented at Geological Society of America, Abstracts
with Program 42(5):191
McGuire WJ, Solana MC, Kilburn CRJ, Sanderson D (2009) Improving
communication during volcanic crises on small, vulnerable islands. J Volcanol
Geotherm Res 13(1):63–75, doi:10.1016/j.jvolgeores.2009.02.019
Miles MB, Huberman, AM (1994) Qualitative data analysis (2nd ed) Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage
National Association of Geoscience Teachers (2010) VEPP Activities. [URL: "http://nagt.org/nagt/teaching_resources/vepp/index.html"] http://nagt.org/
 nagt/teaching_resources/vepp/index.html. Accessed 12 March 2014.
Orr TR, Poland MP, Patrick MR, Thelen WA, Sutton AJ, Elias T, Thornber CR,
Parcheta C, Wooten KM (2015) Kīlauea’s 5–9 March 2011 Kamoamoa fissure
eruption and its relation to 30+ years of activity from Pu‘u ‘Ō‘ō. In: Carey RJ,
Cayol V, Poland MP, Weis D (eds) Hawaiian Volcanoes, From Source to
Surface, American Geophysical Union Monograph 208 pp 393-420
doi:10.1002/9781118872079.ch18
Petcovic HL, Libarkin JC (2007) Research in science education: the expert-novice
continuum. J Geosci Educ 55(4):333–9
Pierson TC, Driedger CL, Tilling RI (2013) Volcano crisis response at Yellowstone
volcanic complex—after-action report for exercise held at Salt Lake City,
Utah, November 15, 2011: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2013–1018: 31.
(Available at [URL: "http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2013/1018/"] http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2013/1018/)
Pintrich PR, Zusho A (2007) Student Motivation and Self-Regulated Learning in
the College Classroom. In: Perry RP, Smart JC (eds) The Scholarship of
Teaching and Learning in Higher Education: An Evidence-Based Perspective.
Spring, Dordrecht, pp 731–810
Poland MP, Miklius A, Orr T, Sutton AJ, Thornber CR, Wilson D (2008) New
episodes of volcanism at Kilauea volcano, Hawaii, EOS, transactions. Am
Geophys Union 89(5):37–8
Poland MP, Teasdale R, Kraft K (2010a) Internet-accessible, near real-time volcano
monitoring data for Geoscience education: Volcanoes Exploration Program:
Pu‘u ‘O‘o. Paper presented at Fall Meeting, AGU, Abstract ED21C-0684
Poland MP, van der Hoeven Kraft KJ, Teasdale R (2010b) The Volcanoes Exploration
Program: Pu`u `Ō’ō—a Website and workshop for utilizing near-real-time volcano
monitoring data in geoscience education. GSA Abstracts with Program 42(5).
Poland, MP, Teasdale, R, Kraft, K, 2010c, VEPP: Monday Morning Meeting at the
Hawaiian Volcano Observatory. [URL: "http://nagt.org/nagt/teaching_resources/vepp/examples/48383.html"] http://nagt.org/nagt/teaching_resources/
 vepp/examples/48383.html, Accessed March 2014
Page 16
Teasdale et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:11
Poland MP, van der Hoeven Kraft KJ, Teasdale R (2011) Volcanology curricula
development aided by online educational resource. EOS Transactions
Newsletter 92(12):101
Shulman LS, Sherin MG (2004) Fostering communities of teachers as learners:
disciplinary perspectives. J Curric Stud 36(2):135–40
Solana CM, Kilburn CRJ, Rolandi G (2008) Communicating eruption and hazard
forecasts on Vesuvius, Southern Italy. Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal
Research 172:308–14
United States Geological Survey (2009) Volcanoes Exploration Program: Pu‘u ‘O‘o
(VEPP). [URL: "https://vepp.wr.usgs.gov/"] https://vepp.wr.usgs.gov/. Accessed 12 March 2014 (Note this site is
password protected, contact mpoland “at” usgs.gov for login information)
Voight B (1990) The 1985 nevado del Ruiz volcano catastrophe: anatomy and
retrospection. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 44:349–86
Zimmerman BJ (2000) Self-efficacy: an essential motive to learn. Contemp Educ
Psychol 25:82–91
Zusho A, Pintrich PR, Coppola B (2003) Skill and will: The role of motivation and
cognition in the learning of college chemistry. Int J Sci Educ 25(9):1081–94 
Page 16 of 16
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁ t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
