BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Background
Methods: inputs for the IGEPN´s monitoring and communication strategies
  The importance of IGEPN´s local observatory, OVT
  The social/political network around the volcano
  The Vigía network and OVT-- a collaborative effort
Results and discussion
  Challenges to providing early warnings before Vulcanian-style eruptions
  Early warning given before major Vulcanian eruption on 1 February 2014
Conclusions
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgments
References
Page 1
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9
DOI 10.1186/s13617-015-0025-y
RESEARCH  Open Access
The scientific–community interface over the
fifteen-year eruptive episode of Tungurahua
Volcano, Ecuador
Patricia A Mothes*, Hugo A Yepes, Minard L Hall, Patricio A Ramón, Alexander L Steele and Mario C Ruiz
Abstract
The successful handling of Tungurahua’s frequent eruptions during 15 years via permanent instrumental monitoring and
good community relations by the Instituto Geofísico of the Escuela Politécnica Nacional (IGEPN) is due to these factors:
1./ Instrumental monitoring of Tungurahua volcano by the IGEPN started a decade before the 1999 reactivation. In early
1999 increased background seismicity and high SO2 
readings suggested that magma was stirring. 2./ The long-term
participation of IGEPN scientists in both monitoring and volcanic studies has fostered an institutional memory and a
knowledge base that is referential for providing early warnings and in aiding the authorities to make critical decisions in
anticipation of dangerous volcanic behavior. 3./ The permanent presence of IGEPN scientists at Tungurahua’s Volcano
Observatory (OVT) who oversee the monitoring operations and maintain close contact with the threatened community.
4./ Participation of volunteer volcano observers from the community (vigías) who convey their observations 24 hours/
day via a pan-volcano UHF radio system.
Challenges to the operation´s success include: identifying precursor geophysical signals before volcanic eruptions begin;
financing OVT´s operations and real-time instrumental surveillance; assuring active involvement of experienced scientists
at OVT; instructing new rotating public officials in volcanic hazards and volcano crisis management, as well as working
alongside them during critical moments; maintaining positive working relations with the community.
Here we report on volcano monitoring and risk reduction strategies that have served the IGEPN in a semi-rural
environment, where ~30,000 people reside in high-risk zones. On reflection, we believe that our “bottom-up” approach
has been effective and has merit. This approach developed gradually; our actions were in response to our instrumental
monitoring activity of Tungurahua, providing credible information to the public and authorities and overcoming negative
perceptions by the population. If there is a recipe, it is conditioned on good monitoring results and interpretation that is
adequately and frequently communicated to those concerned, and over many years fostering a mutual trust among the
actors. Some strategies described herein may not be pertinent at a volcano whose eruptive activity is short-lived.
Keywords: Tungurahua volcano; Early warnings before eruption; Volcano observatory; Scientific-community relations;
Vulcanian eruptions; Vigías
Background
As described by Tobin and Whiteford (2002), after culmin-
ation of the 3 month-long forced evacuation of about
26,000 people in Baños and areas surrounding Tungurahua
volcano in October, 1999, the affected population re-
mained resentful and leery of scientists and their mo-
nitoring and hazard communication efforts. The local
population openly blamed the volcano monitoring
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:pmothes@igepn.edu.ec"] pmothes@igepn.edu.ec
Instituto Geofísico, Escuela Politécnica Nacional, Casilla 1701-2759, Quito,
Ecuador 
scientists for this unfortunate situation. Such circum-
stances made it difficult over the next several years
for IGEPN volcanologists to be fully accepted in the
Baños area. Herein we describe the strategies the IGEPN
embraced to change a negative situation, to one that is
positive.
Tungurahua volcano (Latitude 01°28'S; Longitude 78°
27'W) is located in the southern portion of the Eastern
Cordillera of the Ecuadorian Andes, 140 km south of
Quito and 33 km southeast of Ambato, the capital of
Tungurahua Province (Figure 1). The 5023-m-high active
© 2015 Mothes et al.; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 2 of 15
Figure 1 (See legend on next page.)
Page 3
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 3 of 15
(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 1 Map of most Quaternary volcanoes of continental Ecuador. The two main cordilleras are highlighted– the Western and the Eastern,
respectively. Tungurahua volcano is located near the southern end of the Eastern Cordillera. County seat cities mentioned in the text: Baños,
Pelileo, Patate and Penipe are shown, as are smaller towns and villages and OVT. Modified from: Bernard, B and D. Andrade, 2012. “Volcanes
Cuaternarios del Ecuador Continental”. IGEPN internal publication, Quito- Ecuador.
stratovolcano is notable for its extreme relief of 3200 m,
steep sides, and frequent eruptive cycles. Its 400-m-wide
crater is situated slightly NW of Tungurahua’s summit
with the lowest rim (at 4800 m) on its NW side, favoring
spillage of pyroclastic and lava flows onto the upper NW
and W flanks, and potentially lower down into the com-
munities of Juive Grande, Cusúa and Bilbao, among others
(Figures 1 and 2a and b).
The actual Tungurahua edifice is recent. After a cata-
strophic sector collapse of the previous cone some
3000 years ago, it has rebuilt itself at the same location
with its current symmetrical shape (Hall et al. 1999).
Important eruptive activity occurred between AD 1300
and 1700 (Le Pennec et al. 2008).  Five major eruptive
episodes are recognized in historical reports: 1641–46, 
1773–81, 1886–88, 1916–18, and the present period. An-
desitic lava flows, pyroclastic flows, ash falls, and second-
ary lahars characterize the volcano’s activity (Hall et al.
1999). Tungurahua is a dangerous volcano that threatens
the tourist town of Baños (~20,000 residents; ≤ 50,000 on
holidays) as well as small villages located around the base
of the cone (Figures 1 and 2a, b).
Since 1999 the eruptive activity of Tungurahua vol-
cano has varied between volcano explosivity index (VEI)
levels of <1 to 3, generally allowing the continuance of
tourism, agricultural, and other economic activities
around the volcano´s edifice. On-off eruptive cycles oc-
curring every 4–12 months have helped to maintain the
attention of local and regional authorities and the popu-
lation at large during this drawn-out eruptive process.
Figure 2 Tungurahua volcano, location of Baños city and other communities and paths of the 2006 pyroclastic flows. a: Modified
aerial photograph of Tungurahua volcano taken before the 2006 pyroclastic –flow forming eruptions. The tourist city of Baños is located
at the northern foot of the cone, and partially on the fan of the Rio Vascún. The extreme relief between the summit and Baños is 3200 meters
over a 7 km distance. Photo courtesy of Jorge Juan Anhalzer- Quito. b: Digital elevation map of the whole volcano showing all major quebradas
on the north, west and SW flanks, pyroclastic flow paths of 2006 and post 2006, identified as pdcs in the legend, and ashcloud surge (ACS) of the
same eruption, and main town and rivers.
Page 4
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 4 of 15
From 1999 and to the present, eruptive activity has var-
ied between intermittent periods of low to moderate
Strombolian-style eruptive activity to notable Vulcanian
and sub-Plinian events. In the first seven years the activity
was mainly characterized by Strombolian episodes with
frequent but small explosions, lava fountaining, and ejec-
tion of incandescent ballistics, sub-regional to regional ash
falls, and rain-generated lahars (Leonard et al. 2005).
However, no pyroclastic flows were produced in this 7 year
period. Later, sub-Plinian eruptions on 17 August 2006
generated sizeable pyroclastic flows (40 Mm3,  bulk vol-
ume) (Hall et al. 2013) (Figure 2b). During these eruptions
and subsequently, Vulcanian-like explosive outbursts ac-
companied the most intense Strombolian eruptions and
were characterized by powerful infrasound signals and
audible booms during paroxysmal phases (Ruiz et al. 2006;
Hall et al. 2013). From May 2010 to present, activity has
been interspersed by Vulcanian-style eruptive outbursts of
varying intensity, often producing explosions with high in-
frasound values as well as small-volume pyroclastic flows,
some which reached the volcano´s base (Figure 2b).
Since September, 1999 the IGEPN has maintained
a permanently-staffed observatory (OVT) located 13 km
NNW of the crater and at its principal office in the
Escuela Politécnica Nacional, Quito, where it has oper-
ated 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Continual moni-
toring of Tungurahua employs collocated seismic and
infrasound instruments (short period and broadband),
SO2 
gas emission detection (COSPEC and DOAS) and
geodetic methods (EDM, tiltmeters, GPS and occasion-
ally InSAR). In addition, thermal imagery (airborne and
ground-based) during the past 10 years has proven to be
invaluable for nighttime and foggy observations. Avail-
able satellite information is also used in the visible, infra-
red and radar ranges for the detection of ash plumes,
hot spots, and thermal anomalies, and to measure SO2
concentrations in the atmosphere and to obtain radar in-
terferograms (InSAR). IGEPN uses twelve acoustic-flow-
monitoring stations (AFM) (Hadley and LaHusen 1995)
to detect and register secondary lahar activity (Figure 3).
Lahars are frequently generated by the remobilization of
loose volcaniclastics by rainfall on the cone´s steep slopes;
they are the most commonly occurring hazard and they
affect the main roads that circumvent the volcano and also
some infrastructure. During the 15 year eruptive episode
more than 800 lahars have been registered by the AFM
monitoring system, often resulting in lahar warnings is-
sued to the public from OVT (Mothes and Vallance 2015).
Methods: inputs for the IGEPN´s monitoring and
communication strategies
The importance of IGEPN´s local observatory, OVT
The strong onset of Tungurahua´s unrest in September
1999 required that a local observatory be established. 
The generous loan of a hacienda farmhouse 13 km NW
of the volcano, provided an ideal line-of-sight view of
the volcano (Figure 3).  The Observatorio del Volcán
Tungurahua, OVT, is staffed by a senior scientist and an
assistant on rotating shifts of eight days, thus satisfying
the need to have a sustained local scientific presence
which greatly facilitates rapid recognition of changes on
the volcano and in managing developing situations, if
necessary. These two individuals record visual and aud-
ible activity, foster and evaluate incoming signals from
the volcano´s monitoring network, provide support to
national and international scientists and students con-
ducting fieldwork on the volcano, participate in meetings
at the local and provincial level, communicate with the
populace at large, give interviews for radio and TV sta-
tions and to the press, and provide frequent verbal up-
dates about the volcanic activity over the regional UHF
radio system. They also perform data collection from
thermal springs, gas measurements with mini-DOAS,
and make observations and sampling of fresh ash and
lahar deposits. Observations made by the local volcano
observers, vigías, reporting to OVT over the radio sys-
tem, are recorded at all hours. During the months-long
intervals of relative quiescence between strong eruptive
periods, activities at OVT are in a lull and the demands
are lower. Generally OVT scientists can catch up on
field work, academic obligations, and perform upkeep of
the monitoring network around the volcano.
During the eruptive period from 1999 to early 2006,
the permanent presence of IGEPN scientists at the vol-
cano assured people that the volcano was being moni-
tored full time. Nonetheless this volcano monitoring
service wasn´t exempt from risk. In 2000 several of
Baños’ hotel owners blamed the OVT and IGEPN scien-
tists for lack of tourist visitation to their facilities, pro-
claiming that excessive information about the volcano´s
behavior was being shown in the media and tourists
were canceling their hotel reservations in Baños. Their
hostile attitudes were perhaps a lingering response to
the evacuation in 16 October 1999 to January 5, 2000,
when all Baños´ hotels closed, thus causing a local eco-
nomic crisis (Lane et al. 2003). At the most critical mo-
ment some hotel owners threatened to chase out OVT
scientists with machetes and even to set the observatory
on fire! Eventually the difficulties were worked out and
faded with time, mostly because the OVT personal began
giving weekly live interviews on a Baños radio station in
which the townspeople heard updates of the volcano´s sta-
tus and a daily interpretation of monitoring data. Many
talks were also given to communities about the nature and
benefits of volcano monitoring and trends in the eruptive
process; some talks were done under the auspicious of a
European Community-funded DIPECHO project, which
at that time was involved in ameliorating social issues in
Page 5
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 5 of 15
Figure 3 Digital elevation map of Tungurahua volcano with locations of main towns, instrumental monitoring stations, OVT and
communities with volunteer vigías.
the affected areas to the west of the cone. Local people
also became accustomed to the permanent presence of the
IGEPN scientists in the area, eventually perceiving OVT
operations and its mission as a benefit to their overall se-
curity. Meanwhile, the economic base improved around
Baños and tourists again filled the hotels, even though
the volcano remained active and the IGEPN continued
normal reporting (Sword-Daniels et al. 2011).
Compared with the basic setup of fifteen years ago,
the monitoring network in 2015 is considerably more
robust. OVT relies on broad band (BB) and short period
seismic networks and also infrasound sensors linked
to the BB stations (Kumagai et al. 2010).  Telemetered 
electronic tiltmeters, continuous GPS stations, continu-
ously recording video and thermal cameras, more lahar
monitors and four telemetered SO2 
detection systems
(DOAS) have greatly improved the IGEPN´s capacity to
provide better prognosis before eruptive activity´s onset
(Figure 3).  Also, during eruptions a 25 station ash-
collection network is used to evaluate rates of ash accu-
mulation and volumes (Bernard et al. 2013).
The social/political network around the volcano
Since the onset of Tungurahua´s eruptive activity the
IGEPN has maintained broad working relationships with
mayors, governors and other popularly-elected officials,
Page 6
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 6 of 15
as well as central government-designated public servants
and civil defense personnel. Elected public servants gen-
erally serve for 4 years. Between 1999 and 2006 risk
management before and during natural hazard events
was carried out by the Ecuadorian Civil Defense through
personal in their local, provincial and national offices.
Subsequently, after 2006 the newly formed National
Secretary of Risk Management (SNGR) became the main
coordinating entity charged with risk mitigation in the face
of floods, landslides, volcanic and seismic activity. Since
early 2014, each county throughout the country is re-
quired to designate a risk management coordinator whose
job is to prepare local citizens before events of adverse na-
ture and also to coordinate mitigating actions at the
county level. The SNGR of the national government inter-
acts with the governors of each province, overseeing the
coordination of activities between county and provincial
officials. Overall this setup has enabled the IGEPN to pro-
vide rapid and frequent briefings to authorities concerning
increases in pre-eruption signals and to help them to
make critical decisions before major eruptive events.
Baños did not have evacuation plans prior to the reactiva-
tion of the volcano in 1999, nor when the city and high-
risk areas around the volcano were forcefully evacuated
for three months starting on 16 October, 1999, at which
time the Ecuadorian military handled all procedures. The
forced and prolonged evacuation of 26,000 residents gen-
erated deep resentment in the affected citizens and huge
economic loses. They fully blamed the IGEPN for the ac-
tions taken, even though we had not made the decisions
to evacuate them or keep them away from their homes
and livelihoods for 3 months (Tobin and Whiteford 2002).
It took years to overcome these accusations and part of
the IGEPN´s response was to develop positive interactions
with the local community (Leonard et al. 2005).
But evacuation plans existed and were used to evacu-
ate Baños during the paroxysmal stage of the 17 August
2006 sub-Plinian eruption. In this instance, given the
volcano´s strong, overwhelming superficial manifesta-
tions, the townspeople willingly evacuated to safe zones.
Subsequently, no other broad evacuations have occurred,
however smaller village-specific evacuations have oc-
curred before heightened eruptive activity in May 2010
and February, 2014. Also, in most cases when activity
ramps up, members of the communities of Cusúa and
Bilbao sleep in safe zones, and return in the morning to
do chores.
Some officials are willing to act on pre-eruptive advi-
sories from IGEPN scientists, while others are more re-
luctant to act due to the pressure from local hotel and
tourist interests, again, particularly in Baños. Two cases
illustrate these circumstances. Days before the 14 July
2006 eruption, the governor of Tungurahua province
demanded in a written statement that the IGEPN desist 
from reporting about the volcano´s condition, claiming
that it was chasing tourism away from Baños. He pro-
claimed that from then on he personally would be fielding
all responses to inquiries from members of the press, local
and national officials, and the population at large about
the volcano´s activity (Figure 4).  At this time daily and
special reports were being prepared at the IGEPN and sent
out to 560 recipients via fax and internet, and up to 10 in-
terviews with the media were granted daily from OVT and
the Quito office. The IGEPN respectfully obeyed the writ-
ten order and smartly redirected telephone calls and re-
quests for scientific information and interviews to the
governor’s office and personal phones, so that he could ex-
plain to all concerned the rapidly evolving state of the vol-
cano on a 24/7 basis. His readiness to take on this task
quickly waned when he recognized his shortcomings to
credibly answer questions about the volcano’s heighten
state of restlessness and in perceiving the constant and
extraordinary social pressure to provide immediate and re-
liable scientific information. Within 24 hours, via a second
written order, the governor reinstated the IGEPN’s com-
munication responsibilities, barely two days before the 14
July 2006 (VEI = 2) eruption.
A month later, on the morning of the 16th of August
2006, about 14 hours before onset of Tungurahua´s lar-
gest eruption since 1918, amidst unceasing high-decibel
explosions and continually felt vibrations throughout the
region– due to low frequency volcanic tremor accom-
panying magma ascent, the principal authority of Baños
was unreachable by telephone or radio at 10 am when
the IGEPN director called to advise/warn him that a
large eruption was believed to be imminent and that cer-
tain areas could be overrun by pyroclastic flows. Fortu-
nately the local civil defense chief took responsibility
and made the decisions to evacuate people from several
threatened villages and Baños city before the paroxysmal
finale at about 00H30 (local time) on August 17th (Hall
et al. 2013).  There were no serious casualties in Baños
county, although about 60 homes were overrun and
scorched by pyroclastic flows, particularly in the Juive
Grande sector, where thankfully the residents had
responded to the alert and were not injured. The hydro-
electric facility of Agoyan (156 MW),  3 km downriver
from Baños, also responded successfully to OVT´s early
warnings and their engineers carried out the company´s
emergency plans to close the intake tunnel to the tur-
bines, thus avoiding damage to the turbines from severe
abrasion or blockage by fresh volcanic products; they
also opened the dam´s floodgates to permit the flow-
through of dense materials. A few days later after a gen-
eral revision and filling of the reservoir, the facility was
again operating normally.
The mayors of the neighboring counties of Penipe
and Pelileo with their communities of Bilbao, Puela and
Page 7
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 7 of 15
Figure 4 Cartoon modified from that which was published in Quito´s “El Comercio” newspaper on 12 July, 2006 in which the director
of the Instituto Geofísico is handed an order from the assistant of the Tungurahua governor. The order states that the IG director must
abstain from reporting on Tungurahua´s eruptive activity and that the governor will give the reports in such a way that tourism will not suffer.
Cusúa, situated around the volcano´s flanks, also had
their roles to play during the ramping up to the 17th
August eruption. On the evening of the 16th the mayor
of Pelileo came to OVT to give a verbal order over the
radio system that residents of Cusúa and other commu-
nities of his county must evacuate. Also, the mayor of
Penipe personally drove around the villages of Puela
and Palitagua beseeching the citizens to evacuate be-
fore the major eruption. Unfortunately, five people
didn´t heed the warnings and died in Palitagua due to
descending pyroclastic flows. Another short-coming in
Penipe county was the lack of coverage of the pan-
volcano radio system, impeding a free-flow of critical
information to this sector from both OVT and other
actors during the crisis. Additionally, given the delays
to get people motivated to leave their endangered prop-
erties, about 50 head of livestock, some grazing on the
upper flanks of the volcano, perished from burns or as-
phyxiation. Decimeter-size ballistics fell out to 8 km,
injuring people and livestock (Arellano et al. 2008).
People living to the west and southwest of the cone—
such as in the Cotaló area, and who stayed inside their
homes, reported huddling beneath wooden tables to
avoid impacts while the ballistics crashed through their
roofs. 
The Vigía network and OVT– a collaborative effort
Vigía,  a Spanish word for somebody who is watching
and alert, describes the volunteer efforts of 25 mostly
rural-based people who keep the IGEPN informed of
happenings in the sector where they live and work
around the volcano. As Stone et al. (2014) explained, the
vigía network is a prime example of community-based
monitoring that contributes to the strengthening of the
whole operation. Since scientists at OVT can only ob-
serve the volcano’s N and NW flanks, beginning in 2000
farmers living in other sectors of the volcano were asked
by OVT staff and Civil Defense leaders to daily report
the volcanic activity that they observed from their loca-
tions. This system was established with the help of the
Tungurahua province Civil Defense director and his col-
laborators in order to further open lines of communica-
tion over all sectors of the volcano that were being
affected by the eruption process. Vigías were chosen
based upon their observational skills and the proximity
of their homes to certain sectors of the volcano or to ac-
tive lahar-frequented ravines—quebradas.  They use
hand-held radios that pertain to the local UHF network
now operated by the SNGR. Verbal messages given by
vigías are received around the clock at OVT and re-
corded in a logbook and corroborated with the IGEPN´s
Page 8
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 8 of 15
monitoring data. The area covered by the vigía’s commu-
nication network includes the southern part of the vol-
cano in Penipe county, the western flanks of the cone
that comprise part of Pelileo county, the Baños area, and
the communities of Pondoa and Runtun, above Baños
and Ulba (Figure 3) (Stone et al. 2014). Reporting by vig-
ías of the descent of secondary lahars after heavy rains
or snow has been very successful and has contributed to
the hastening of the closure of roads before vehicles get
stuck or buried in lahars. One notable lahar in February
2005 was provoked by a local electrical storm and sent a
wall of water and debris into the El Salado hot spring fa-
cility located in the Vascún Quebrada, one km upslope
of Baños. The vibrations made by the descending lahar
caused a notable jump in the data values of the AFM
station in that quebrada. This combination strongly sug-
gesting that a lahar of substantial volume (100 m3/s) was
in transit. Thanks to the alertness of OVT scientists and
their immediate communication of this dangerous situ-
ation to Baños Civil Defense authorities and the mayor,
plus timely reporting by several vigías, 13 bathers were
rescued before the deadly lahar inundated the thermal
pools where they were relaxing (Mothes and Vallance
2015; Williams et al. 2008).
Since most vigías have lived with the volcano for many
years and are dedicated to agricultural activities and at-
tending to livestock living on the high slopes, they know
well their immediate surroundings and are quick to ob-
serve anomalous behavior. Their observations offer per-
tinent and dependable information regarding activity on
the upper slopes of the cone; for example, the type of
ash fall—lithic or scoria, ash color and grain size, inten-
sity of rainfall and its persistence, the descent of lahars
and their texture or the directions taken by ash fall col-
umns and incandescent flows. Many times the informa-
tion provided by vigías closely matches patterns of
seismic and infrasound data. A visual confirmation sent
over the radio to OVT, for example, about the descent
of a pyroclastic flow or the increase in lahar activity in
one of the many quebradas draining the volcano, is a
welcome compliment to the instrumental monitoring
data. Nightly at 8 pm a radio broadcast (ronda) is hosted
in which each vigía reports observations concerning the
volcano from his/her sector, and any other pertinent
news. OVT personal record the observations of the vig-
ías and then give an oral summation of the day´s seismic
and other instrumental recordings of events on the vol-
cano and in the region.
OVT co-hosts an annual meeting/luncheon for vigías,
key local officials, and OVT personal with the aim of
sharing observational criteria, giving an annual scientific
report on the overall trend of the volcano´s activity, and
maintaining collegial collaborative ties. Many vigías who
live on opposite sides of the volcano might only see each 
other at these special events, although they all partici-
pate in the nightly radio rondas and recognize each
other’s voices. The annual meeting thus serves to fortify
this volunteer network and keep all involved interested
in participating and being attentive when an eruption
period is approaching.
At the last two vigía meetings, all vigías verbally
shared their observations of recent activity, but they also
drew out on paper event time-lines that transpired in
their sector during important eruptive periods and what
actions they took to benefit their community. This activ-
ity fortified their collective memory. OVT personal keep
vigías informed about scientific evaluations of the on-
going eruptive process. Special events planned for the
future include discussions about strategies for fostering
successful care of livestock during continual ashfall.
Local university researchers will provide the know-how
along with the experience of the vigias in handling their
own livestock during multiple ashfall events.
Vigías also assist with the installation of IGEPN moni-
toring stations, cleaning ash and vegetation off solar
panels, and the overall caretaking of monitoring infra-
structure. At Tungurahua there have been few robberies
of monitoring equipment, perhaps because people per-
ceive that it is to their benefit that the instrumentation
keeps working, but they also know that a vigía is atten-
tive to the instrument’s well-being. Through the years
the vigías have become more fortified in their commu-
nity leadership skills. This is because many of them have
had to act responsibly during evacuations of their commu-
nity when dangerous eruptive activity begins. Secondly,
they are people with knowledge of how their community
has dealt with the eruptive processes and they have per-
spective on what actions might have to be taken in the fu-
ture in benefit of their community members.
Results and discussion
Challenges to providing early warnings before Vulcanian-
style eruptions
From the onset of eruptive activity in 1999 to the August
eruptions in 2006 the activity can be categorized as mainly
Strombolian style (Figure 5) (Arellano et al. 2008; Hidalgo
et al. 2014).  This means that the vent is predominantly
open and high gas pressures don´t accumulate, rather the
activity has a rhythmic continuum of pyroclast ejections
and the eruptions tend to be long-standing (Vergniolle and
Mangan 2000).  Typically Tungurahua´s eruptive periods
commence with an increased number of low-frequency
earthquakes that begin to produce mild explosions with
moderate infrasound characteristics. With greater conduit
opening, the lava fountains jet out of the crater and con-
tinuous roiling sounds are heard. Ash falls associated with
low-level lava fountaining often continues for days and
covers agricultural lands to the west with black scoracious
Page 9
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 9 of 15
Figure 5 A timeline of Tungurahua´s eruptive activity 1999–2014. Shown on the left margins are the daily numbers of seismic events:
VT = volcano-tectonic; LP + HB = long period and hybrids; EX = explosions and TREM = volcanic tremor. Eruptive activity is represented by light
pink color, while repose is represented by white. The activity was predominantly Strombolian-style through 2010. Vulcanian style was more
predominant between 2010 to present.
and lithic ash mantles. Notable ash fallout occurred in late
1999 and in August, 2001 (Eychenne et al. 2012). These
events however did not produce pyroclastic or lava flows,
and the limited ballistic trajectories kept bomb/block im-
pacts high on the volcano´s upper slopes.
In contrast, the end of the 17 August 2006 eruption
was associated with the rapid ascent of a large volume of
gas-rich magma (Samaniego et al. 2011) that generated
pyroclastic flows that descended most quebradas on the
volcano’s west side, as well as the Pucayacu and Vazcún
quebradas above Baños (Kelfoun et al. 2009), and over-
ran Palitagua village on the south flank, where five resi-
dents died who had not heeded warnings to evacuate
(Ramón 2010; Hall et al. 2013). A total bulk volume of
almost 0.1 km3 of pyroclastic flow debris and airfall
tephra was erupted (Hall et al. 2013).  The last phase
(Phase III) of the eruption had large Vulcanian-like out-
bursts and was notably more energetic than the earlier
phases of eruptive activity (Figure 6) (Arellano and Hall
2007). The eruptive column rose 17 km above the vol-
cano´s summit (Steffke et al. 2010). Following the mid-
2006 eruptions and continuing through April 2010,
Strombolian-style eruptions occurred about every six
months and lasted about six weeks; subsequently the
volcano settled into repose.
Starting on 28 May 2010, however, another large
Vulcanian-style eruption began. Its rapid onset, limited
open-vent eruptive activity prior to the main explosion, 
its loud audible characteristics, and the threat of pyro-
clastic flows and a broader ballistic distribution, made
this event and subsequent Vulcanian events truly dan-
gerous to local residents. Since the May 2010 event, six
other Vulcanian-style eruptive episodes have occurred
and have been interspersed with Strombolian-style activ-
ity (Table 1 and Figure 5). In general the Vulcanian-style
eruptions are small to moderate-size, discrete explosive
outbursts that last seconds to minutes. Nonetheless, the
Vulcanian explosion recorded on 14 July 2013, had the
highest seismic or acoustic energies ever recorded at
Tungurahua (Table 1). A Vulcanian explosion occurs when
an accumulation of magmatic gases beneath a sealed con-
duit plug or dome attains high overpressures that cause
brittle failure of the impermeable plug and produces a
discrete eruption in which the gases, clasts, and juvenile
products are violently released (Morrissey and Mastin 2000;
Clark 2013). After the initial conduit opening, Plinian and
sub-Plinian eruptions with juvenile products may follow.
Vulcanian eruptions typically emit volumes <0.1 km3 of
dense rock equivalent (DRE) (Morrissey and Mastin 2000).
Nonetheless, Strombolian-style activity briefly returned
to Tungurahua in 2011 and the eruptions produced ap-
proximately 3.2 Mm3 of magma (DRE),  of which about
3.0 Mm3 was new magma, as interpreted from deform-
ation patterns at the highest tilt stations (Ruiz et al. 2012).
In most cases Vulcanian explosive events at Tungura-
hua were preceded by a marked brief increase in LP
Page 10
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 10 of 15
Figure 6 Graph which represents the seismic amplitude and energy of seismic outbursts (explosions) related to the eruptive sequence
of 16–17 August, 2006. Note the abrupt increase of energy in Phase III during the last hour of the paroxysmal eruption when the high energies,
column height and discharges were sub-Plinian.
seismic events—a swarm typically occurs a few days to
several hours prior to the eruption. Other precursors include
strong deformation signals registered by electronic tiltmeters
several weeks prior to the eruption, especially at the station
closest to the conduit (RETU) (Figure 3), and a decrease in
the SO2 
values registered by the DOAS instrumentation.
Early warning given before major Vulcanian eruption on
1 February 2014
Early warnings before Vulcanian eruptions are often
hard to provide because of the sudden onset of this style
of eruption and the subtleness of precursors (Gottsman
et al. 2011).  Nonetheless, there is a growing literature
that reports on important ground deformation before
such eruptions (Iguchi et al. 2008; Yamazaki et al. 2013).
Before Tungurahua´s Vulcanian eruption of 1 February
2014, the geophysical data patterns suggested that an
eruption was imminent. Although seismic signals during
the previous week had been relatively minor, a strong in-
flationary pattern registered by the electronic tiltmeter
station at 4000 m elevation implied that internal pres-
sures were building beneath a rocky plug in the volcano’s
conduit (Figure 7). A marked shift in seismicity was ob-
served 36 hours prior to the disruption of the conduit´s
plug by the three principal explosions of the 1 February
2014 eruption. A swarm of long-period seismic events
and continual high-amplitude tremor heralded the run- 
away energy release that took place in this event (Figure 8).
The 36 hr-long window of restlessness prior to the
main eruption permitted the IGEPN to prepare special
advisories that “a major eruption would likely occur
in a short time frame (hours to days)” for the local, pro-
vincial and national authorities and the local populace.
The internet, social media, phone calls, the vigía radio
system,  and reports on radio and television were all
used to get the message out. Use of the UHF radio sys-
tem at OVT was also fundamental to insure immediate
updates of the ongoing activity. As the seismic swarms
became more continuous and seismic and acoustic
energy levels rose, another formal verbal report was
issued by OVT scientists over the vigía radio system
that an eruption was imminent two hours before the
eruption. Accordingly, SNGR personal and the vigías
advised people in their villages via loud speakers of
the severity of the situation and most residents opted
to self-evacuate. Military trucks and SNGR personal
helped with the mobilization. Many of the farmers
living on the threatened western slopes of the volcano
have optional government-built housing at La Paz
(a barrio of Pelileo) and Rio Blanco (east of Baños) and
in Penipe town, where they and their families can spend
the night. Each morning they return home and assess the
damage to their property and crops, if any, and tend to live-
stock, which may be still grazing in the high hazard zone.
Page 11
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 11 of 15
Table 1 Registry of Vulcanian-style eruptions of Tungurahua volcano and their characteristics
No Date/Time Seismic and Audible
(UTC) Characteristics Of Vulcanian
Explosions 
Pf´s and channels used Hrs. of Advance Warning Comments
1  28-05-2010; Huge Explosion; N-shaped infrasound Yes, Achupashal
11:13  (IS) waveform. High seismic to acoustic
ratio (low VASR).
6.91E + 08 = Average Seismic Energy
(Joules)* 
None  Occurred after approximately
3 months of repose. It was the
uncorking of the volcanic system
after some period of pressure
build up
1.04E + 10 = Average Acoustic Energy
(Joules)*
2  21-08-2012; Explosion; Sharp N-shaped IS signals No
15:52  are not consistent across the
network
2.85E + 08 = Average Seismic Energy
(Joules) 
?  Occurred during a peak period in
volcanic activity (one of the peak
days of the eruptive phase), after
a building of activity during the
preceding days.
9.36E + 10 = Average Acoustic Energy
(Joules)
3  14-12-2012; Huge Explosion; Sharp N-shaped IS
19:36  signals. Compressional first seismic
motions.
1.33E + 08 = Average Seismic Energy
(Joules) 
Yes, Mapayacu- SW flank. 6 hr. OVT staff recognized
jump in activity. 
Most of the energy of main
event was released within the
first 1 seconds and nearly all
energy in the first 5 seconds.
5.17E + 10 = Average Acoustic Energy
(Joules)
4  16-12-2012; Moderate Explosion; Emergent No
10:53  compressional seismic onset. Small,
P-wave – not particularly clear.
7.09E + 08 = Average Seismic Energy
(Joules)
4.79E + 10 = Average Acoustic Energy
(Joules) 
None  Similar to activity on the 28th
May 2010. The first explosion of
this new phase of activity
recorded on the 14 December
2012 had partially opened the
conduit and vent.
5  14-07-2013; Huge Explosion, very strong shock Yes. Achupashal and others Yes, 1 Hr.
11:46  wave. Waveform structure is not of  to the south; pf´s arrived
an expected and simple ‘N-shape’  to Chambo river.
despite shockwave presence, but
instead comprises a more complex
sequence. 
This was the largest discrete
explosion recorded at Tungurahua
since BB seismic and infrasound
monitoring began in July 2006.
1.93E + 09 = Average Seismic Energy
(Joules)
3.20E + 11 = Average Acoustic Energy
(Joules)
6  18-10-2013; Moderate explosion.
14:26 
1.91E + 08 = Average Seismic Energy
(Joules) 
Yes, Achupashal Alto.
2.60E + 10 = Average Acoustic Energy
(Joules) 
Yes, volcano was already
erupting. 
Very clear, N-shaped IS signal.
Impulsive compressional onset.
Coda up to ~ 50 seconds. Most
energy at <5 Hz.
7  01-02-2014; Strong explosion.
22:39 
2.05E + 08 = Average Seismic Energy
(Joules) 
Yes, Juive Grande and SW 36 hrs
quebradas
3.40E + 10 = Average Acoustic Energy
(Joules) 
Three distinct explosions at
22 h11; 22 h31 and 222 h39, the
last opened the system and was
followed by descent of pf´s.
*Mean seismic and acoustic values are calculated from 4 collocated broadband and acoustic sensors (Alex Steele_IGEPN, pers. Comm. 2014).
Due to the presumed high gas pressures and accumu-
lated magma beneath the conduit plugs, the last three
Vulcanian events (Table 1) produced pyroclastic flows
which sped relentlessly down quebradas, arriving to the 
surrounding river channels 10 minutes after the main
explosion (Figure 2b).  Given the dynamics of the
Vulcanian-style eruptions, early warnings based on geo-
physical parameters and conveyed over a reliable radio
Page 12
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 12 of 15
Figure 7 Plots of tiltmeter data from the electronic tilt station, Retu, located on the NW flank of Tungurahua at 4000 meters elevation.
The pattern of a pronounced inflationary trend than followed by a strong downgoing “deflationary” pattern of tilt on the radial axis has been a
guide for IGEPN scientists to be alert for onset of Vulcanian eruptions. Dates in boxes are onset of main Vulcanian eruptions.
Figure 8 Seismic trace for vertical component of the BMAS broadband seismic station at Tungurahua. Note the long quiet period from
00 h00 to 11 h00, after which wide-amplitude tremor starts. The 22 h39 Vulcanian-style eruption was preceded by two smaller explosions. After
the 22 h39 explosion pyroclastic flows were emitted and are shown in the inset of the thermal imagery photo of the NW flank of Tungurahua.
Photo was taken at 22H40 from OVT and is courtesy of Sylvia Vallejo-IGEPN.
Page 13
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 13 of 15
system are essential for the well-being of the local popula-
tion who persist living on the volcano´s flanks and also
those who are transiting on main thoroughfares around
the volcano. Since we have identified some of the precursor
geophysical parameters that may be displayed before future
major Vulcanian events at Tungurahua, the IGEPN hope-
fully can continue to provide timely early warnings before
new eruption onsets.
After fifteen years of on and off eruptions, Tungurahua
has produced both Strombolian-style and Vulcanian erup-
tive outbursts and a varied amount of ash and eruptive
products. Estimates of the amount of volcanic material ex-
pulsed up to March 2014 is based on the following data
with the respective references: 1999 to July 2001 =
14 Mm3 (Wright et al. 2012); August, 2001 = 4 Mm3 (Le
Pennec et al. 2011); Late 2001-December, 2005 = 5 Mm3
(Wright et al. 2012); August, 2006 = 100 Mm3 (Hall et al.
2013; Eychenne et al. 2012);  2007 unknown; February,
2008 = 1.5 Mm3 (Biggs et al. 2010);  December, 2008-
November, 2012 = 20 Mm3 (G. Ruiz and J. Bustillos, Pers.
Comm); December, 2012 = 0.5 Mm3 and March, 2013 =
0.2 Mm3 (Bernard et al. 2013). Since July 2013 to present
at least 8 Mm3 were expulsed in the form of pyroclastic
flows (M. Hall and S. Vallejo, Comm. Pers.). A total re-
ported bulk volume is approximately 153 Mm3 of com-
bined ashfall, lava and pyroclastic flows.
The sporadic nature of the eruptive activity and its
relative predictability are important factors giving resi-
dents the confidence to keep living around the volcano.
Most citizens have continued to maintain their homes
and livelihoods, and that despite the explosive activity,
crop yields are moderately good, some even bountiful,
due to the frequent dressing of fine andesitic ash, which
is quickly tilled into the soil to readily facilitate nutrient
uptake by crops. Tourists travel to Baños to be close to
the volcano, especially flocking to the city during the
most spectacular and persistent Strombolian activity,
viewing the volcano from safe hilltop perches. The city
government promotes safe visitation to the volcano for
local and international tourists.
Since the display of outright resentment by the popu-
lation to the IGEPN monitoring scientists after the
1999-forced evacuations, the managerial aberrations that
occurred in 2006 and especially after the large eruptions
that same year spilled pyroclastic flows down three
flanks and modified local topography, there was little
doubt in people´s minds that the volcano truly had the
eruptive power to affect their lives and livelihoods. Until
they experienced the 2006 eruptive events, residents
whose grandparents had related to them the hardships
they had faced following the yet bigger 1918 Tungurahua
eruption, had been skeptical that the actual eruption
would personally affect them or their families. Farmers
still living persistently on Tungurahua´s SW flanks relate 
that their relatives in 1918 escaped the harshness of that
eruptive episode by migrating to the piedmont zone at the
foot of the Western Cordillera, about 80 km SW of
Penipe, to start a new life.
Local people also developed greater respect for the
IGEPN scientists, as OVT had given two successful early
warnings before the July and August, 2006 eruptive epi-
sodes, and also for the recent Vulcanian-style eruptions of
2013 and that of 01 February, 2014. Good working rela-
tions with the provincial and local officials and the
population-at-large around Baños, Pelileo and Penipe have
typified the post-2006 eruptive period.  While nobody
knows what the final outcome will be at Tungurahua, if
the eruption were to end now, the eruptive phase of
1999–2014 will have been more benevolent than the
1916–1918 eruptive events, whose incandescent products
produced broader flow paths which were experienced and
reported by deceased ancestors of families who still live
around the volcano. Stratigraphy also shows us that previ-
ous historical eruptions produced larger volume ash falls
and broader-reaching pyroclastic flows. For example, vil-
lages on the west flank were overrun by pyroclastic flows
during earlier historical eruptions as was the western per-
imeter of Baños and Ulba (Le Pennec et al. 2008).  The
1773 eruption brought a scoria bomb-rich pyroclastic flow
into Baños center (Mothes et al. 2004).
Conclusions
The founding of OVT on a local hacienda outside of
Baños gave IGEPN scientists an opportunity to experi-
ence and monitor closely the evolution of eruptive activ-
ity and to issue early warnings to authorities and the
populations living in high-risk zones. OVT has also
benifitted from the implementation of a wide range of
modern monitoring techniques that aide scientists in the
interpretation of changing conditions in the volcano,
and thus provides a means for giving early warnings.
The persistent local presence at OVT has helped the
IGEPN to have a close evaluation of evolving eruptive
activity and be in close and immediate contact with local
authorities and the public. Some IGEPN scientists have
been serving regular monitoring shifts at OVT since in-
ception of the observatory and are well recognized and
trusted in the community. Trust is an earned attribute
which is very important during volcanic crises, because
people may feel that they are putting their lives in a sci-
entist´s hands (Haynes et al. 2008). This long association
with monitoring at OVT has helped to create a collect-
ive “institutional memory” within the IGEPN and have
fostered a well-founded knowledge of the volcano´s be-
havior. This understanding has facilitated the induction
of young scientists into OVT monitoring activities.
Young scientists, who begin as students working on a
thesis, are trained at OVT over a period of months, thus
Page 14
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 14 of 15
learning the “modus operandi”. They learn the volcano´s
geography, become acquainted with the local actors, but
foremost they must learn the geophysical signs given by
the volcano and the possible significance of these signals.
Personal interaction by OVT monitoring scientists
with local people and vigías has helped cement relations
and establish trust. The vigías are an important link be-
tween the monitoring scientists and the communities
where individual vigías live. The continued real-time 24/
7 monitoring done by the IGEPN has given people living
around the volcano a greater level of security. The popu-
lation has come to rely on receiving timely early warn-
ings before eruption, and they believe that IGEPN
monitoring scientists are keeping a constant eye on the
volcano´s pulse and trends. The vigía network and radio
system also promotes the interchange of critical observa-
tions which keeps community members informed as well
as giving visual and audible observations to OVT scientists.
In this contribution we reported a clear shift over
15 years, from negative to eventually positive in the pub-
lic´s perception of volcano monitoring and early warnings
given by the IGEPN. Various circumstances played a role
in this transformation, but the foremost contribution was
maintaining a local observatory, staffed by scientists from
a national university, the gradual insertion by various
means into the local context and the scientific-community
linkage that is effectively established through collaboration
with vigías, being present to meet often with concerned
people and officials, and to give orienting talks and
debriefings on volcanic activity. Essentially the IGEPN,
consciously or not, has carried out volcano monitoring
and risk reduction with a “bottom-up” approach. This ap-
proach takes more time to implement compared to a top-
down approach, where the people are forced to evacuate
or stay out of a zone through enforcement by military or
police, and perhaps where monitoring scientists have little
contact with the public. Developing trust between local
people, authorities and scientists is mutually beneficial, es-
pecially when the mission is long. Insertion into the local
fabric is gradual and may take years if there is lingering re-
sentment by the local population, and relies on key players
at observatories who are credible, recognized and trusted.
We believe that the public wants to know and hopefully
trust the scientists who are providing critical information
about possible impacts on their lives in decisive moments,
ie, the decision to evacuate or not, being one of them.
As has been pointed out, overall moderate levels of
eruptive activity of Tungurahua volcano, combined with
the instrumental and human-based monitoring and warn-
ing system that is in place, has allowed local people to
continue living in high risk areas. Their willingness to con-
tinue inhabiting some high risk zones is doubtless due to
their connection to their land, their economic invest-
ments, the lack of another home, the custom volcano 
monitoring provided by OVT and for some, the ability to
stay in touch by communicating over the UHF radio sys-
tem. Given the powerful eruptions that occurred in 2006
and later, local residents probably realize the possibility
that a surprise large pyroclastic flow could travel far down
the slopes and quebradas during rapid-onset Vulcanian-
style eruptions, potentially affecting life and property. If, in
the future large and multiple pyroclastic flows occur with
a lead time of only minutes, not all the people who could
be affected may receive an adequate warning that permits
evacuation. This is because the people at highest risk, espe-
cially those living on the NW flanks, are served by evacuation
routes that are cut by quebradas that may transport descend-
ing pyroclastic flows. Such a worst-case scenario, if it were
to play out, could present severe complications for both the
IGEPN and the SNGR and perhaps terminate inhabitation of
families on the volcano´s immediate flanks.
Nonetheless, after 15 years, thus far the VEI = 3 or
smaller eruptions have not surpassed the resilience of
communities or of OVT scientists to adequately respond
or recover from an eruption. OVT scientists continue
living in this environment, communicating often with
the local population via several media, including having
frequent personal contact– essential actions which for-
tify the scientific-community interface in the area. Fore-
most, OVT scientists have the paramount responsibility
of fingerprinting geophysical trends of Tungurahua´s ac-
tivity and providing early warnings before heightened
eruptive activity.
Finally we must honor Tungurahua, for unlike most vol-
canoes that erupt in hours or days of their awakening,
then resume dormancy, Tungurahua has given us 15 years
of study and practice in which to improve our response
and reaction and has taught us many lessons.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
PM developed the concept of the paper, wrote the draft and carried out the
modifications. HY, PH and PR revised the manuscript and participated in
discussions about the content. AS prepared data on Vulcanian explosions
and read the text and made comments. MR discussed with all authors
hazard mitigation strategies and improvements to monitoring during crises.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We are thankful for the Instrumentation upgrades that have been achieved in
collaboration with JICA, USAID, USGS, SouthCom, UNAVCO, NOVAC, the SNGR,
Proyecto BID (Early Warning System), the Ecuadorian NSF (SENESCYT) and
SENPLADES. Cooperation with French IRD scientists has provided high-quality
modeling of PDCs. We also extend gratitude to the Chavez Family who loans us
their hacienda house for OVT operations. The DIPECHO Project helped in
improving community relations and contributing to the concept of forming the
Vigía group. Interactions with the STREVA project have provided stimulating
conversations concerning resilience of local populations and volcano observatories.
We extend thanks to the EPN for continuing support and the staff of the IGEPN.
We recognize the commitment of the 25 vigías who provide invaluable
observations during eruptive activity at Tungurahua. A USAID-OFDA project
Page 15
Mothes et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:9  Page 15 of 15
also helped to strengthen the vigía network in 2013. We are grateful to the
three reviewers whose suggestions improved the manuscript.
Received: 5 August 2014 Accepted: 26 January 2015
References
Arellano S, Hall M (2007) Velocidades de emisión de bombas expulsados por el
volcán Tungurahua el 16–17 de agosto de 2006. 6ta Memorias Jorn. Cien.
Tierra, Esc Poli Nac, Quito, pp. 185–188
Arellano S, Hall M, Samaniego P, Le Pennec JL, Ruiz A, Molina I, Yepes H (2008)
Degassing patterns of Tungurahua volcano (Ecuador) during the 1999–2006
eruptive period, inferred from remote spectroscopic measurements of SO2
emissions. J Volcano Geotherm Res 176:151–162
Bernard B, Bustillos J, Wade B, Hidalgo S (2013) Influence of the wind direction
variability on the quantification of tephra fallouts: December 2013 and March
2013 Tungurahua eruptions. Avances 5(1):A14–A21, Quito, Ecuador
Biggs J, Mothes P, Ruiz M, Baker S, Amelung F, Dixon T, Hong S-H (2010) Stratovolcano
growth by co‐eruptive intrusion: the 2008 eruption of Tungurahua Ecuador.
Geophys Res Lett 37:L05304, doi:10.1029/2009GL041644, 2010a
Clark AB (2013) Unsteady explosive activity: Vulcanian eruptions. In: Fagents SA,
Tracy KP G, Rosaly MC L (eds) Modeling Volcanic Processes: The Physics and
Mathematics of Volcanism. Cambridge University Press, England, pp 129–152
Eychenne J, Le Pennec J-L, Troncoso L, Gouhier M, Nedelec J-M (2012) Causes
and consequences of bimodal grain-size distribution of tephra fall deposited
during the August 2006 Tungurahua eruption (Ecuador). Bull Volcanol
doi:10.1007/s00445-011-0517-5
Gottsman J, Angelis D, Fournier N, Van Camp M, Sacks S, Linde A, Ripepe M
(2011) On the geophysical fingerprint of Vulcanian explosions. Earth
Planetary Sci Lett 306:98–104, doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2011.03.035
Hadley KC, LaHusen RG (1995) Technical manual for the experimental acoustic
flow monitor. US Geologic Surv Open File Rep 25:95–114
Hall M, Robin C, Beate B, Mothes P, Monzier M (1999) Tungurahua Volcano, Ecuador:
structure, eruptive history and hazards. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 91(1):1–21
Hall ML, Steele AL, Mothes P, Ruiz MC (2013) Pyroclastic density currents (PDC) of
the 16–17 August 2006 eruptions of Tungurahua volcano, Ecuador:
Geophysical registry and characteristics. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 265:78–93
Haynes K, Barclay J, Pidgeon N (2008) The issue of trust and its influence on risk
communication during volcanic crisis. Bull Volcanol 70(5):605–621
Hidalgo S, Battaglia J, Bernard B, Steele A, Arellano S, Galle B (2014) Identifying
open and closed system behaviors at Tungurahua volcano (Ecuador) using
SO2 and seismo-acoustic measurements. EGU General Assembly, Vienna
Austria, Abstract id 1615541H
Iguchi M, Yakiwara H, Tameguir T, Hendrasto M, Hirabayashi J (2008) Mechanism
of explosive eruption revealed by geophysical observations at the
Sakurajima, Sawanosejima and Semeru volcanoes. J Volocanol Geotherm Res
178:1–9, doi:10.1016/j.jvolgeores.2007.10.010
Kelfoun K, Samaniego P, Palacios P, Barba D (2009) Testing the suitability of
frictional behaviour for pyroclastic flow simulation by comparison with a
well-constrained eruption at Tungurahua volcano (Ecuador). Bull Volcanol
71(9):1057–1075
Kumagai H, Nakano M, Maeda T, Yepes H, Palacios P, Ruiz M, Arrais S, Vaca M,
Molina I, Yamashima T (2010) Broadband seismic monitoring of active
volcanoes using deterministic and stochastic approaches. J Geophys Res
115:B08303, doi:10.1029/2009JB006889
Lane LR, Tobin GA, Whiteford LM (2003) Volcanic hazard or economic destitution:
hard choices for Baños, Ecuador. Environ Haz 5:23–34
Le Pennec J-L, Jaya D, Samaniego P, Ramón P, Moreno S, Egred J, van der Plicht
J (2008) The AD 1300–1700 eruptive periods at Tungurahua volcano,
Ecuador, revealed by historical narratives, stratigraphy and radio-carbon
dating. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 176:70–81
Le Pennec J-L, Ruiz GA, Ramón P, Palacios E, Mothes P, and Yepes H (2011)
Impact of tephra falls on Andean communities: the influences of eruption size
and weather conditions during the 1999–2001 activity of Tungurahua Volcano,
Ecuador. J Volcanol Geotherm Res (2011) doi:10.1016/j.jvolgeores.2011.06.011.
Leonard GS, Johnston DM, Williams S, Cole JW, Finnis K, Barnard S, (2005)
Impacts and management of recent volcanic eruptions in Ecuador: lessons
for New Zealand. Institute of Geological & Nuclear Sciences, Geological and
Nuclear Sciences Science Report 2005/20, 51 p. [URL: "http://civildefence.govt.nz/assets/Uploads/publications/GNS-SR2005-20-Ecuador-volcano-impacts.pdf"] http://civildefence.govt.nz/
 assets/Uploads/publications/GNS-SR2005-20-Ecuador-volcano-impacts.pdf 
Morrissey MM, Mastin L (2000) Vulcanian Eruptions. In: Surgurdsson H (ed)
Encyclopedia of Volcanoes. Academic Press, San Diego, USA, pp 463–476
Mothes P, Vallance J (2015) Lahars at Cotopaxi and Tungurahua Volcanoes,
Ecuador: Highlights from Stratigraphy and Observational Records and
Related Downstream Hazards. In: Papale P et al (eds) Volcanic Hazards,
Risks and Disasters, Hazards and Disasters Book Series. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
Netherlands, pp 142–167
Mothes P, Hall M, Hoblitt R, Newhall C (2004) Caracterización de los flujos
piroclásticos producidos por el volcán Tungurahua (Ecuador): evidencia de
dichos flujos en la ciudad de Baños. Investigaciones en Geociencias, vol 1.
Instituto Geofísico & Corporación Editora Nacional, Quito, pp 19–27
Ramón P (2010) Análisis Retrospectivo de la Evaluación de la Amenaza, el
Monitoreo Volcánico y la Comunicación durante las Erupciones del año 2006
del Volcán Tungurahua. Master 2 SGT PREFALC "CIENCIAS Y GESTION DE LA
TIERRA" GEOLOGIA, RIESGOS Y GESTION DEL TERRITORIO, Université Nice
Sophia Antipolis, p 113, Instituto Geofísico, Quito
Ruiz M, Lees JM, Johnson JB (2006) Source constraints of Tungurahua volcano
explosion events. Bull Volcanol 68:480–490
Ruiz AG, Mothes P, Bustillos J, Jarrin P, Yepes H (2012) Predicting Volumes of
Magma Influx in 2011 using Ground Deformation Patterns at Tungurahua
Volcano, Ecuador. Cities on Volcanoes7, Abstract, Colima, Mexico
Samaniego P, Le Pennec J-L, Robin C, Hidalgo S (2011) Petrological analysis of
the pre-eruptive magmatic process prior to the 2006 explosive eruptions at
Tungurahua volcano, Ecuador. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 199:69–84
Steffke AM, Fee D, Garcés M, Harris A (2010) Eruption chronologies, plume
heights and eruption styles at Tungurahua volcano: integrating remote
sensing techniques and infrasound. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 199:69–84
Stone J, Barclay J, Simmons P, Cole PD, Loughlin SC, Ramón P, Mothes P (2014)
Risk reduction through community-based monitoring: the vigías of Tungurahua,
Ecuador. J of Applied Volcanology 3(11), doi:10.1186/s13617-014-0011-9.
Sword-Daniels V, Wardman J, Stewart C, Wilson T, Johnston D, Rossetto T (2011)
Infrastructure impacts, management and adaptations to eruptions at Volcán
Tungurahua, Ecuador, 1999–2010, GNS Science Report 2011/24., p 73
Tobin GA, Whiteford LM (2002) Community resilience and volcano hazard: the
eruption of Tungurahua and evacuation of the faldas in Ecuador.
Disasters 26(1):28–48
Vergniolle S, Mangan M (2000) Hawaiian and Strombolian eruptions. In:
Sigurdsson H (ed) Encyclopedia of Volcanoes. Academic Press, San Diego,
USA, pp 447–461
Williams R, Stinton AJ, Sheridan MF (2008) Evaluation of the Titan2D two-phase
flow model using an actual event: case study of the 2005 Vazcún Valley
Lahar. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 177:760–766
Wright HMN, Cashman KV, Mothes PA, Hall ML, Ruiz AG, Le Pennec J-L (2012)
Estimating rates of decompression from textures of erupted ash particles
produced by 1999–2006 eruptions of Tungurahua volcano, Ecuador.
Geology 40(7):619–622, doi:10.1130/G32948
Yamazaki K, Teraishi M, Ishihara K, Momatsu S, Kato K (2013) Subtle changes in
strain prior to sub-Plinian eruptions recorded by vault-housed extensometers
during the 2011 activity at Shinmoe-dake, Kirishima volcano, Japan. Earth
Planets Space 65:1491–1499
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁ t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
