Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2015-06-03
Keywords: Volcanic hazard and risk assessment,Ash and gas dispersal modelling,Scenario-based probabilistic hazard modelling,Emergency management planning,Santorini Volcano,Greece
CrossMarkDomains[1]: springer.com
ModDate: 2015/06/03 17:54:29+02'00'
Subject: Journal of Applied Volcanology, 2015, doi:10.1186/s13617-015-0033-y
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Title: Rapid emergency assessment of ash and gas hazard for future eruptions at Santorini Volcano, Greece
CrossMarkDomains[2]: springerlink.com
doi: 10.1186/s13617-015-0033-y
CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
Author: S F Jenkins
CreationDate: 2015/06/03 11:21:29+08'00'
xmp:crossmark:DOI: 10.1186/s13617-015-0033-y
xmp:crossmark:MajorVersionDate: 2015-06-03
xmp:crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:crossmark:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Volcanic hazard and risk assessment,Ash and gas dispersal modelling,Scenario-based probabilistic hazard modelling,Emergency management planning,Santorini Volcano,Greece
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2015-06-03
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:pdfx:doi: 10.1186/s13617-015-0033-y
xmp:pdfx:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:prism:url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13617-015-0033-y
xmp:prism:doi: 10.1186/s13617-015-0033-y
xmp:prism:issn: 2191-5040
xmp:prism:aggregationType: journal
xmp:prism:publicationName: Journal of Applied Volcanology
xmp:prism:copyright: Jenkins et al.
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s13617-015-0033-y
xmp:dc:publisher: Journal of Applied Volcanology
xmp:dc:description: Journal of Applied Volcanology, 2015, doi:10.1186/s13617-015-0033-y
xmp:dc:subject: Volcanic hazard and risk assessment; Ash and gas dispersal modelling; Scenario-based probabilistic hazard modelling; Emergency management planning; Santorini Volcano; Greece
xmp:dc:title: Rapid emergency assessment of ash and gas hazard for future eruptions at Santorini Volcano, Greece
xmp:dc:creator: S F Jenkins; S Barsotti; T K Hincks; A Neri; J C Phillips; R S J Sparks; T Sheldrake; G Vougioukalakis
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2015-06-03T17:54:29+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2015-06-03T11:21:29+08:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2015-06-03T17:54:29+02:00
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:9a0268b1-6e06-4524-a994-9ca048c12cdd
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:2e706416-eb9b-4593-8307-3574dc9ed21b
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:874b0ad4-7d93-4e47-b04a-99c18ade97ae
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2015-06-03T22:36:53+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://www.aiim.org/pdfa/ns/id/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfaid
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/A ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Part of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: part
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Integer
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Amendment of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: amd
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: conformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer ORCiD Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springer.com/ns/xmpExtensions/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: springer
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCiD (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCiD is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springer.com/ns/xmpExtensions/1.0/authorinfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrosMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkMajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://crossref.org/crossmark/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: crossmark
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: crossmark
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Usual same as prism:doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The date when a publication was published.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://prismstandard.org/namespaces/basic/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: prism
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Prism
xmp:pdfaProperty:cBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction
  Study overview
  Volcanic setting
  Economic and demographic setting
Stochastic hazard models
  TEPHRA2
  VOL-CALPUFF
  AERMOD
Wind conditions
Scenario identification
  Most likely scenario
    Ash modelling inputs
    Gas modelling inputs
  Largest considered scenario
    Ash modelling inputs
Thresholds and critical locations
Ground ash hazard
  Most likely scenario
    Comparison of model outputs
  Largest considered scenario
Airborne ash hazard
  Most likely scenario
SO2 gas hazard
Conclusions and emergency management implications
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Acknowledgments
Author details
References
Page 1
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16
DOI 10.1186/s13617-015-0033-y
RESEARCH  Open Access
Rapid emergency assessment of ash and gas
hazard for future eruptions at Santorini
Volcano, Greece
S F Jenkins1*, S Barsotti2,3, T K Hincks1, A Neri2, J C Phillips1, R S J Sparks1, T Sheldrake1 and G Vougioukalakis4
Abstract
Hazard assessments for long-dormant volcanoes, where information is rarely available, typically have to be made
rapidly and in the face of considerable uncertainty and often poor information. A conditional (assuming an
eruption), scenario-based probabilistic approach to such an assessment is presented here for Santorini volcano
(Greece). The rapid assessment was developed and implemented in response to the 2011-2012 unrest crisis in
order to inform emergency management and planning. This paper synthesises the results presented to the Greek
National Committee and scientific community involved. Two plausible eruptions at Santorini were investigated,
using multiple inputs and dispersal models, based on observations of historic eruptions and expert judgement. For
ash hazard, a ‘most likely’ eruption scenario was developed, characterised by slow lava extrusion over periods of
one to two years with weak but persistent explosions and ash venting up to 3 km. A second ‘largest considered’
sub-Plinian explosive scenario assumed a 12 km high column of 4-h duration. For gas hazard, constant fluxes of
200 and 800 tons/day SO2 
were assumed for the duration of the eruption scenarios, noting that there is very little
evidence to constrain SO2 
flux from Santorini eruptions. Statistical models of likely wind conditions with height
and season were developed from decadal reanalysis time series showing that consistent low-altitude winds were
rarely maintained for more than a few days. Stochastic models of ash (TEPHRA2, VOL-CALPUFF) and gas (AERMOD)
dispersal provided outputs in the form of probability maps and exceedance probability curves for key loading and
concentration thresholds at important locations on the island. The results from the rapid assessments presented
in this paper confirm that ash and gas hazard is likely to be of concern if an eruption of Santorini occurs. Higher
hazard may be expected to the south and east of the volcano, notably at important tourist and transport hubs.
Low hazard to the north and northwest suggests that these may be suitable locations for emergency response
centres and emergency critical infrastructure. This approach may provide a blueprint for rapid ash and gas
assessment for other long-dormant volcanoes and we provide suggestions for refining the methods used.
Keywords: Volcanic hazard and risk assessment; Ash and gas dispersal modelling; Scenario-based probabilistic
hazard modelling; Emergency management planning; Santorini Volcano; Greece
Introduction
Unrest on long-dormant volcanoes, for which hazard in-
formation is commonly sparse, typically requires rapid
hazard assessment, given that possible onset of eruption
may be within days to months of the start of unrest. As-
sessments have to be made promptly to inform decision-
making and planning for an emergency. However, the
information that is required as input for such assessments
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:Susanna.Jenkins@bristol.ac.uk"] Susanna.Jenkins@bristol.ac.uk
1Department of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1RJ, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
may be incomplete, of poor quality or even non-existent.
It is likely that such volcanoes either have no historic rec-
ord or that the last historic eruption was prior to the avail-
ability of modern instrumental monitoring, which is now
common on many active volcanoes (Sparks et al. 2012).
Some important types of data, such as volcanic emissions,
may thus be completely absent and there will be limited
time for gathering new data or carrying out new research.
In these cases, information from similar volcanoes with
better information may help in estimating some critical
parameters.
© 2015 Jenkins et al. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 2 of 22
Here we describe rapid hazard assessments carried out
for Santorini volcano, Greece, during a recent period of
unrest (2011–2012).  The last eruption of the volcano
was in 1950 and was relatively weak, however historical
and geological records suggest that larger eruptions were
possible. The assessments presented here were carried
out to inform the Greek National Committee and assist
them in considering emergency management and plan-
ning for a future eruption. This approach may provide a
blueprint for rapid ash and gas assessment for other
long-dormant volcanoes.
Study overview
Following approximately 60 years of relative quiescence at
Santorini volcano, Greece, seismic swarms and expanding
radial deformation began in January 2011, continuing
throughout the year before dying down early in 2012.
Deformation and seismicity were focussed in the northern
portion of the caldera, approximately 4 km below the sur-
face (Newman et al, 2012; Parks et al, 2012; Parks et al,
2013). Observations of this sequence of unrest were un-
precedented at Santorini and raised concerns about the
impact of a future volcanic eruption. In response to this,
and in collaboration with the Greek National Committee
for the Scientific Monitoring of Santorini Volcano, we
undertook preliminary studies of the potential ash and gas
hazards from an eruption at Santorini. The hazards from
emissions of volcanic ash and gas are of particular signifi-
cance because of their potential impact on the island’s
population, economy and critical infrastructure. In par-
ticular, closure or disruption of roads, the airport or port
may limit the scope of any evacuation or other emergency
management actions, such as the provision of supplies or
clean-up.
This paper describes two parallel rapid hazard assess-
ments that were co-ordinated by two different research
groups and undertaken during the state of unrest in late
2011 and early 2012 as concern about volcanic unrest
grew. Two of the authors (RSJS and GV) were part of a
small group of scientists convened by the local author-
ities on Santorini to provide advice and expertise to in-
form the authorities about the potential for eruption and
possible impacts. The hazard assessments were carried
out rapidly to inform this advice. Results were delivered
to the Greek National Committee in May and July 2012
and discussed during scientific meetings on Santorini in
March 2012 and October 2012. A further parallel inves-
tigation was carried out for the Committee that com-
bined multiple strands of observational and scientific
evidence to quantitatively assess the relative probabilities
of different unrest outcomes (see Aspinall and Woo,
2014). Our ultimate aim was to link the assessments so
that long-term and real-time revised hazard assessments
may be carried out as new evidence becomes available, 
potentially also contextualising volcanic hazards along-
side other risks facing the island, such as tectonic earth-
quake and tsunamis. However, the unrest at Santorini
subsided through 2012 and the studies were not pro-
gressed to this stage. Ideally, and prior to any future un-
rest emergencies, such assessments should be elaborated
upon and reviewed in detail.
A small number of plausible eruption scenarios at San-
torini were investigated based on observations of historic
eruptions and expert judgement, and using stochastic
models of ash and gas dispersal. Different tools and data
sets were employed by the two groups but both hazard
assessments used consistent input data of the eruption
scenarios. Ash and gas hazard modelling outputs were
produced as probability maps for exceeding key critical
thresholds and exceedance probability curves for key lo-
cations. We have since bought together the studies to
compare and contrast dispersal modelling outputs and
to make available a more comprehensive initial evalu-
ation of potential ash and gas hazard at Santorini and to
suggest emergency management measures. This paper
describes a methodology for near real-time hazard assess-
ment at volcanoes showing signs of unrest, and should
not be used in place, or as an exemplar of, a comprehen-
sive volcanic hazard and risk assessment. More detailed
study, without the time and data constraints that are im-
posed by an emergency, is advisable for Santorini before a
further period of unrest or an eruption.
Volcanic setting
Santorini is the most active volcano in the South Aegean
volcanic arc. It comprises a caldera that formed during the
catastrophic Thera eruption approximately 3600 years
ago, one of the largest volcanic eruptions recorded in hu-
man history. Currently Santorini volcano is within an effu-
sive phase with dacitic volcanism focussed on the Kameni
islands (Fig. 1), which rise 500 m above the flooded cal-
dera floor and represent the peak of a sub-aerial shield
volcano constructed on a cone of hyaloclastites and sub-
marine lava. Previous inter-caldera phases have been char-
acterised by extended periods of lava effusion and
sporadic tephra emission, leading to the intercalations of
lava and tephra layers exposed within the caldera cliffs
(Druitt et al, 1999).
Palea Kameni, which formed after the Thera eruption,
last erupted in 726 AD after seven centuries without any
record of activity. Historical and geological evidence for
significant pumice generation and ash plumes several kilo-
metres high suggest this was an explosive sub-Plinian
event. Following 726 AD, Santorini was then quiet until
more frequent eruptions began in 1570 AD forming the
Nea Kameni islands. Nea Kameni has erupted seven times
in the past 500 years, each involving extrusion of viscous
lava to form domes and thick flows and accompanied by
Page 3
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 3 of 22
Fig. 1 Map of Santorini caldera, and its location within Greece, the recent volcanic islands of Nea Kameni and Palea Kameni and nine key
locations considered in our assessment of the potential ash and gas impacts from a future eruption at Santorini volcano
intermittent ash explosions over a few months or years
(Smithsonian Institution 2013).
There is limited historical information on unrest activ-
ity at the volcano. What is available suggests that erup-
tions are preceded by an extended period (weeks to
months) of felt seismicity and local deformation immedi-
ately (days) prior to eruption (Fytikas et al, 1990; Pyle
and Elliot, 2006). There are also records of unrest prior
to the 2011–2012 unrest episode that did not result in
eruption (e.g. Stiros et al, 2010).
Economic and demographic setting
Santorini island is home to just over 15,000 people (Hellenic
Statistical Authority 2011), which can swell to more than
500,000 in the summer months. The well-established
tourism industry on the island has led to significant eco-
nomic and population growth and the majority of the per-
manent population are employed within the tourist sector.
Only a small proportion of the population still have trad-
itional occupations of fishing and viniculture (Dominey-
Howes and Minos-Minopoulos, 2004; Vougioukalakis and
Fytikas, 2005). Thus all livelihoods are at risk from a fu-
ture volcanic eruption and any evacuation, unrest or non-
magmatic activity (e.g. phreatic eruptions) is capable of
having a significant impact upon the local economy.
Stochastic hazard models
In carrying out the parallel rapid hazard assessments de-
scribed in this paper, two ash models were used: TEPHRA2
(Bonadonna et al, 2005) to allow for rapid computation of 
ash fall hazard and VOL-CALPUFF (Barsotti et al, 2008) to
assess the airborne ash hazard. VOL-CALPUFF also out-
puts the ash fall hazard and so we were able to quantita-
tively compare the hazard outputs from numerically
different approaches to ash fall modelling. The rationale for
assessing the hazard independently using different models
and datasets is not to carry out a systemic model compari-
son but to describe how science is undertaken by different
groups in an emergency: broadly similar hazard outputs
would strengthen our confidence in the presented results.
For modelling of gas (SO2
) dispersal, the boundary layer
pollution model AERMOD (Cimorelli et al, 2005) was used.
In what follows, we briefly introduce each of these models
before discussing the statistical models of wind conditions
developed for the study.
TEPHRA2
TEPHRA2 is a Eulerian dispersal model that assumes an
initial released mass of ash distributed between the
ground and the plume top for a single event (Bonadonna
et al, 2005). Particles are then advected by a steady-state
wind at source and spread out by atmospheric diffusion,
diluting their concentration. Particles fall according to
terminal velocities that account for Reynold’s number
variations along the particle’s fall to earth, derived from
the particle size distribution and the stratified wind field
(Bonadonna et al, 2005).  Model inputs are shown in
Table 1 and were estimated from expert judgement, based
on experience and knowledge of the scientific literature
and analogous volcanoes. As we were concerned with
Page 4
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 4 of 22
Table 1 Ash modelling inputs for an expected most likely
future eruption at Santorini
Model input parameter Value Description
Vent elevation 367 (m) From Smithsonian Institution (2013)
Eddy constant 0.04 Eddy diffusion value for Earth for small
particles (Suzuki, 1983)
Diffusion coefficient 142.6  Describing the advection and diffusion
of large particles (m2/s)
Fall time threshold
Particle density 
188.6  Threshold for change in diffusion
calculation (seconds fall time)
2300 Assumed density of particles (kg/m3)
Plume steps  200 Number of column integration steps
Particle classes 100 Number of particle size classes
Plume ash distribution 0  Initial mass uniformly distributed from
base to top of plume
proximal on island deposits (<10 km from source), the dif-
fusion coefficient and fall time threshold were relatively
low to be appropriate for the area scale of the modelling
(Bonadonna et al, 2005). Model outputs for each simula-
tion comprise the ash load at each cell, with target cells
computed individually rather than across a uniform ‘grid’,
giving an ash load ‘footprint’ for each released ash mass.
VOL-CALPUFF
VOL-CALPUFF couples a Eulerian description of plume
rise with a Lagrangian representation of ash dispersal as
a series of diffusing packets (Barsotti et al, 2008).  The
model is able to describe the tilting effects of the plume
due to wind action and uses orography-corrected me-
teorological and volcanological conditions that simulate
the transient and three-dimensional transport of vol-
canic ash throughout the eruption duration. The settling
velocities of particles are described as a function of par-
ticle characteristics (density, size and shape) and atmos-
pheric conditions. VOL-CALPUFF is therefore a useful
tool for reconstructing and forecasting both ash concen-
trations in the air and ash fallout (dry and wet) on the
ground from the same scenario (Barsotti and Neri 2008;
Spinetti et al, 2013).  To enable comparison of the ash
fall footprints from VOL-CALPUFF with those derived
from TEPHRA2 we deliberately used the same volcano-
logical input parameters for the two models (Table 1).
For the presented results, VOL-CALPUFF has been run
by using hourly meteorological data pre-processed by
using CALMET (Scire et al. 1990).
AERMOD
AERMOD is a widely used boundary layer pollution
model that involves release of a source plume of tracers
(e.g. SO2 
or ash), which are then tracked as they are car-
ried by wind and interact with topography (Cimorelli et
al, 2005). The model has been applied at Masaya volcano 
in Nicaragua and compared well with measurements of
SO2 
concentration (Johns, 2010).  Input parameters
include vent radius, vent velocity, exit temperature and
tracer flux (Table 2). These parameters are not independent
because values have to be internally consistent since tracer
flux depends on radius and velocity. Near ground concen-
trations of SO2 
are calculated and reported here. Results
are weakly sensitive to variations of velocity and radius for
fixed mass flux because overall source buoyancy is con-
stant and plume heights are only weakly dependent on ini-
tial momentum.
Wind conditions
The wind is a primary control on dispersal of ash and gas.
Statistical analysis of wind data at different altitudes
characterises variability of wind speed and direction as
functions of height. Model wind data were sourced for
TEPHRA2 from the European Centre for Medium Range
Weather Forecasts ([URL: "http://www.ecmwf.int"] www.ecmwf.int) and constitute 20 years
of daily averaged regional ERA-Interim re-analysis data
(1990 to 2011) sourced from a 0.7° grid. Model wind data
for use with VOL-CALPUFF were sourced from the Na-
tional Centers for Environmental Prediction and Atmos-
pheric Research ([URL: "http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov"] www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov) and constitute
10 years of regional re-analysis data (1980 to 1990) avail-
able on a 0.75° grid with a temporal resolution of 6 h. The
different types of wind data adopted by the two models
were a result of the different nature of the two dispersal
models and also the requirement for wind data to be
pre-processed and rapidly available so that model outputs
Table 2 Gas modelling inputs for an expected most likely
future eruption (a 200 tons/day or 800 tons/day scenario) at
Santorini
Model input
parameter 
Value Description
Vent elevation 113 m  From Pyle and Elliot, 2006
Exit temperature 1000 K  Typical temperature of magmatic
gases from dacitic magma
Proportion of SO2 
5 %  As a proportion of erupted gas,
the other gas being water
Gas exit velocity 10 m/s  Estimate made from typical values
Gas exit density 0.12 kg/m3  Density of water at 1000 K
Vent diameter 7 or 14 m  Given gas density and concentration,
a 7 m diameter vent is required to
emit 200 tons/day. To conserve mass,
keeping temperature and velocity
constant, an 800 tons/day emission
requires a 14 m diameter
Albedo 0.25  Fraction of total incident solar
radiation reflected by the surface
(typical value for grassland used)
Bowen ratio  5  Net radiation at a surface (typical
value for grassland used)
Surface roughness 0.15 m  Typical value for grassland used
Page 5
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 5 of 22
could be obtained as quickly as possible. As an advection–
diffusion model, TEPHRA2 uses a single time-averaged
wind record at source that does not vary with time; by con-
trast, VOL-CALPUFF accounts for temporal and spatial
variation in the wind and therefore requires processing of
the reanalysis data to provide time-varying and high-
resolution wind inputs. Figure 2 summarises the data from
both data sets with rose diagrams showing the proportions
and ranges of wind speed and direction at three different
heights and suggests that minimal differences exist in wind
statistics between the two datasets. Comparison between
the outcomes from the two models and their underlying
wind datasets (Comparison of model outputs) allowed us
to evaluate the effect of different models and model input
data on hazard analyses and therefore to highlight the most
robust outcomes of the assessment.
The key features of the wind statistics are the predomin-
ance of northerly winds at low altitude (<1 km) while
there is a dominance of westerly and north-westerly winds
at higher altitudes, which are weaker over the summer
months (June to August). Wind speeds are mostly below
10 to 20 m/s at lower altitudes (≤3 km) but at higher alti-
tudes relevant to the sub-Plinian scenario (12 km), speeds
are commonly up to 30 to 40 m/s. These wind character-
istics have first order hazard implications discussed later.
Another useful parameter when considering ash dispersal
is wind persistence towards a given direction. We divided
direction into eight 60° sectors and used the two sets of 
re-analysis data to calculate separately the statistical distri-
bution of the number of days that the wind persisted in
that direction. Salient examples are shown in Fig. 3 and
they indicate that the ECMWF and NCEP/NCAR datasets
produce similar information on wind conditions at Santo-
rini. Analysis of these data shows that a consistent low
altitude wind direction is rarely maintained for more than
a few days. Thus it is highly probable that in a prolonged
eruption all parts of the island will be affected.
Scenario identification
Given the rapidity of this study, being carried out during
the unrest crisis, and the limited supporting data available
to characterise a full suite of eruption scenarios with ap-
propriate distributions and parameterisation, we chose to
consider only a small number of plausible and representa-
tive scenarios. Using arbitrary choices based on such few
data (even with input from expert judgement) to inform a
fully probabilistic assessment may have suggested that
model parameters (and associated uncertainties) were well
constrained, leading to a false degree of confidence in the
output. Conversely, had input ranges been used that rep-
resented the (true) high degree of uncertainty, rather than
those refined through the use of scenarios, resulting out-
puts would vary so much as to have little practical value.
The outputs provde a starting point from which to identify
potential hazards and areas at greatest risk so as to inform
further, more detailed, analysis. Ideally, hazard assessment
Fig. 2 Wind rose diagrams that show wind speeds and directions as a function of altitude (approximately surface, 3 km and 9.5 km), based on
statistical analyses of daily regional winds provided by the ECMWF ERA-Interim (upper) and NCEP/NCAR (lower) re-analysis data over extended
periods. Note that wind rose diagrams follow standard meteorological definition and show the direction the wind is blowing from rather than to
Page 6
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 6 of 22
Fig. 3 The directional persistence of low altitude winds exhibited by the datasets used in modelling: ECMWF ERA-Interim (used by TEPHRA2) and
NCEP-NCAR (used by VOL-CALPUFF), for two representative 60° sectors: towards the south and towards the southeast
at long dormant volcanoes would draw in more analogue
and volcano-specific data and carry out more detailed
time-series analysis than was possible at the time of the
Santorini crisis. We would also recommend that a range
of experts be elicited, formally or informally, in order to
quantify better the credible ranges over which scenarios
and inputs vary. Where possible, identifying which outputs
are of most importance for emergency managers would
help in deciding which inputs to focus on.
The eruption history at Santorini exhibits three main
styles of eruption: 1) caldera-forming eruptions with a
Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI) of 6 or 7, analogous to
the 3600 Ka Thera eruption; 2) sub-Plinian explosive (VEI
4) eruptions, similar to that of 726 AD; and 3) long-
duration weak ash emissions that accompany extrusion
of lava, as seen at Santorini over the last 500 years (Fytikas
et al. 1990; Druitt et al, 1999; Pyle and Elliot, 2006;
Smithsonian Institution 2013). An eruption similar to the
Thera eruption would blanket the island of Santorini
in pyroclastic deposits and have significant regional, and
global, effects. However, the recurrence interval of such
an eruption is approximately 15 to 20 thousand years
(Dominey-Howes and Minos-Minopoulos, 2004) and
the consensus interpretation is that Santorini is in a post-
caldera shield-building stage of volcanism. Thus we
considered this eruption style very unlikely in the current
impact assessment. We therefore restricted our assess-
ment to two scenarios: a ‘most likely’  weak ash plume
based on recent historical eruptions of 1866–70, 1925–26
and 1939–40, and a ‘largest considered’ sub-Plinian event,
based on evidence of significant pumice generation in the
eruption of 726 AD and on geological records that suggest
Santorini is capable of powerful mid-intensity explosive
eruptions. As a consequence, for each scenario, we only
account for aleatoric uncertainty in the wind conditions
at the time of eruption by simulating a large number
of runs into multiple wind conditions producing condi-
tional (assuming an eruption) probabilistic outputs. The 
volcanological inputs for modelling of these scenarios are
detailed over the next sections.
Most likely scenario
The perceived ‘most likely’  future eruption scenario at
Santorini is informed by the studies of Fytikas et al.
(1990), Pyle and Elliot (2006) and Watt et al. (2007) and
by descriptions of past eruptions, notably 1866–70, 1925–
26 and 1939–40. Historical observations at Santorini indi-
cate that ash emissions are related to intermittent explo-
sions and ash venting that occurs contemporaneously
with extrusion of lava. Compared to many other arc volca-
noes, explosive activity is quite small in magnitude and
weak in intensity. The largest events consist of Vulcanian
explosions that can eject blocks of rock as far as 2 km
from the vent and produce ash plumes that reach up to
3 km height. However, most of the explosive activity is less
intense, generating plumes in the range of a few hundred
metres to not much more than 1 km height. Hazards asso-
ciated with these eruptions include the ejection of ballis-
tics during explosions, the dispersal and fallout of ash and
the release of volcanic gas from the vent and as lava enters
the sea (Fytikas et al, 1990). Historical accounts suggest
that the range of ballistics is about 1 km (Fytikas et al,
1990).  As there are no settlements within 2 km of the
likely future vent on the Kameni islands we did not further
consider the potential impact from ballistics, although
large ships that necessarily pass close to the likely future
vent on Nea Kameni islands en route to the Port may be
at risk from this hazard.
Ash modelling inputs
For modelling ash production from the most likely sce-
nario (using TEPHRA2 and VOL-CALPUFF), we assumed
a two-year eruption duration and constrained inputs using
the detailed observations of plume heights during erup-
tions in 1925–28 (Reck, 1936), 1939–40 (Georgalas and
Papastamatiou, 1953) and detailed descriptions of the
Page 7
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 7 of 22
1866–70 eruption by Schmid (1874), Fouqué (1879) and
Dekigalla (1881),  and also considering some of the
eruption data summarised by Watt et al. (2007). During
any of the previous eruptions, a maximum plume height
of around 3200 m was observed (in 1925), with minimum
plume heights in the order of a few tens to hundreds of
metres. We therefore chose to model four separate plume
heights: 0.5, 1, 2 and 3 km, on the basis that this accounted
for the variability observed in previous eruptions and
therefore covered what was likely for a future most likely
scenario. By modelling specific plume heights, rather than
a continous range between 0.5 and 3 km, we could then
provide individual hazard maps for different plume heights.
We consider that this approach was appropriate for emer-
gency managers in permitting near real-time forecasting of
the hazard from specific events and for scenario planning.
Two separate cases for ash production during a most likely
scenario eruption are described here to account for differ-
ent approaches to calculating mass flux from plume height.
The vast majority of Vulcanian plumes are best charac-
terised as starting plumes. Volcanic ash plumes are only
modelled as thermals if the event is very close to being
instantaneous; by contrast, the source explosion supplying
a starting plume does so over times comparable to, or
greater than, the time taken for the plume to rise to its
neutral buoyancy height (see Sparks and Wilson, 1982;
Sparks et al, 1997). Observations of the ash plume spread-
ing rate can be used to distinguish easily between a thermal
and a sustained or starting plume as the entrainment coef-
ficient is about 0.25 for a thermal and about 0.1 for a sus-
tained or starting plume (Sparks et al, 1997). This leads to
a height to width ratio of approximately 25 and 10 respect-
ively. The majority of plumes generated by Vulcanian
explosions, including historic photographs of Santorini ex-
plosions, are closer to 10 than 25, indicating that they are
best characterised as starting plumes.
There are well established empirical relationships be-
tween plume height and mass flux (e.g. Sparks et al,
1997; Mastin et al, 2009) based mostly on powerful
eruptions, and these are widely used to assess ash hazard
to aviation. Santorini ‘Strong’ assumes that this relation-
ship is valid. However, recent studies suggest that these
relationship are not accurate for weak plumes strongly
affected by wind, e.g. 2010 Eyjafjallajökull eruption,
Iceland. The Santorini ‘Weak’ scenario accounts for this
using the scaling relationship of Woodhouse et al. (2013)
with the scenario column heights and wind shear calcu-
lated from averaged reanalysis data, which results in an
order of magnitude increase in mass flux (Table 3). The
total time and the total mass fraction of erupted ash has
been calculated for the baseline Santorini Strong and
Weak scenarios (Table 4), given the calculated mass fluxes
and an estimate of total erupted volume from historical
eruptions at Santorini. Only a very small percentage of 
magma erupted in a most likely scenario is expected to be
ash (0.1 % in Santorini Strong and 1 % in Santorini Weak).
Over the assumed two-year period the percentage of time
the models assume ash is generated is 15.3 % and 7.6 % of
the total time, respectively. These numbers are indicative
and qualititatively consistent with descriptions of historic
eruptions. The ‘Santorini Weak’ case, where we considered
the effect of local wind conditions on bending over a weak
plume, gives higher mass loadings than assuming no
wind-plume interaction (‘Santorini Strong’) because of the
increased mass. Thus the calculated hazard will be higher
during ashing events in this case, although there are more
periods when there is no ash.
To speed up simulation time, a synthetic catalogue of
ash footprints was produced by modelling individual ash
plumes of fixed mass and height (0.5, 1, 2 and 3 km:
Table 3) into each daily wind record from more than
10 years of re-analysis wind data (see Wind conditions).
This approach allows for the influence of varying wind
conditions in forecasting the potential ash hazard foot-
print from any one eruption. Sampling from the ranges
identified in Table 3, we simulated up to 10,000 events
with the eruption start randomly sampled from within
the synthetic catalogue. In the absence of sufficient his-
toric data to develop a full statistical model, a time series
for each eruption was determined by modelling inter-
event times for each plume size bin (0.5, 1, 2, and 3 km)
as independent Poisson processes, each with a different
rate parameter based on historical observations (see
Table 3).  Modelled event durations and eruption fre-
quencies resulted in similar total erupted masses in each
event bin. Alternate inter-event distributions could not
be justified because of the lack of available data; what
data are available suggest that statistical repose models
vary between eruption cycles (Watt et al, 2007).  Given
more time, detailed time-series analyses of previous erup-
tions could be used to justify additional scenario variants
that employ alternative distributions for inter-event times.
For instance, a magnitude-frequency relationship based
on past eruption time-series could have been used to
simulate the inter-event duration and subsequent explo-
sion magnitude using a marked point process. If there
were sufficient data to fit such a model, this approach
would account for mass/height variation and enable simu-
lation of event clustering. How useful this would be rela-
tive to further refining alternate input data would depend
upon the perceived value of the different outputs: for ex-
ample, inter-event times inform cumulative estimates and
durations of ash hazard over the total eruption but do not
affect individual plume height hazard maps. Historically,
eruptions at Santorini typically last a few years, with ex-
plosive activity intermittent throughout but more promin-
ent in the early months of the eruption. Scenario variants
such as clustering could only be very loosely characterised
Page 8
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 8 of 22
Table 3 Volcanological inputs for a ‘most likely’ long-duration ash emission with assumed event mass and duration (and thus mass
flux) given two scenario cases: ‘Strong’ assumes that the Sparks et al. (1997) empirical relationship between plume height and mass
flux is valid (i.e. the plume is not strongly affected by wind), while ‘Weak’ considers that the plume is affected by wind and follows
the relationship of Woodhouse et al. (2013)
Height
(km) 
Number of
events 
Poisson rate
parameter 
Event ash mass (x106 kg)
Strong Weak 
Duration (mins)
Strong Weak 
Particle size (phi)
Total eruption duration: 2 years
3  5
2  20 
0.007
2.74 × 10−2 
6
1.8 
60  10  10  Range: −3.32 to 6.64
30  15  15  Median: 1.66
1  75  0.103  1.1  5.4  120  60  Standard deviation: 2
0.5  400  0.548  0.2  1.1  360  180
Scenario variants to investigate the effect of ash aggregation
Particle size is modified to favour larger particles.  Range: −3.32 to 3.32
All parameters as for the base Santorini ‘Weak’ and ‘Strong’ scenarios.  Median: 0.00
Standard deviation: 2
Scenario variants to investigate the effect of event clustering
Total eruption duration: 1 year
3  5
2  20 
0.014
5.48 x 10−2 
Increased Poisson rate parameter simulates shorter inter-event times.
1  75  0.205  All other parameters as for the base Santorini ‘Weak’ and ‘Strong’ scenarios.
0.5  400  1.096
Duration refers to individual events, rather than the total eruption duration, and relates to the event ash mass and calculated mass flux. Further variants build
upon these base scenarios to investigate the influence of aggregation and event clustering on simulated hazard
due to lack of data. To begin to investigate the effect of
event clustering on the potential ash hazard, a modifica-
tion to the base Santorini Strong and Weak scenarios is
identified where we simulate a non-stationary Poisson
process by increasing the Poisson rate parameter to ac-
count for shorter inter-event times, and therefore cluster-
ing of events (with the total duration of the ash-producing
portion of eruption assumed to be 1 year, see scenario var-
iations in Table 3).
Grain size distributions (Table 3) are based on qualita-
tive descriptions of ‘sandy to very fine’ ash in Santorini
eruptions (Kténas, 1926).  However, a common process
in volcanic eruptions is particle aggregation, in which
fine ash (typically < 64 μm) is deposited in the form of
Table 4 Summary values for the two ‘most likely’ scenario cases
at Santorini. The ‘Strong’ case assumes no influence of the wind
upon the plume (Sparks et al, 1997) and the ‘Weak’ considers
that the plume may be affected by wind (Woodhouse et al,
2013)
Scenario case:
Total mass of ash:
Total mass of lava: 
Strong
2.33 x 108 kg
2 x 1011 kg 
Weak
1.73 x 109 kg
2 x 1011 kg
Ratio of ash to lava:  ~1:1000  ~1:100
Eruption duration: 2 years  2 years
Duration of ash emission: 15.3 % of time  7.6 % of time 
clusters containing tens of thousands of particles. These
aggregated particles deposit much more quickly than the
individual particles, but often break up on impact with
the ground. The resulting increased abundance of very
fine ash exacerbates health hazards (Horwell and Baxter,
2006). Commonly the mass fraction of fine ash can exceed
50 %, but this is not known from Santorini eruptions. To
simulate the effect of particle aggregation on ash dispersal
and deposit loading on the ground, we investigate a fur-
ther variant of both the ‘Santorini Strong’ and ‘Weak’ sce-
narios. Aggregated particles are assumed to be in the
reduced range 1 cm - 100 microns (phi −3.32 to 3.32), but
with a modified grain size distribution that favours larger
particle sizes (Table 3). This modification is purely qualita-
tive and requires further investigation and grain size char-
acterisation before being used in a more comprehensive
assessment.
For these six scenario variants (Table 3),  individual
event deposits and cumulative mass loads (total deposit
from all events over the 1 or 2 year duration of the
eruption) were logged for each grid location and used to
produce probability of exceedance curves. The deposits
(from all plumes) for each day of the eruption were also
summed to get the cumulative daily, weekly, monthly
and total deposit at any given site. Results for the six
variants were presented separately to elucidate the effect
of different mechanisms on the hazard and also to allow
Page 9
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 9 of 22
direct comparison between the models. Exceedance
probability maps and curves were also produced for each
of the fixed height plumes to show the likely hazard as-
sociated with any one event.
Gas modelling inputs
Significant health effects from magmatic gases have been
historically documented during past eruptions of Santorini
(Dakoronias, 1879).  However, no direct measurements of
SO2 
fluxes exist for these events making it difficult to con-
strain likely fluxes in a future eruption. For the emergency
assessment, we considered two daily averaged fluxes for the
most likely two-year scenario: 200 tons/day and 800 tons/
day. Fluxes have been estimated based on petrological ana-
lyses and inferred discharge rates for previous eruptions.
Using a typical sulphur content of 1000 ppm for dacitic
magmas and magma discharge rates of 1 m3/s, similar to
those observed historically (Pyle and Elliot, 2006), a default
scenario with a constant flux of 200 tons per day is pro-
vided. Such a value is characteristic of many effusive erup-
tions of dacitic arc volcanoes, such as Mount Unzen, Japan,
1991–1995 (Hirabayashi et al, 1995) and Mount Saint
Helens, USA, 2004–2005 (Gerlach et al, 2008).  Higher
fluxes of SO2 
may be expected if there is an increased
erupted mass flux (i.e. Santorini Weak) or more explosive
activity. Furthermore, many arc volcanoes exhibit an “excess
degassing” phenomena where fluxes of SO2 
are too large to
originate exclusively from the magma that is erupted, sug-
gesting that other SO2 
sources are contributing (Shinohara,
2008). A scenario based solely on mass fluxes (as for the
200 tons/day case) could therefore be an underestimation of
the true flux; however, reliable constraints for sources and
fluxes of SO2 
could not be achieved. A best estimate of 800
tons/day was chosen, which reflects the elevated fluxes ex-
pected from an eruption with increased mass flux or excess
degassing. This value was based on expert judgement and
gas fluxes from analogous arc volcanoes that exhibit more
explosive activity and degassing over similar two-year time-
scales, such as Mount Augustine (McGee et al, 2010).
We chose values of gas exit velocity, vent radius and
gas exit density that were consistent with the mass flux
identified (200 or 800 tons/day) and an SO2 
proportion
of 5 %, using the standard equation for state of water at
1000 K at 1 atmosphere to calculate the gas exit density.
For each eruption scenario, 100 two-year simulations
were randomly sampled from a synthetic catalogue of
379 simulations to obtain 0.05, 0.5 and 0.95 probability
of exceedance values. Initial wind conditions were sam-
pled from within a 20-year record and daily wind re-
cords over the following two years were used.
Largest considered scenario
The second key scenario employed in this study was a
sub-Plinian eruption, a largest considered scenario for a 
future eruption at Santorini, with lower probability of
occurrence than the most likely scenarios but higher
probability than a large caldera-forming eruption. Based
on very limited and uncertain data (one pumice eruption
in 726 AD of unknown magnitude out of eight historic
eruptions) the chances of the next eruption at Santorini
being sub-Plinian are thought to be no more than 1 in
10 and likely much lower given that the past seven erup-
tions have been largely lava eruptions. For gas outputs,
averaged daily values of 800 tons/day may provide a
first-order indication of hazard appropriate to a large ex-
plosive eruption followed by sustained degassing.
Ash modelling inputs
Based on analogous sub-Plinian eruptions (Pyle 2000) and
the limited historical accounts of 726 AD (Friedrich et al,
2006), we considered a plume height of 12 km (Table 5)
and discharge rate of 1000 m3/s, which correlates with an
erupted mass of 3.3 × 1010 kg over four hours, given a dens-
ity of erupted material of 2300 kg/m3 (following the empir-
ical relationship of Sparks et al, 1997).  Ash produced
during the largest-considered scenario represents approxi-
mately 15 % of the total expected volume, but 150 % of the
expected total ash mass in the more voluminous most likely
scenario (Santorini Weak). In the absence of specific infor-
mation, we used the same grain size distribution as for the
weak plume scenarios, approximately representing sandy to
very fine ash (Table 5). Grain size estimates could be refined
using information from analogue sub-Plinian eruptions at
other volcanoes. For the sub-Plinian scenario suggested
here, it is possible that as much as 40 % of the erupted ma-
terial would comprise fine ash (<63 μ or >4 phi) (Mastin et
al, 2009). This would have the effect of reducing the deposit
in more proximal on-island areas as the fine ash fraction
would remain in suspension for longer and be carried far-
ther from the vent. Particle density (Table 1) was kept fixed
at 2300 kg/m3; any pumiceous particles will likely be lower
density than this and ideally the sub-Plinian scenario would
account for this, particularly for more proximal hazard esti-
mation. As with a finer ash mass fraction, reduced particle
densities would act to reduce the amount of ash falling out
in more proximal areas. However, the uncertainty related to
grain size and density characteristics are modest compared
to uncertainties related to the relationships between plume
Table 5 Volcanological inputs for a ‘largest considered’ sub-
Plinian eruption scenario
Plume
height (km)
12 
Number
of events
1 
Mass flux
(kg/s)
2.3 x 106 
Duration
4h 
Mass from
event (kg)
3.3 x 1010 
Particle
size (phi)
Range: −3.32
to 6.64
Median: 1.66
Standard
deviation: 2
Page 10
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 10 of 22
height and mass flux in the source term, duration and the
abstraction of historic eruption data as discrete and simpli-
fied events. It is unlikely that improving the sophistication
in modelling grain size characteristics would affect the first-
order hazard effects and their implication for emergency
planning. One simulated event was modelled for each daily
wind record, i.e. 7305 simulations in total, to account for
uncertainty in likely wind conditions.
Thresholds and critical locations
Ash fall load thresholds were chosen that approximately re-
lated to key hazardous impacts. A threshold of 100 kg/m2
was identified as a conservative loading above which roof
collapse may become an issue for very weak roof types
(Blong, 1984), and is approximately equivalent to 10 cm of
dry ash thickness assuming a fall density of 1000 kg/m3.
Using the same ash density assumption, a load of 1 to
10 kg/m2 is equivalent to between 1 mm and 1 cm of ash
deposit, and is known to disrupt airport operations, trans-
port, cause damage to crops and in certain cases cause elec-
trical circuits and electronic systems to malfunction
(Barsotti et al, 2010; Jenkins et al, 2014; Wilson et al, 2012).
For suspended ash concentrations, we considered the
probability of exceeding ash concentrations of 50 μg/m3
following the World Health Organisation (WHO) air
quality standard for 10 micron particulate matter (PM10),
and also 2 mg/m3 and 0.2 mg/m3 as the defined enhanced
procedure zone and 2010 safe flying limit for commercial
aviation, respectively (ICAO, 2010; Zehner, 2010).
The WHO also provides an Air Quality Guideline (AQG)
for daily SO2 
concentration thresholds of 20 μg/m3, below
which air quality is deemed good. The European Commis-
sion (EC) provide a daily threshold of 125 μg/m3 beyond
which SO2 
concentrations are considered dangerous. EC
and WHO also provide short-term ten minute averages of
350 and 500 μg/m3 respectively. However, with the uncer-
tainty in being able to constrain both the magnitude and
temporal variation in SO2 
fluxes it is felt that the daily aver-
age is the most appropriate limit to use as an initial assess-
ment of SO2 
hazard. The SO2 
thresholds are used here as
points of reference for modelling purposes and are conser-
vative values that have been defined with reference to a
general population undertaking everyday activities. Thus
they may not be appropriate to an emergency situation;
more specific health risk assessments will be needed in case
of an eruption, where air quality monitoring and health sur-
veillance of the population will be a requirement.
For the objectives of this study, we identified nine lo-
cations on the island that represent key centres of popu-
lation or critical infrastructure (Fig. 1 and Table 6).
Ground ash hazard
The results of the ash fall modeling can be displayed in
several ways to help elucidate the hazard; perhaps the 
most useful are exceedance probability maps and exceed-
ance curves for individual events. Assuming that each
simulation run for any given scenario is equally probable
(i.e. probability = 1/number of simulations),  the exceed-
ance probability is calculated for each grid cell by sum-
ming the probabilities from all simulations for the given
scenario that exceed the loading threshold at that grid cell.
In this way exceedance probability maps or location-
specific curves highlight patterns in possible wind condi-
tions at the time of a future eruption. Here, we discuss the
results from our two defined scenarios: a most likely weak
plume and a largest considered sub-Plinian eruption. Pri-
mary ash fall hazard results are shown from TEPHRA2
outputs but for the most likely scenario they are also com-
pared with those from VOL-CALPUFF.
Most likely scenario
The ground ash hazard assessment for a long-duration
weak plume event shows that ash hazard is strongly af-
fected by wind direction, with relatively high ash hazard in
the south and east of the island, notably at the Port and
Akrotiri, and very low hazard at Oia in the north. For each
of the six eruption scenario variants (see Scenario identifi-
cation and Table 3), Fig. 4 shows the average number of
days in the total eruption scenario that the daily ash load
exceeds 1 g/m2, considered to be approximately equivalent
to the onset of ash fall and reduced air quality. Such ash
events are forecast to be about 10 times more likely at the
Port than at Oia (Fig. 4).
When considering individual events for the typical San-
torini Weak case, the probability that the 1 g/m2 threshold
is exceeded at the Airport changes from 20 to 50 % for
plume heights from 0.5 to 3 km (Fig. 5). If 35 % is taken as
representative then under the typical Santorini Weak case
ash is produced 7.6 % of the time so that the expected pe-
riods when ash approaches or exceeds suspended concen-
trations would be about 3 % of the eruption duration, or a
1 in 30 chance of flights being disrupted during a two year
eruption. Similar relationships to those seen at the Airport
(Fig. 5) are observed in the results for other locations. In-
creased plume heights produce higher probabilities at all
study sites, reflecting the greater reach of the ash. Ash
loading hazard that assumes the ‘Santorini Weak’  case
(plume affected by wind) exceeds that of the ‘Santorini
Strong’ (plume unaffected by wind) case by up to a factor
of 4 (Figs. 4 and 5),  reflecting the increased mass of
erupted ash (Table 3). This highlights the underestimation
of ash hazard yielded by assessments that do not take into
account the effects of wind on weak to moderate intensity
eruptions. The effect of aggregation, simulated here by in-
creasing the grain sizes, is to reduce hazard (Figs. 4 and
5);  this is due to the settling velocity distribution being
coarser so that more mass falls out close to the volcano.
As plume height increases, the effect of aggregation is
Page 11
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 11 of 22
Table 6 Names and description of key population centres and critical infrastructure, with their location relative to the Kameni
islands, the most likely source for a future eruption of Santorini
Name  Description  Distance and bearing
from Nea Kameni
Thera (Fira)  The modern capital of Santorini and a key tourist centre  3.5 km east-northeast
Santorini airport  A military and civilian airport receiving international flights  7 km east
Port Athinios  The main harbour serving passenger and cargo ships  3.5 km southeast
Pyrgos  Tourist village in the centre of the island  5.5 km southeast
Kamari  Coastal settlement to the southeast of the island built after the
devastating earthquake of 1956 
8.5 km east-southeast
Perissa  Coastal settlement to the southeast of the island  9 km southeast
Akrotiri  An important archaeological site where a Minoan settlement was
buried under pyroclastic deposits during the Thera eruption in
approximately 1630 BC 
5 km south
Therassia  The smaller island forming the remains of the caldera wall  5.5 km northwest
Oia  A relatively large town of more than 4000 inhabitants  6.5 km north-northwest
reduced because the stronger higher plumes, particularly
in stronger winds, have similar reach for both assumed
grain size distributions. This suggests a lower sensitivity to
assumed grain size distribution for the more intense erup-
tions. Grain size is poorly constrained at Santorini because
of the lack of ash grain size studies for historic Santorini
eruptions and this finding suggests that grain size studies
should prioritise fallout from weaker ash emissions. ‘Clus-
tering’  of events, achieved by reducing the inter-event
times according to an increased Poisson rate parameter,
leads to more days with higher concentrations; for distinct
periods of explosivity within this eruption scenario variant,
the more frequent explosive activity invoked by clustering
of events may lead to a greater disruption of activities on
the island, especially as more closely spaced events will 
limit the extent to which manual or environmental ash re-
moval can occur. Consequences of this for aviation and
the tourism industry and for repeated clean-up activities
may be significant.
For a long duration event, as may be expected with the
most likely scenario, ash falls may cumulate from multiple
events over weeks, months or years and this will lead to
much greater accumulations than for the individual
events. Plotting the total ash accumulations over two years
therefore provides an estimate of the maximum loading;
erosion, wind re-distribution, rain and clean-up operations
will act to reduce this load in uncertain ways. Figures 6
and 7 show the same results in three different ways to
elucidate different aspects of the hazard. Figure 6a shows
the hazard spatially as the cumulative deposit with 0.5
Fig. 4 The average number of days, for the six scenario variants identified in Table 3, during the course of the one or two-year simulated most
likely eruptions, as computed by the TEPHRA2 model, that the daily deposit exceeded 1 g/m2, approximately related to the onset of ash fall
and reduced air quality. Santorini Weak cases where no aggregation or event clustering is simulated (‘Typical’) result in the highest hazard:
approximately two days in every week at Port Athinios
Page 12
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 12 of 22
Fig. 5 Exceedance probability curves for ash loading at the Airport for four fixed plume heights as computed by the TEPHRA2 model. Each plot
shows the simulated influence of eruption flux to plume height relationships (by assuming the standard relationship of Sparks et al, 1997 for
Santorini Strong or the revised Woodhouse et al, 2013 relationship that accounts for wind conditions on weak plume for Santorini Weak) and
aggregation (by increasing grain sizes) on ash fall loading. The plots show results for individual eruptions of fixed plume height and so deposit
loads are the same for eruptions within the Typical and Clustering variants. Similar results were found for the other key sites. Dashed lines mark
the 1 g/m2 threshold, which is used to represent the onset of ash fall and reduced air quality. Note that ash loads are shown on a base 10
logarithm scale
exceedance probability (50 % probability of being
exceeded), while Fig. 6b shows the probability of the cu-
mulative deposit exceeding 10 kg/m2 (an exceedance
probability map). Fig. 7 shows the probability of exceed-
ing a range of cumulative ash loads at each of the nine
sites of interest (an exceedance probability curve). Even
considering a maximum cumulated load, the probability
of reaching conditions for collapse of very weak roofs
(~100 kg/m2) is negligible on the island. These results
further indicate that, in the event of a future long-
duration eruption, much of the ash will fall out in the
caldera and deposits on island will be quite thin, with
lowest ash hazard likely in the north of the island at
Oia and relatively high ash hazard at Thera, the Port
and Akrotiri. 
Comparison of model outputs
TEPHRA2 is an open-source, simple advection–diffu-
sion model that assumes an instantaneous release of the
erupted mass and steady-state atmospheric conditions.
The code can run in minutes on a desktop computer,
making it ideal for the rapid hazard assessment and
simulation of multiple ash fall scenarios described here,
particularly at medium to distal locations. We compare
the ground ash hazard results above with an equivalent
assessment using the VOL-CALPUFF model. VOL-
CALPUFF can model a continuous release of mass
during an eruption and account for changes in wind
condition with distance from source and with time
through the eruption. It is able to calculate ash concen-
tration in the air as well as loading on the ground, with
Page 13
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 13 of 22
Fig. 6 Probability maps that represent total ash accumulation on the ground over a most likely eruption scenario as computed by the TEPHRA2
model. The same results are shown in two different ways: a) the 0.5 exceedance probability (50 % probability of being exceeded) cumulative
deposit (in kg/m2) in each grid cell; and b) the probability (as a percentage) of the cumulative deposit exceeding 10 kg/m2 over the simulated
eruption. A Santorini Weak typical case is assumed. In reality, these probabilities represent an upper bound because ash will be removed or
remobilised by natural (rain, wind) and manual clean-up operations. The black star marks the simulated vent location
particular accuracy at proximal to medium locations.
VOL-CALPUFF samples from a 10 year wind dataset
sourced from NCEP/NCAR; statistical analysis of this data-
set relative to the 20 year ECMWF data used with
TEPHRA2 shows little variation between the two sources
(Fig. 2). The two models differ fundamentally with VOL-
CALPUFF (and other coupled meteorological transport
models) having greater input requirements (due to the ex-
plicit consideration of the dynamics of the source plume)
and more detailed outputs, but longer runtimes than sim-
pler advection–diffusion models like TEPHRA2. Few direct
comparisons of the models exist and therefore, comparing
the models like-for-like provides a representative measure 
of model uncertainty in forecasting potential impact and al-
lows us to identify areas of impact for which we have the
greatest confidence (Fig. 8).  Given the computational re-
quirements of VOL-CALPUFF, only one scenario variant
(the Typical Weak) could be modelled and we compare the
results of these runs with the equivalent outputs from
TEPHRA2 here.
For the simulated most likely weak plume eruption
scenario, Fig. 8 shows a comparison between the out-
comes of the two models in terms of exceedance prob-
abilities with reference to a ground load of 1 kg/m2. The
maps show a high level of agreement, particularly for
the higher probabilities and so the implications for
Fig. 7 Exceedance probability curves for cumulative ash load at each of the nine key sites of interest, as computed by the TEPHRA2 model for a
most likely eruption scenario. These curves represent another way of displaying the same results as in Figs. 4 and 6 (total ash accumulation from
a Santorini Weak typical case). In reality, these probabilities represent an upper bound because ash will be removed or remobilised by natural
(rain, wind) and manual clean-up operations. The legend shows sites in order of decreasing hazard
Page 14
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 14 of 22
Fig. 8 Model comparison plot for a cumulative 2 year ground deposit from the most likely eruption scenario (Santorini Weak) exceeding 1 kg/m2.
Results compare outputs from the TEPHRA2 and VOL-CALPUFF ash dispersion models with shaded areas showing the 0.9 (left), 0.5 (middle) and
0.1 (right) probability of exceedance for both models. The black star marks the simulated vent location
emergency management planning are similar. In particu-
lar, both models show the highest hazard across the
southern part of the island. At loads of 1 kg/m2, VOL-
CALPUFF shows comparatively larger affected areas, but
this trend is reversed at very small loads (<0.01 kg/m2),
particularly for weaker events (1 km plume: Fig. 9). Two
main factors are thought to describe this outcome. First,
the use of hourly meteorological data with VOL-
CALPUFF, which allows for wind field variations with
time and space and has a strong influence on the ash 
dispersal process. In fact, even small changes in wind
direction over time will affect ash deposition, particularly
in a prolonged eruption. This is confirmed by the fact
that the weaker (1 km),  but longer (Table 3),  events
show the largest differences when VOL-CALPUFF and
TEPHRA2 outputs are compared (Fig. 9). On the other
hand TEPHRA2, as any other pure Eulerian advection–
diffusion code, is relatively more diffusive at source and
as a consequence affects larger areas with lower mass
loadings. This implies that, relative to VOL-CALPUFF,
Fig. 9 Model comparison for four key locations assuming fixed column heights of 1 km and 3 km and typical Santorini Weak eruption
parameters. Note that ash loads are shown on a base 10 logarithm scale
Page 15
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 15 of 22
more distal locations will be affected by smaller deposits,
but that the probability of reaching higher tephra loads in
more proximal areas will be lower, as shown in Figs. 8 and
9. In addition to the wind variability over time and plume
diffusivity, the different wind datasets employed by the
two models may also play a role in differences in model
output: at lower altitudes (<1 km), the ECMWF data used
by TEPHRA2 has comparatively faster wind speeds than
the NCEP/NCAR data used by VOL-CALPUFF (Fig. 2),
which may help to compensate for the less lateral disper-
sal in the plume. At higher altitudes (~3 km), the wind
data are more comparable, although ECMWF reanalysis
data show slightly more dominant westerly winds than
NCEP/NCAR (Fig. 2). These effects (wind variability and
less diffusivity for VOL-CALPUFF) are more evident
when a single fixed height scenario is assumed, and are
masked within the cumulative 2-years long scenario.
Nevertheless, the overall similarity in results is comforting
and suggests that for the purposes of rapid emergency
management planning a simple advection–diffusion model
such as TEPHRA2 can capture the first-order distribution
of ash fall hazard locally.
Largest considered scenario
The results of the TEPHRA2 sub-Plinian ground ash haz-
ard model are shown in Figs. 10 and 11 as exceedance
probability maps and site-specific curves. In this case
there is a possibility of roof collapse occurring, although it
is small. For weak roof structures at Thera (old or poor
condition tiles and lightweight metal sheeting), there may 
be approximately a 10 % to 15 % chance of roof collapse
(≥200 kg/m2).  For the dominant roof type on Santorini
(reinforced concrete slab) the chance of roof collapse is
negligible (a few %) (following Spence et al, 2005),  al-
though the hazard could approximately double if there
was rain during or shortly after the eruption because of
the increased load from saturated ash (Macedonio and
Costa, 2012). Local disruption to aviation is certain and
might extend tens or even hundreds of kilometres away in
regional airspace (although a quantitative assessment of
this is outside the scope of this study). Dominant north-
westerly and westerly winds above 1 to 2 km altitude are
most likely to control the dispersal of a sub-Plinian plume
and so at lower thickness thresholds (Fig. 10a) areas to the
south and east are subject to highest hazard, as for simu-
lated weak plumes. With increasing ash load threshold
(Fig. 10b), higher hazard is orientated towards the south
because lower altitude winds become important for parti-
cles that fall out more quickly and for the increased ash
amount. Overall, probabilities of ash hazard at Oia and
Therassia are much lower than in the south and east
(Figs. 10 and 11), with only a 5 to 10 % chance of loads ex-
ceeding 10 kg/m2, approximately equivalent to 10 mm de-
posit. As with the most likely eruption scenario, this is
predominantly a consequence of local wind conditions.
Airborne ash hazard
The presence of an international airport just 7 km to the
east of the most recent vent and the importance of Santo-
rini as a tourist destination made it important for this rapid
Fig. 10 Probability (as a %) of exceeding (a) 10 and (b) 100 kg/m2 loading using TEPHRA2 to simulate the largest considered (sub-Plinian)
reference scenario. The black star marks the simulated vent location
Page 16
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 16 of 22
Fig. 11 Exceedance probability curves for ash loading at each of the key sites on Santorini following the largest considered scenario. The legend
shows sites in order of decreasing hazard at the 100 kg/m2 threshold. Sites to the North and West (Oia and Therassia) show very low hazard
relative to sites East and South of the volcano, as computed by the TEPHRA2 model
study to also consider the potential ash concentration at
altitude. Using VOL-CALPUFF, we generated exceedance
probability maps of aerial ash concentration at 1000 m
above ground level for two thresholds for aviation safety at
that time: 2 and 0.2 mg/m3. We also used VOL-CALPUFF
to assess ash concentration at ground level because of
its important with regard the presence of fine ash that
could be inhaled by the population (assumed here to be 15
micron sized particles or less, as a proxy for PM10
). We
discuss results for the most likely weak plume eruption sce-
nario here.
Most likely scenario
Reference concentration thresholds were exceeded with
very low probabilities in the aerial space around the Air-
port (Fig. 12); only the 2 and 3 km plume scenarios were
able to bring suspended ash towards the east at an alti-
tude of 1000 m a.g.l. Assuming a fixed plume height of
3 km, ash concentrations of 2 mg/m3 or greater (Com-
mercial aviation Enhanced Procedure Zone) may be ex-
pected with a probability of less than 5 %. Smaller fixed
plume height scenarios of 0.5 km affected the atmos-
phere at altitudes of a few hundred metres in the south-
ern part of the island but did not extend to the Airport.
In contrast to the estimated ground deposit hazard,
fixed plume height exceedance probability curves for ash
concentrations at ground level show hazard (probabil-
ities associated with the amount of suspended fine par-
ticulate matter) at the nine study sites to be higher for
smaller events, i.e. lower plume heights, than for larger
events (Fig. 13). Barsotti et al. (2010) have suggested that
higher plume heights, releasing larger amounts of ash
higher into the atmosphere, support the transport of the
finer portion of ash farther from the vent. At Santorini,
stronger wind speeds at altitudes above 1 to 2 km (Fig. 2) 
will exacerbate this situation, although larger amounts of
fine material may be associated with stronger events mean-
ing that the difference in hazard close to source remains
small. Areas to the south (Akrotiri) are expected to experi-
ence highest hazard with respect to the other locations con-
sidered for plumes of 2 km or lower. Vice versa, enhanced
dispersion and highest hazard towards the east (Port,
Thera) are expected with a 3 km plume. These results sug-
gest that 10 to 50 % of events with plume heights greater
than 1 km will cause conditions in the south and east of
the island that could raise health concerns (Fig. 13). How-
ever, environmental conditions will strongly influence the
level of fine ash exposure and associated impact on air
quality. For example, frequent rain will reduce airborne
ash concentrations while resuspension of ground ash de-
posits through wind, traffic and/or human activities like
clean-up will increase airborne ash concentrations, leading
to a potentially significant reduction in air quality (e.g.
Thorsteinsson et al, 2012).
SO2 
gas hazard
Significant health effects related to volcanic gases were ob-
served during the 1866 eruption of Santorini (Dakoronias,
1879). Thus we made preliminary estimates of future SO2
gas concentrations around the island. We stress that SO2
fluxes from typical Santorini eruptions are poorly con-
strained and large fluctuations in SO2 
flux are likely
during eruption. Measurements at other arc volcanoes
suggest that these variations can approach an order of
magnitude either side of the long-time average flux and
that fluctuations can be on time scales of hours to many
months. In the event of a future eruption at Santorini, the
collection of SO2 
flux data will be critical in evaluating the
gas hazard more accurately than is possible here. In par-
ticular, the vulnerability of at-risk groups in the population
Page 17
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 17 of 22
Fig. 12 Exceedance probability maps, where the contours show the probability as a percentage, for ash concentrations exceeding 2 mg/m3
(aviation enhanced procedure zone), given fixed plume heights of 0.5, 1, 2 and 3 km within the Santorini Weak case, as computed by the
VOL-CALPUFF model. Exceedance probability maps for the smaller 0.2 mg/m3 threshold (2010 aviation safe flying limit) show a similar pattern
but with slightly larger reach, however the Airport still has a 5 % or lower probability of exceeding the 2 mg/m3 threshold at all plume heights
will need to be assessed in the light of measured peaks of
SO2 
of short duration (15 min measurements) and pos-
sible synergistic health impacts from combined elevated
fine ash particulate and SO2 
levels, amongst other factors
not appropriate to consider here. The hazard modelling
shows that the effects on air quality in the scenarios out-
lined are not trivial and health impact assessments will be
a priority in future preparedness measures and actual cri-
sis management. Expert medical and air pollution expert-
ise should be sought. 
The mean number of days (within a two-year degas-
sing period) that SO2 
concentrations exceed air quality
guideline thresholds set out by the World Health Organ-
isation (WHO) and European Commission (EC) for the
reference eruption scenarios are shown in Table 7.
Results suggest that exposure to reduced air quality
(>20 μg/m3) during an eruption is likely to be wide-
spread and frequent across the island and Thera, the
capital of Santorini and an important tourist site, may
experience gas concentrations > 125 μg/m3 approximately
Page 18
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 18 of 22
Fig. 13 Exceedance probability curves for VP15 
ash concentrations at the key nine sites, as computed by VOL-CALPUFF for individual plume
heights within the Santorini Weak case for the mostly likely eruption scenario. The WHO daily threshold for good air quality (50 μg/m3) is shown
by the vertical line. Note the maximum value of 0.2 on the y axis and that ash loads are shown on a base 10 logarithm scale
one day in every eleven (Fig. 14 and Table 7). However, as
with ash, the gas hazard is strongly influenced by wind
conditions, and the greatest hazard, in terms of the prob-
ability that SO2 
concentrations in any one day will exceed
the EC threshold of > 125 μg/m3,  can be found to the
south at Akrotiri, with an approximately 5 % probability
during the 200 tons/day scenario and 25 % during the 800
tons/day scenario. The lowest hazard is to the north at
Oia (<2 %) (Fig. 14). The two emission scenarios show sig-
nificantly different probabilities more than 4 km from the
vent (i.e. all sites except Thera and the Port), particularly
for exposure to gas concentrations > 125 μg/m3.  This 
provides further impetus for collecting measurements that
can constrain SO2 
flux estimates in the event of an
eruption. More studies are required to see what effect a
stronger plume than that simulated here would have for
the hazard at each of the key sites.
Conclusions and emergency management
implications
Here we have summarised the main outcomes of two
parallel coordinated investigations, which aimed to pro-
vide scenario-based probabilistic ash and gas hazard as-
sessments for Santorini volcano during the unrest of
Table 7 Mean percentage of days (in a two year period of degassing activity) that SO2 
concentrations exceed air quality guidelines
and standards, given 200 tons/day and 800 tons/day emission scenarios
WHO limits: 
200 tons SO2
/day
WHO AQG - 20μgm−3  EC AQG – 125μgm−3 
800 tons SO2
/day
WHO AQG - 20μgm−3  EC AQG – 125μgm−3
Oia  6  0.3  8  2
Thera (Fira)  16  4  17  9
Port Athinos 20  3  20  6
Airport  15  0.4  22  5
Pyrgos  17  0.8  22  10
Kamari  14  0.3  21  4
Perissa  13  0.1  21  3
Akrotiri  37  4  43  23
Therassia 4  0.3  5  1
The lower threshold (20 μg/m3) represents Air Quality Guidelines (AQG) stated by the World Health Organisation, below which air quality is deemed to be good,
and the upper threshold (125 μg/m3) statutory Air Quality Guidelines (AQG) set by the European Commission (EC), which are considered dangerous for periods of
24 h or more
Page 19
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16
Thera: 200 tons SO2 
per day
EC Air Quality Standard (125 µg m−3)
WHO Air Quality Guidline (20 µg m−3) 
Page 19 of 22
Thera: 800 tons SO2 
per day
EC Air Quality Standard (125 µg m−3)
WHO Air Quality Guidline (20 µg m−3)
Daily 
exceedance 
probability 
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
Daily 
exceedance 
probability 
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0  50  100  150  200  250
SO2 
Concentration (µg m−3)
Akrotiri: 200 tons SO2 
per day
EC Air Quality Standard 125 (µg m−3)
WHO Air Quality Guidline 20 (µg m−3) 
0  50  100  150  200  250
SO2 
Concentration (µg m−3)
Akrotiri: 800 tons SO2 
per day
EC Air Quality Standard (125 µg m−3)
WHO Air Quality Guidline (20 µg m−3)
Daily 
exceedance 
probability 
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
Daily 
exceedance 
probability 
0
.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0  50  100  150  200  250
SO2 
Concentration (µg m−3)
Oia: 200 tons SO2 
per day
EC Air Quality Standard 125 (µg m−3)
WHO Air Quality Guidline 20 (µg m−3) 
0  50  100  150  200  250
SO2 
Concentration (µg m−3)
Oia: 800 tons SO2 
per day
EC Air Quality Standard 125 (µg m−3)
WHO Air Quality Guidline 20 (µg m−3)
Daily 
exceedance 
probability 
0
.0 
0.1 
0
.2 
0.3 
0
.4 
0.5 
Daily 
exceedance 
probability 
0
.0 
0.1 
0
.2 
0.3 
0
.4 
0.5 
0  50  100  150  200  250  0  50  100  150  200  250
SO2 
Concentration (µg m−3)  SO2 
Concentration (µg m−3)
Fig. 14 Daily median exceedance probability curves (shaded areas represent the interval between the 0.05 and 0.95 probability of exceedance,
based on sampling 100 two-year simulations) for SO2 
gas concentration at Thera (upper), Akrotiri (middle) and Oia (lower) as computed by the
AERMOD model. Scenarios of 200 tons SO2
/day (left) and 800 tons SO2
/day (right) are shown as are the EC and WHO air quality thresholds for
dangerous (orange dashed line: 125 μg/m3) and reduced (blue dashed line: 20 μg/m3) air quality, respectively. Note the maximum value of 0.5 on
the y axis. As with ash hazard, these plots suggest that Oia is likely to experience lesser impact than the rest of the island
2011–2012. The studies were carried out within a short
timeframe and in the face of significant uncertainty in
order to inform emergency management and planning
for a future eruption. As such, they exemplify a rapid
emergency hazard assessment undertaken in an emer-
gency to provide a first-order indication of likely hazard.
The results of the two independent emergency studies
both confirm that ash and gas hazard is likely to be of 
concern if an eruption of Santorini occurs. That the
studies were carried out independently and were of
broad agreement strengthens our confidence in the haz-
ard outputs. Fixed plume height exceedance probability
maps and curves of ash loading and airborne ash were
found to represent the more useful tool as they give an
indication of hazard, and therefore required manage-
ment actions, associated with individual scenarios. Ash
Page 20
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 20 of 22
and gas hazards are relatively high at key population
centres in the south and east such as Thera and Pyrgos,
and at transport hubs, notably the Port and Airport,
principally as a consequence of the dominant wind di-
rections. However, the level of hazard is also influenced
by the intensity of the event, the altitude over which the
volcanic material is released, distance from the vent and
the occurrence of precipitation. The north of the island
has much lower ash and gas hazard, and therefore is the
logical place to develop emergency services, such as a
volcano observatory, civil defence headquarters and
medical facilities. For the most likely eruption scenario
(i.e. long-duration and intermittent ash production from
weak plumes),  ash loading is expected to be too small
for roof collapse to be a threat. However, ash and gas
will be an intermittent threat to air quality, critical infra-
structure and aviation.
For the first time, probability maps of aerial ash con-
centration have been created for Santorini. Suspended
ash levels in a most likely weak plume scenario are cal-
culated to be at levels likely to be of concern for the avi-
ation industry, it seems probable that the Airport will be
affected for some ash events and also that operations at
the Port may be disrupted. Volcanic ash plumes will be
persistent and largely unpredictable so that cancellation
or diverting of flights and temporary grounding of air-
craft may happen more frequently than actual ash con-
centrations may require. In particular, disruption of
international flights and the risk of adverse impacts for
cruise ships anchoring in the southern and eastern por-
tions of the caldera during the summer months, e.g.
through passenger respiratory issues or corrosion to
paintwork, has large potential economic impact for the
important tourism industry. Modelled ash and gas con-
centrations exceeded current World Health Organisation
thresholds for safe air quality standards more than once
a week (15 to 20 %). People may be affected for periods
of hours to days and such conditions will occur repeat-
edly during an eruption. This supports historic observa-
tions of health issues associated with the 1866 to 1870
eruption of Santorini. However, potentially harmful fluc-
tuations in gas or ash emissions, wind directions and/or
resuspension of ash by wind are not captured in this
modelling and health advice should be taken from med-
ical experts. Adequate supplies of dust masks are recom-
mended for citizens and tourists and regular monitoring
of the air quality (ash and gas concentrations) during the
eruption is advised. The combination of fine ash and gas
with dry, hot or windy weather may also require further
precautions to be undertaken, such as partial or full
evacuation. In addition to the health impacts of fine ash
exposure, agriculture is likely to be adversely affected by
fine ash and acid rain, especially in the growing seasons
of spring and early summer. 
The largest considered sub-Plinian eruption is ex-
pected to cause significant disruption and hazards but to
be relatively short-lived. The shift in wind directions to-
wards the east with increasing altitude means that, in
particular, the Port is subject to high hazard (>60 %
probability of loads exceeding 10 kg/m2) and there is a
possibility of roof collapse for weaker structures in the
east (Thera: 10 % to 15 % probability of loads exceeding
200 kg/m2),  but also the south of the island (Akrotiri:
15 % to 20 % probability).
The calculations in this assessment proved useful in
highlighting areas that would benefit from further data
and/or study in preparation for a future eruption. How-
ever, they should be regarded as preliminary and with
large uncertainties. One of the key limitations in develop-
ing the stochastic models presented here was in deriving
reliable estimates of model input parameters given uncer-
tain and few data, and with limited time. The ash and gas
hazard assessment presented here should therefore be
used as a starting point for a refined assessment, to be
undertaken prior to another period of unrest or a future
eruption. Potential improvements include further investi-
gating historical eruption accounts and geological data at
Santorini and analogous volcanoes to improve model in-
put parameters such as grain size distributions, column
height estimates or characterisation of eruption time-
series as a Poisson point process. A more accurate de-
scription of the source plume dynamics should also be
obtained, mostly in terms of vertical mass distribution and
wind effects on the plume. Ash thresholds appropriate to
an eruption crisis on Santorini should be refined through
studies of exposed infrastructure, agriculture and build-
ings and through discussion with health officials. In
particular, assessing short fluctuations in ash and gas
hazard will be important from a health perspective. In
the event of a future eruption, it will be imperative to
make measurements of ash and gas emissions, including
time series of plume heights, SO2 
fluxes and systematic
sampling of the ash, supported by characterisation of its
properties, to support future hazard assessments at
Santorini and elsewhere.
Assessing the impact of this study on decision-making
in relation to disaster planning and disaster risk reduction
for the emergency and possible future eruptions on Santo-
rini is difficult. The unrest declined and no eruption en-
sued. At the height of the unrest there were many
concerns and the local authorities consulted several scien-
tists for advice, including two of the authors (RSJS and
GV). Many of the results reported in this paper were gen-
erated in very short time frames to support this advice.
For example Fig. 2 was generated in a single day to inform
a meeting with local authorities on Santorini. Research is
tangibly and necessarily different in an emergency situ-
ation to a classical research project. For example the ash
Page 21
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 21 of 22
modelling work in the UK and Italy were largely inde-
pendent. We consider that it is a strength that the model-
ling results are similar and, most importantly, that they
came up with the same implications for emergency man-
agement. The implications of the assessment were taken
seriously and understood by the local authorities at the
time but we did not follow up whether these have been
subsequently embedded into local civil protection plans.
The results were also delivered to the Greek National
Committee and were acknowledged, but again we do not
know whether subsequent actions were taken. Publication
of this emergency research in the peer-reviewed literature
will help ensure that the findings are readily available for
the next emergency on Santorini and are not lost or made
inaccessible, as has sometimes happened in the past in
other emergencies in other countries.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
Ash modelling has been carried out by TKH, SB, AN and SFJ and gas
modelling by JCP and TS. RSJS developed the eruption scenarios in
collaboration with GV. SFJ and SB combined the studies and carried out
model comparisons. RSJS and GV provided expertise to the local authorities
on Santorini during the emergency. All authors have read and approved the
final manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We thank David Pyle (University of Oxford) for reviewing the choice of
eruption scenarios, Sebastian Watt (then Southampton University) for
providing detailed information and discussion on the eruption history and
Sandy Drimoni (University of Athens) for translating historical documents
and providing information on qualitative eruption descriptions. We thank
Peter Baxter (University of Cambridge) for discussions and contributions
surrounding the health aspects of this study. We also wish to thank two
anonymous reviewers for their detailed and insightful comments. We are
very grateful for the collaboration with the National Committee of Greece on
Santorini who invited us to carry out the ash and gas hazard assessments
described here. Finally, we would like to acknowledge the following sources
of funding support that made this assessment possible: an AXA research
fellowship (SFJ), the STREVA project (NERC/ESRC consortium NE/J019984/1)
(JCP, TKH and RSJS), the VOLDIES project (ERC contract 228064) (SFJ, TKH
and RSJS), the ESF MEMOVOLC network (AN) and a NERC Environmental
Risks to Infrastructure Innovation Programme grant (NE/M008878/1) (SFJ,
JCP). This work was also supported by the Global Volcano Model
([URL: "http://www.globalvolcanomodel.org/"] www.globalvolcanomodel.org) through a NERC International innovations
project.
Author details
1Department of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1RJ, UK.
2Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia (INGV), Sezione di Pisa, Pisa,
Italy. 3Icelandic Meteorological Office, Reykjavík, Iceland. 4Institute of Geology
and Mineral Exploration (IGME), Athens, Greece.
Received: 30 May 2014 Accepted: 5 May 2015
References
Aspinall WP, Woo G (2014) Santorini unrest 2011–2012: an immediate Bayesian
belief network analysis of eruption scenario probabilities for urgent decision
support under uncertainty. J Applied Volcanology 3:12
Barsotti, S, Neri, A (2008) The VOL-CALPUFF model for atmospheric ash dispersal:
2. Application to the weak Mount Etna plume of July 2001. J Geophys
Res-Sol Ea, 113(B3) 
Barsotti S, Neri A, Scire JS (2008) The VOL-CALPUFF model for atmospheric ash
dispersal: I. Approach and physical formulation. J Geophys Res 113(B03208):85
Barsotti S, Andronico D, Neri A, Del Carlo P, Baxter PJ, Aspinall WP, Hincks T
(2010) Quantitative assessment of volcanic ash hazards for health and
infrastructure at Mt Etna (Italy) by numerical simulation. J Volcanol Geotherm
Res 192(1–2):85–96
Blong RJ (1984) Volcanic hazards: a sourcebook on the effects of eruptions.
Academic, Australia, Sydney, p 424
Bonadonna C, Connor CB, Houghton BF, Connor L, Byrne M, Laing A, Hincks TK
(2005) Probabilistic modeling of tephra dispersal: Hazard assessment of a
multiphase rhyolitic eruption at Tarawera, New Zealand. J Geophys Res
110(B03203):1–21
Cimorelli AJ, Perry SG, Venkatram A, Weil JC, Paine RJ, Wilson RB, Lee RF, Peters
WD, Brode RW (2005) AERMOD: A Dispersion Model for Industrial Source
Applications. Part I: General Model Formulation and Boundary Layer
Characterization. J Appl Meteorol 44(5):682–693
Dakoronias (1879) De l’influence des emanations volcaniques sur les etres
organizes, particulierment etudiée a Santorin pendant l’eruption de 1866.
Adrien Delahaye, Paris
Dekigalla J (1881) Diary about the 1866 volcano eruption at the Kameni islands
(in Greek: Ημερολόγιον περί της εν έτει 1866 κατά τας νήσους Καμμένας
ηφαιστείου εκρήξεως). Ermoupolis, Reneri Prindesi ed., 188 pp
Dominey-Howes D, Minos-Minopoulos D (2004) Perceptions of hazard and risk
on Santorini. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 137(4):285–310
Druitt TH, Edwards L, Mellors RM, Pyle DM, Sparks RSJ, Lanphere M, Davies M,
Barriero B (1999) Santorini Volcano. Geological Society Memoir No. 19,
London, p 176
Fouqué F (1879) Santorin et ses éruptions. G. Macon, Paris, 440 pp
Friedrich WL, Kromer B, Friedrich M, Heinemeier J, Pfeiffer T, Talamo S (2006)
Santorini eruption radiocarbon dated to 1627–1600 B.C. Science 312(5773):548
Fytikas M, Kolios N, Vougioukalakis GE (1990) Post-Minoan activity of the Santorini
volcano: Volcanic hazard and risk, forecasting possibilities. In: Hardy DA, Keller
J, Galanopoulos VP, Flemming NC, Druitt TH (eds) Thera and the Aegean
world III. The Thera Foundation, London, pp 183–198
Georgalas GC, Papastamatiou J (1953) L’eruption du volcano de Santorini en
1939–1941; l’eruption du Dome Fouque. Bulletin Volcanogique 13:1–38
Gerlach TM, McGee KA, Doukas MP, Gerlach TM, McGee KA, Doukas MP (2008)
Emission rates of CO2
, SO2
, and H2
S, scrubbing, and pre-eruption excess
volatiles at Mount St. Helens, 2004–2005, vol 1750, US Geological Survey
professional paper. US Geological Survey, Washington DC, pp 543–571
Hellenic Statistical Authority (2011) Census 2011, Accessed 12/07/2013. [URL: "http://www.statistics.gr/"] www.statistics.gr
Hirabayashi JI, Ohba T, Nogami K, Yoshida M (1995) Discharge rate of SO2 
from
Unzen volcano, Kyushu, Japan. Geophys Res Lett 22(13):1709–1712
Horwell CJ, Baxter PJ (2006) The respiratory health hazards of volcanic ash:
a review for volcanic risk mitigation. Bull Volcanol 69:1–24
ICAO (2010) International Civil Aviation Organization EUR DOC 019 - Volcanic ash
contingency plan EUR and NAT regions (2nd Edition), Issued by the EUR/NAT
Office of ICAO under the authority of the EANPG and the NAT SPG
Jenkins SF, Spence RJS, Fonseca JFBD, Solidum RU, Wilson TM (2014) Volcanic risk
assessment: Quantifying physical vulnerability in the built environment.
J Volcanol Geotherm Res 276:105–120
Johns, A., 2010. Modelling gas dispersion from Masaya volcano, Nicaragua, using
the industrial source model, AERMOD. MRes Science of Natural Hazards
thesis. University of Bristol.
Kténas K (1926) L’eruption du Volcan de Santorini en 1925: Notes Preliminaires.
In: Records of Athens Academy, Athens, Part I., pp 75–83
Macedonio G, Costa A (2012) Rain effect on the load of ash deposits. Natural
Hazards and Earth FSystems Science, Brief communication 12:1229–1233
Mastin LG, Guffanti M, Servranckx R, Webley PW, Barsotti S, Dean KG, Durant AK,
Ewert JW, Neri A, Rose WI, Schneider DJ, Siebert L, Stunder BJ, Swanson G,
Tupper A, Volentik A, Waythomas CF (2009) A multidisciplinary effort to
assign realistic source parameters to models of volcanic ash-cloud transport
and dispersion during eruptions. J Volcanol Geotherm Res 186(1–2):10–21
McGee KA, Doukas MP, McGimsey RG, Neal CA, Wessels RL (2010) Emission of
SO2
, CO2
, and H2
S from Augustine Volcano, Alaska, 2002–2008. In: Power JA,
Coombs ML, Freymueller JT (eds) The 2006 eruption of Augustine Volcano,
US Geological Survey Professional Paper, 1769. US Geological Survey,
Washington DC
Newman AV, Stiros S, Feng L, Psimoulis P, Moschas F, Saltogianni V, Jiang Y,
Papazachos C, Panagiotopoulos D, Karagianni E, Vamvakaris D (2012) Recent
geodetic unrest at Santorini Caldera, Greece. Geophys Res Lett 39(6):L06309
Page 22
Jenkins et al. Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:16  Page 22 of 22
Parks MM, Biggs S, England P, Mather TA, Nomikou P, Palamartchouk K,
Papanikolaou X, Paradissis D, Parsons B, Pyle DM, Raptakis C, Zacharis V
(2012) Evolution of Santorini Volcano dominated by episodic and rapid
fluxes of melt from depth. Nat Geosci 5:749–754
Parks MM, Caliro S, Chiodini G, Pyle DM, Mather TA, Berlo K, Edmonds M, Biggs J,
Nomikou P, Raptakis C (2013) Distinguishing contributions to diffuse CO2
emissions in volcanic areas from magmatic degassing and thermal
decarbonation using soil gas 222Rn-δ13C systematics: application to Santorini
volcano, Greece. Earth Planet Sci Lett 377–378:180–190
Pyle, D.M., 2000. Sizes of volcanic eruptions. In: H. Sigurdsson, B. Houghton, H.
Rymer, J. Stix, S. McNutt (Editors), Encyclopedia of Volcanology. Academic
Press, pp. 263 – 269
Pyle DM, Elliot JR (2006) Quantitative morphology, recent evolution, and future
activity of the Kameni islands volcano, Santorini. Geosphere 2:253–258
Reck H (1936) Santorin. Der Werdegang eines Inselvulkans und sein Ausbach,
1925–1928. Dietrich Reimer/Andrews und Steiner, Berlin, volume 2 of 3
Schmid JFJ (1874) Santorin 1866 bis 1872. Vesuv. Bajae Stromboli, Aetna 1870.
Carl Scholtze, Liepzig, p 235
Scire JS, Insley EM, Yamartino RJ (1990) Report. Concord, MA, USA, Sigma
Research Corp., Model formulation and user's guide for the CALMET
meteorological model
Shinohara H (2008) Excess degassing from volcanoes and its role on eruptive and
intrusive activity. Reviews of Geophysics, 46(4)
Smithsonian Institution (2013) Volcanoes of the world: an illustrated catalog of
holocene volcanoes and their eruptions. Smithsonian Institution, Global
Volcanism Program digital information series, GVP-4. ([URL: "http://www.volcano.si.edu/"] http://www.volcano.si.edu)
Sparks RSJ, Wilson L (1982) Explosive volcanic eruptions V: Observations of plume
dynamics during the 1979 Soufriere eruption, St Vincent. Geophys J Roy
Astron Soc 69(55):1–570
Sparks RSJ, Bursik MI, Carey SN, Gilbert JS, Glaze L, Sigurdsson H, Woods AW
(1997) Volcanic plumes. John Wiley and sons
Sparks RSJ, Biggs J, Neuberg JW (2012) Monitoring Volcanoes. Science
335(6074):1310–1311
Spence R, Kelman I, Baxter P, Zuccaro G, Petrazzuoli S (2005) Residential building
and occupant vulnerability to tephra fall. Natural Hazards and Earth Systems
Science 5:477–494
Spinetti C, Barsotti S, Neri A, Buongiorno MF, Doumaz F, Nannipieri L (2013)
Investigation of the complex dynamics and structure of the 2010
Eyjafjallajokull volcanic ash cloud using multispectral images and numerical
simulations. J Geophys Res-Atmos 118(10):4729–4747
Stiros SC, Psimoulis P, Vougioukalakis G, Fytikas M (2010) Geodetic evidence and
modeling of a slow, small-scale inflation episode in the Thera (Santorini)
volcano caldera, Aegean Sea. Tectonophysics 494(3–4):180–190
Suzuki T (1983) A theoretical model for dispersion of tephra. In: Shimozuru D,
Yokohama I (eds) Arc volcanism: physics and tectonics. Terra Scientific
Publishing, Tokyo, pp 95–113
Thorsteinsson T, Jóhannsson T, Stohl A, Kristiansen NI (2012) High levels of
particulate matter in Iceland due to direct ash emissions by the
Eyjafjallajökull eruption and resuspension of deposited ash. J Geophysical
Research 117(B00C05)
Vougioukalakis GE, Fytikas M (2005) Volcanic hazards in the Aegean area, relative
risk evaluation and monitoring state of the active volcanic centers. In:
Fytikas M, Vougioukalakis GE (eds) The South Aegean Volcanic Arc. Present
Knowledge and Future Perspectives, vol 7. Elsevier Series Developments in
Volcanology, Amsterdam, pp 161–184
Watt SFL, Mather TA, Pyle DM (2007) Vulcanian explosion cycles: Patterns and
predictability. Geology 35(9):839–842
Wilson TM, Stewart C, Sword-Daniels V, Leonard GS, Johnston DM, Cole JW,
Wardman J, Wilson G, Barnard ST (2012) Volcanic ash impacts on critical
infrastructure. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C 45–46:5–23
Woodhouse MJ, Hogg AJ, Phillips JC, Sparks RSJ (2013) Interaction between
volcanic plumes and wind during the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull eruption, Iceland.
J Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 118(1):92–109, [URL: "http://www.plumerise.bris.ac.uk/"] www.plumerise.bris.ac.uk
Zehner C (2010) Monitoring Volcanic Ash from Space. Proceedings of the
ESA-EUMETSAT workshop on the 14 April to 23 May 2010 eruption at the
Eyjafjöll volcano, South Iceland. ESA-Publication STM-280, Frascati, Italy.
doi:10.5270/atmch-10-01 
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁ t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
