BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Background
  Volcanic hazards in Auckland
  A.E.L.P. methodology overview
  Volcanic hazard analysis
  Damage and mitigation assessment methodology
  Damage assessment of nodes and networks due to uniform volcanic activity
  Damage assessment of nodes due to local and distant scenario volcanic eruptions
  Recovery profile (interdependencies)
Results and discussion
Conclusions
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Authors’ information
Acknowledgements
References
Page 1
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7
DOI 10.1186/s13617-015-0027-9
RESEARCH  Open Access
The genesis of volcanic risk assessment for the
Auckland engineering lifelines project: 1996–2000
Michele Daly* and David Johnston
Abstract
The Auckland Engineering Lifelines Project (A.E.L.P.) was initiated by the Auckland Regional Council, New Zealand,
in 1996 to reduce the damage to and downtime of utilities such as water, wastewater, gas, power, etc., resulting
from a variety of natural and technological hazards. A key initial project was a volcanic risk assessment. This paper
describes the methodology that was developed to specifically assess the volcanic risk to lifelines from the Auckland
Volcanic Field and distal volcanic centres in the central North Island, the application of the risk assessment and
further developments beyond the initial project.
Keywords: Volcanic risk assessment; Lifeline utilities; Auckland; Lifeline interdependencies
Background
The Auckland Engineering Lifelines Project (A.E.L.P.) was
initiated by the Auckland Regional Council, New Zealand,
in 1996 and involved some 40 organisations comprising
local government, utility service providers, and other inter-
est groups. The aim of the A.E.L.P. was to reduce the dam-
age to and downtime of utilities such as water, wastewater,
gas, power, etc.,  resulting from a variety of natural and
technological hazards. The project assessed the vulnerabil-
ity of utilities, identified interdependencies and developed
practical strategies for reducing risk, and for response and
reinstatement following a hazard event. The design of the
project was initially based on and followed from two other
successful Engineering Lifelines Projects in New Zealand;
the Wellington Earthquake Lifelines Study (Hopkins et al.
1993) and the Christchurch Engineering Lifelines Study
(Centre for Advanced Engineering, 1997).
The A.E.L.P. adopted an “all hazards approach” and in
the hazard identification stage of the project discussion
documents were prepared for a number of hazards includ-
ing earthquake, tsunami, cyclone, drought, fire, hazardous
substances spills, biohazards, vandalism, and volcanic erup-
tions from the Auckland Volcanic Field as well as from the
more distal volcanoes in the central North Island (Daly
and Wilkie, 1997). For the final study, these hazards were
reduced to earthquake, volcano, tsunami and cyclone. A
key outcome of the project, and an important deliverable,
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:m.daly@gns.cri.nz"] m.daly@gns.cri.nz
GNS Science Ltd, PO Box 30368, Lower Hutt 5040, New Zealand 
was to enable participating organisations to identify the
extent of their interdependence on other lifeline services.
The identification of interdependencies not only allows the
individual organisations to better prepare themselves for
disaster, but also enables them to influence and prioritise
the response of other organisations to them immediately
after a disaster event.
At the time of the establishment of the A.E.L.P., there
was only rudimentary information available about the
Auckland Volcanic Field. The Ministry of Civil Defence
had produced the Volcanic Hazard Information Series,
translating available scientific knowledge into a publicly
accessible form (Smith & Allen, 1993). The hazard ana-
lyses produced for the A.E.L.P. (Daly and Wilkie, 1997)
were based on this information, as well as a few specific-
ally commissioned studies for earthquake hazards (lique-
faction, ground shaking, landslides),  ex-tropical cyclone
and tsunami. In the case of volcanic hazards, work was
commissioned by the Auckland Regional Council to
bring together the available information and extend this
into hazard and risk commentaries that could then be
adapted for use in the A.E.L.P. (Johnston et al. 1997a, b).
This early work prompted local authorities to start to
take the possibility of another eruption from the Auckland
Volcanic Field more seriously and a long term commit-
ment to expanding a monitoring network established
by the University of Auckland was made. No systematic
risk assessment had been undertaken up to this point.
© 2015 Daly and Johnston; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 2 of 17
This paper describes the methodology that was devel-
oped to specifically assess the volcanic risk from the
Auckland Volcanic Field and distal centres in the central
North Island for use in the A.E.L.P. This methodology is
important in a historical context because since 2000 a
number of initiatives have been established to improve
Auckland’s understanding and management of its volcanic
risk e.g. the Auckland Lifelines Group (ALG), the Volcanic
Impacts Study Group (VISG), the Auckland Volcanic Sci-
ence Advisory Group (AVSAG),  the Auckland Volcanic
Contingency Plan and the multi-organisational research
programme DEVORA (Determining Volcanic Risk in
Auckland). The early risk assessment methodology devel-
oped for the A.E.L.P. set the groundwork for these subse-
quent efforts. A similar methodology used to assess the
earthquake risk for Auckland for use in the A.E.L.P project
has been previously described in Wilkie and Daly, (1998).
Volcanic hazards in Auckland
The city of Auckland is built on a basaltic volcanic field
(Figure 1) which may have been active as recent as 1400 A.
D. (Sandri et al. 2012). The Auckland Volcanic Field covers
360 km2 and contains 50 identified vents. Twenty eruptions
have occurred over the past 20 000 years with Rangitoto the
largest and youngest having formed about 600 years ago.
Eruptive styles from the Auckland Volcanic Field range from
episodes of Strombolian and/or Hawaiian fire fountaining
commonly accompanied by phreatomagmatic episodes with
a Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI) between 0 and 2.
Principle hazards include tephra falls, lava flows, ballistics,
and pyroclastic density currents (Sandri et al. 2012).
However, the Auckland Region faces an additional vol-
canic threat from several large central North Island vol-
canic centres (Figure 2) that are located 140–280 km to
the south and south-east. In the central North Island there
are two major volcano types: (i) andesitic cones and (ii)
rhyolitic calderas (Wilson et al. 1995). Activity at cone vol-
canoes (i.e. Mt Taranaki; and Tongariro, Ngauruhoe, and
Ruapehu (the last three collectively comprising the Tonga-
riro Volcanic Centre)) are typically characterised by a suc-
cession of small to moderate sized eruptions occurring, on
average, every 50 to 300 years from approximately the
same vent area over a long period of time. Activity at cal-
dera volcanoes, on the other hand (i.e. Taupo, Okataina
and Mayor Island), is characterised by far less frequent
(on average every 1000–2000 years),  moderate to ex-
ceptionally large sized eruptions. These eruptions are
capable of generating large volumes of material that
can be distributed over exceptionally large areas many
hundreds of kilometres downwind. The impact of a dis-
tant eruption will be uniformly widespread across the
entire Auckland Region (Johnston et al. 1997a) and
contrasts with the relatively localised impact of hazards 
generated from an eruption within the Auckland Vol-
canic Field (Johnston et al. 1997b).
A.E.L.P. methodology overview
The general methodology used for the A.E.L.P. can be
broken up into a number of tasks as shown in the flow
chart in Figure 3. Definitions of terms used in Figure 3
(and throughout the text) are shown in Table 1. The focus
of the A.E.L.P. was on utility impact and utility response
to make the project manageable. Second order impacts in-
cluding those on the wider community were to be consid-
ered as part of Stage 2 (Figure 3). At the time of writing
(mid-2014), Stage 2 was almost complete.
Task 3 in Figure 3 identified the vulnerabilities or
sensitivities of each utility’s distribution networks and
critical facilities (‘networks’  and ‘nodes’) to damage
using the information from Tasks 1 and 2. Work under-
taken in Task 2 produced an important advancement in
the ability to move from hazard to damage through the
translation of descriptive (qualitative) hazard impacts
into a form that the utilities could use to assess impacts
to specific infrastructural components (e.g. pipes, elec-
tricity sub-stations, water pumping stations, roads etc.).
Being able to assess impacts in this way provided a first
step towards an assessment of risk which would be ex-
panded upon in subsequent work (e.g. DEVORA, 2014).
The Task 3 analysis was split into:
i. A uniform hazard analysis, which analysed the
vulnerability of each individual utility to the
hazards based on known information, and
ii. A scenario hazard event, which analysed the
vulnerability of all utilities to a clearly defined
hypothetical event exemplifying the most likely
worst case for each hazard.
The uniform hazard analysis examined information
known about each hazard across the entire region in
order to highlight to each utility specific areas where its
networks and nodes might be vulnerable to the impacts
of a hazard event wherever the event occurred.
The focus of the scenario events was not to identify the
vulnerability of specific strategic assets but rather to look
at the response of the network system as a whole and
show the interdependencies between individual utilities by
using a particular eruption scenario as an example.
Utilities were asked to step through a vulnerability as-
sessment (Tasks 3 and 4 in Figure 3) for each of the uni-
form and scenario hazards provided, with the assistance of
flow charts and matrices describing damage probability
and type (Figures 4, 5, 6 and Tables 2 and 3).
Utilities were then asked to identify their likely re-
sponse to the event (Task 9 in Figure 3) and their abil-
ity to recover (repair identified network and node
Page 3
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 3 of 17
Figure 1 Map of the Auckland Volcanic Field. (source: Lindsay et al. 2011).
elements) and restore service. A ‘recovery profile’  for
each utility was developed which when combined with
other recovery profiles allowed for an analysis of the
utility system impact (Task 6 in Figure 3).
Finally, utilities were asked as part of Task 3 (Figure 3)
to develop a prioritised mitigation list with help 
from matrices specifically developed for this purpose
(Table 4).
The A.E.L.P. methodology used hazard and infrastruc-
ture maps developed in ARC GIS (ARC Geographical
Information Systems).  Damage probability and damage
type matrices were developed by the project team, and
Page 4
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 4 of 17
Figure 2 Map showing the North Island of New Zealand, the location of the Auckland region (blue), and the volcanic centres identified
as posing a risk to the region. (source: Magill 2002).
the vulnerability, recovery and interdependency analyses
were conducted in workshop settings. While much of
the analysis could have been automated, the educational
value of the discussions was enormous and resulted in
much higher levels of buy-in to the eventual mitigation
work that was recommended in the concluding stages of
the project and which formed the basis for subsequent
work undertaken by the lifeline utilities as part of the
Auckland Lifelines Group.
Volcanic hazard analysis
The volcanic hazard analysis looked at the effects of an
eruption in the Auckland Volcanic Field (Figure 1) as well
as an eruption elsewhere in the North Island (Figure 2), as
distal eruptions have the potential to deposit ash in such
volumes as to have a major disruptive impact on the re-
gion’s utility services and wider community.
For the Auckland Volcanic Field, the assessment is
complicated by the fact that the next eruption could
occur anywhere within a 360 km2 area. A zone of 
uniform hazard was identified which comprised the
known extent of the volcanic field. The focus of the
uniform hazard was to identify the vulnerability of
each utility’s service network and nodes to an event,
which could occur anywhere within the Auckland
Volcanic Field.
Three scenarios events were used in the project. One
local scenario from the Auckland Volcanic Field centred in
the waterfront of the central business district (CBD) and
two distant eruptions from Mt Taranaki and the Okataina
Volcanic Centre (Figure 2) (based on scenarios developed
by Johnston et al. 1997a and 1997b). The local scenario
event has an average return period of 1:1,000 years, based
on the last 20 such events occurring over a 20,000 year
period. Return periods for Mt Taranaki and Okataina were
taken as 1:300 and 1:2,000 years respectively (Johnston
et al.1997a and 1997b).
The CBD location was selected for the local event be-
cause it encompassed both phreatomagmatic (explosive)
and magmatic (effusive) eruption styles and because it
Page 5
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 5 of 17
Figure 3 Flow chart of the A.E.L.P. methodology. (source: Daly and Wilkie 1999).
affected the central business district, rail and port ser-
vices as well as residential areas (Figure 7).
The eruption style and magnitude of the eruption sce-
nario was based on a Mt. Wellington (Figure 1) sized
eruption in terms of the volume of material erupted. For 
the purposes of the A.E.L.P, this size eruption was as-
sumed to totally destroy above ground services within a
3 km radius of the vent (blast zone). Below ground ser-
vices were assumed to be affected within a 1 km radius
of the vent. In order to ensure full service redundancy, a
Table 1 Definition of terms used in the Auckland Engineering Lifelines Project 1996–1999 (modified after Daly and
Wilkie 1999)
Term  Definition
Damage Physical harm impairing the operation of a system, network or node caused by an event.
Event  The hypothetical occurrence of any of the natural disasters considered. An incident or situation which occurs in a particular
place during a particular time interval (Australian/New Zealand Risk Management Standard 4360:1999).
Hazard  The future occurrence or risk of occurrence of any of the natural disasters considered. The source of potential harm or a
situation with a potential to cause loss.
Impact  The time - related effect of damage, comprising:
Node impact - the reduction in operational performance and function of a damaged node.
Network impact - the time and spatial reduction in function of the utility network caused by the cumulative node impacts.
System impact - the reduction in function of the combined network impact on the whole utility system.
Regional impact - The cumulative effect of the system impact and other non-utility effects on the region.
Regional system The integrated and interrelated social, commercial, cultural, political, legal and natural environment of the region.
Scenario analysis Defining a particular scenario to enable the impact of a specific event on the entire utility system to be assessed.
Uniform hazard
analysis 
Defining a given hazard enables mitigation measures for each utility to be rapidly identified.
Utility network An interconnected set of utility components and links for providing a utility service.
Utility node  A discrete constituent of the utility network.
Utility system The combined utility networks, their interdependencies and the interrelations for providing infrastructure services.
Vulnerability The extent to which a system, network or node is sensitive to damage from an event.
Page 6
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 6 of 17
Figure 4 Flow chart for damage assessment of nodes and networks due to uniform volcanic hazard. (source: Daly and Wilkie 1999).
6 km separation (or 2 km separation for services below
ground) would be needed between the utility elements.
The lifeline utilities examined their own vulnerabilities
on this basis. However, because the main effects of the
distant eruptions were from ash fall, most of the vulner-
ability assessments focused on the effects of ash fall ra-
ther than complete localised destruction of part of the
utility network.
The above ground damage zone of 3 km radius was
subsequently adopted by the Auckland Regional Council 
in their volcanic contingency plan. The Council added a
further 2 km margin of safety to create a 5 km radius for
evacuation purposes (Auckland Regional Council, 2002).
At the time of writing, the renamed 3 km ‘extreme risk
zone’ and the additional 2 km ‘high risk zone’ remain as
the starting point for evacuation planning purposes
(Auckland Council, 2013).
The two distant eruption scenarios focussed on ash as
the primary hazard. The first deposited 1 mm of vol-
canic ash over the region from a 0.1 km3 andesitic
Page 7
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 7 of 17
Figure 5 Flow chart for damage assessment of nodes and networks due to local volcanic hazard scenario. (source: Daly and Wilkie 1999).
Note that references to Tables C, D and E in this flow chart are Tables 2, 3 and 4 in this paper respectively.
eruption of Taranaki (Figure 2) and the second deposited
100 mm of volcanic ash from a 4 km3 rhyolite eruption
from the Okataina Volcanic Centre (Figure 2). 
2014b) and fragility functions for different infrastructural
components to volcanic ash (e.g. Wardman et al., 2012;
Wilson et al., 2012; Wilson et al. 2014a).
Damage and mitigation assessment methodology
Two matrices were developed and provided a qualitative
assessment of the type and likelihood of damage (Ta-
bles 2 and 3) from ash fall to a range of infrastructure
within the Auckland region. These matrices are based
on observed impacts of past volcanic eruptions (e.g.
Blong 1984, Johnston 1997a).  A third matrix provided
options for mitigating the effects of ash fall (Table 4). As
mentioned above, these matrices produced an important
advancement in the ability to move from hazard to vol-
canic risk through the translation of descriptive (qualita-
tive) hazard impacts into a form that the utilities could
use to assess impacts to specific infrastructural compo-
nents (e.g. pipes, electricity sub-stations, water pumping
stations, roads etc.).  This early work has led to and in-
formed the subsequent development of semi-quantitative
descriptions of damage (e.g. Wilson et al. 2009), posters
for utilities on how to manage volcanic ash (Wilson et al. 
Damage assessment of nodes and networks due to
uniform volcanic activity
A zone of uniform hazard was identified which comprised
the known extent of the volcanic field (Figure 8). Within
this zone, an eruption was assumed to cause 100% damage
to over-ground services within a 3 km radius (blast zone)
and to underground services within a radius of 1 km. Out-
side these distances, the principal damage results from
ash. The analysis damage to nodes and networks due to
uniform volcanic activity was undertaken following the
flow chart in Figure 4. The uniform hazard analysis is es-
sentially a rapid once over of all critical network facilities
which ranks them as having negligible, moderate, or high
probability of damage based on their overall damage as-
sessment. This enabled a prioritised list of mitigation mea-
sures to be developed which was able to be incorporated
directly into utilities’ own strategic asset management and
maintenance programmes.
Page 8
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 8 of 17
impacts of various services from the same event with
performance post event.
Recovery profile (interdependencies)
The concept of a Recovery Profile was developed to de-
scribe how a hazard event would affect a utility’s ability
to function at different stages after a scenario event by
asking:
a) What percentage of service was available
immediately after the event?
b) What percentage of service was available one week
after the event?
c) How many days, weeks or months would be
required to get back to full service, including any
temporary fixes?
Figure 6 Flow chart for damage assessment of nodes and
networks due to distant volcanic hazard scenarios. (source: Daly
and Wilkie 1999). Note that references to Tables C, D and E in this flow
chart are Tables 2, 4 and 3 in this paper respectively. Worksheets 6C
and 6D referred to have not been reproduced in this paper, but can be
found in the original documentation (Daly and Wilkie 1999). An
example of a worksheet for a related task can be found in Figure 9.
Damage assessment of nodes due to local and distant
scenario volcanic eruptions
The analysis of damage to nodes and networks due to the
local scenario eruption was undertaken following the flow-
chart in Figure 5, on worksheets as shown in Figure 9.
Similarly, the analysis of damage to nodes and networks
due to the different ash thicknesses from the two distal
eruption scenarios was undertaken following the flowchart
in Figure 6, on worksheets similar to that shown in
Figure 9.
Through consideration of the likely damage from a par-
ticular scenario a picture can be developed of the effects
of an event on the entire system and forms a resource for
use when developing strategies for response and recovery.
Interdependence is addressed through reconciling the 
Lifelines were asked to develop a recovery profile per
significant network node or element (Figure 9) and ul-
timately to form a view of the overall recovery profile of
their network as a result.
An iterative process was used, initially assuming unlim-
ited resources and unrestricted access to sites for repairs.
The recovery profiles of all lifelines were discussed in a
workshop setting and reviewed. Individual utilities then
reassessed their profiles on the basis of a more realistic as-
sessment of access, competition for resources and inter-
dependency of services. Subsequent discussions with other
lifelines utilities typically, and as expected, had the effect
of making recovery profiles longer.
The methodology initially proposed to map the recov-
ery profiles to show impacted zones, i.e. areas where ser-
vice was unavailable one day and one week after the
event, and where full recovery took a long time. In prac-
tice this proved impractical within the timeframe due to
the collation of large volume of data from the recovery
profiles that this exercise required. As a result, the exer-
cise was amended to focus on areas or elements of sig-
nificant service loss in each utility and how that affected
the rest of that network.
A workshop was held at the conclusion of the vulner-
ability assessment to allow each lifeline utility to:
a) Outline its network’s capabilities for servicing the
other utilities,
b) Hold individual discussions with each of the other
lifeline sectors to identify and understand each
other’s interdependencies.
A matrix for the scenario eruption (Figure 10) was devel-
oped which demonstrated the interdependencies and the
priority which each lifeline had on the others for operation
and recovery. As network systems are often complex, no
particular precision can be claimed in the numbers given,
Page 9
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 9 of 17
Table 2 Volcanic ash-induced damage to structures matrix (modified after Daly and Wilkie, 1999)
Structure  Ash thickness <1 mm Ash thickness 1-5 mm Ash thickness 5 - 100 mm Ash thickness >100 mm
Pipework
Open systems (ie stormwater) Low probability High probability High probability High probability
Closed systems  Negligible Negligible Negligible  Negligible
Building structures
Flat-roof  Low probability Mod. probability High probability High probability
Pitched-roofs (>20°)  Low probability Mod. probability High probability High probability
Building services
Air-conditioning Low probability Mod. probability High probability High probability
Gutters  Low probability Mod. probability High probability High probability
Electricity services
Power lines  Negligible Low probability Mod. probability High probability
Power line insulators:
Low voltage  Negligible Mod. probability High probability High probability
High voltage  Negligible Low probability Mod. probability High probability
Substations  Negligible Mod. probability High probability High probability
Civil structures
Roads  Low probability High probability High probability High probability
Rail  Negligible Mod. probability High probability High probability
Wastewater
Sewage pumps  Low probability High probability High probability High probability
Sewage treatment plant  Low probability Mod. probability High probability High probability
Water Supply Systems
River/Stream  Low probability High probability High probability High probability
Uncovered reservoir Low probability Mod. probability High probability High probability
Cover reservoir/ground water Negligible Negligible Negligible  Negligible
Roof-fed tank  Low probability High probability High probability High probability
Telecommunications
Lines  Negligible Low probability Mod. probability High probability
Microwave towers  Low probability Mod. probability Mod. probability High probability
Exchange equipment:
External air-conditioning Low probability High probability High probability High probability
Internal Air-conditioning Negligible Low probability Low probability Low probability
Specific infrastructure
Ports  Low probability High probability High probability High probability
Airports: Air transport Mod. probability High probability High probability High probability
but the table highlights the links between lifelines in the
period following an eruption affecting Auckland. The
process showed that road (access), cellular communication,
and fuel, were lifelines on which others were hugely reliant.
A close fourth was electricity. Note that water supply was
ranked quite low in the analysis. This was because the pro-
ject focussed on the physical recovery needs of the lifelines
themselves rather than on the immediate needs of staff or
the community. 
Results and discussion
Analysis of the worksheets, workshop discussion sum-
maries, and Figure 10 confirms many of the conclusions
reached in other studies (e.g. Johnston 1997a):
a) Specific items of equipment identified as critical
to a network’s operation and which are also highly
vulnerable to volcanic ash, should be protected
(if possible) against ash fall.
Page 10
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 10 of 17
Table 3 Volcanic ash-induced damage type matrix (source: Daly and Wilkie, 1999)
Structure Ash thickness <1 mm Ash thickness 1-5 mm Ash thickness 5 - 100 mm Ash thickness >100 mm
Pipework
Open systems
(ie stormwater) 
Blockage depending on  Blockage depending on  Blockage depending on  Blockage depending on water
water (or sewage turbidity) water (or sewage turbidity) water (or sewage turbidity) (or sewage turbidity)
Closed systems N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A
Building structures
Flat-roof  Corrosion damage on metal Corrosion damage on
roofs, especially if freshly metal roofs, especially if
painted  freshly painted 
Corrosion damage on
metal roofs, especially if
freshly painted 
Corrosion damage to metal roofs;
loading damage potential for flat
roofed structures, moderate if dry
(high over 300 mm), high if wet.
Pitched-roofs (>20°)  Corrosion damage on metal Corrosion damage on
roofs, especially if freshly metal roofs, especially if
painted  freshly painted 
Corrosion damage on
metal roofs, especially if
freshly painted 
Corrosion damage to metal roofs,
low to moderate risk of load damage
depending on roof pitch.
Building services
Air-conditioning Abrasion damage to moving Abrasion damage to
parts.  moving parts. 
Blockage, abrasion damage Blockage, abrasion damage to
to moving parts.  moving parts.
Gutters  Blockage from reworked ash. Blockage from reworked Blockage from reworked
ash, load damage. ash, load damage. 
Blockage from reworked ash, load
damage.
Electricity Services
Power lines  N/A  Loading, tree breakages
onto lines 
Loading, tree breakages
onto lines 
Loading, tree breakages onto lines
Power line insulators N/A  Short-circuiting (flashover),  Short-circuiting (flashover),  Short-circuiting (flashover), low
low potential if ash is dry, low potential if ash is dry, potential if ash is dry, high if ash
high if ash is wet.  high if ash is wet.  is wet.
Substations N/A  Short-circuiting (flashover),  Short-circuiting (flashover),
low potential if ash is dry, low potential if ash is dry,
high if ash is wet. Abrasion high if ash is wet. Abrasion
damage to moving parts. damage to moving parts. 
Short-circuiting (flashover), low
potential if ash is dry, high if ash is
wet. Abrasion damage to moving
parts.
Civil Structures
Roads  N/A  Blockage, reduced traction Blockage, reduced traction Blockage, reduced traction and
and visibility  and visibility  visibility
Rail  N/A  Reduced traction and
visibility, short-circuiting of
electric signals if ash is
wet. 
Reduced traction and
visibility, short-circuiting of
electric signals if ash is wet. 
Blockage, reduced traction and
visibility, short-circuiting of electric
signals if ash is wet.
Wastewater
Sewage pumps Abrasion damage to moving Abrasion damage to  Abrasion damage to  Abrasion damage to moving parts
parts (depends on turbidity moving parts (depends on moving parts (depends on (depends on turbidity of sewage)
of sewage)  turbidity of sewage) turbidity of sewage)
Sewage treatment
plant 
Abrasion damage to moving
parts (depends on turbidity
of sewage) 
Abrasion damage to
moving parts (depends on
turbidity of sewage),
damage to pond oxidation
process. 
Abrasion damage to
moving parts (depends on
turbidity of sewage),
damage to pond oxidation
process. 
Abrasion damage to moving parts
(depends on turbidity of sewage),
damage to pond oxidation process.
Water Supply Systems
River/Stream pH and turbidity
contamination 
pH and turbidity
contamination 
pH and turbidity
contamination 
pH and turbidity contamination
Uncovered reservoir Turbidity contamination pH and turbidity
contamination 
pH and turbidity
contamination 
pH and turbidity contamination
Cover reservoir/
ground water 
N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A
Roof-fed tank  Chemical, pH and turbidity Chemical, pH and turbidity Chemical, pH and turbidity Chemical, pH and turbidity
contamination contamination contamination contamination
Telecommunications
Lines  N/A  Loading, tree breakage onto lines
Page 11
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 11 of 17
Table 3 Volcanic ash-induced damage type matrix (source: Daly and Wilkie, 1999) (Continued)
Microwave towers N/A
Exchange
equipment:
External air-
conditioning 
Short-circuiting (flashover)
of equipment, abrasion
damage to moving parts
Internal air-
conditioning 
N/A
Specific infrastructure
Ports  Potential corrosion and
abrasion damage to port
facilities 
Loading, tree breakage
onto lines
Corrosion of metal
surfaces. 
Loading, tree breakage
onto lines
Corrosion of metal surfaces. Corrosion of metal surfaces,
possible load damage.
Short-circuiting (flashover)
of equipment, abrasion
damage to moving parts
N/A 
Short-circuiting (flashover)
of equipment, abrasion
damage to moving parts
N/A 
Short-circuiting (flashover) of
equipment, abrasion damage
to moving parts
N/A
Potential corrosion and
abrasion damage to port
facilities 
Potential corrosion and
abrasion damage to port
facilities 
Potential corrosion and abrasion
damage to port facilities
Airports - Air
transport 
Potential corrosion and
abrasion damage to aircraft
and airport
(communications)
installations 
Potential corrosion and
abrasion damage to
aircraft and airport
(communications)
installations 
Potential corrosion and
abrasion damage to aircraft
and airport
(communications)
installations 
Potential corrosion and abrasion
damage to aircraft and airport
(communications) installations,
loading damage potential for flat
roofed structures, moderate if dry
(high over 300 mm), high if wet.
b) Roads are the most important transport sector in
relation to other 'lifelines' and in terms of public
use. Access to utilities to remove ash and/or protect
them often requires the use of roads at the very
time they are affected by ash falls. Despite their
importance they have a low dependence on other
'lifelines'.
c) Fuel supplies are important for standby electricity
generation, and road, rail and air transportation,
but most utilities will have access to sufficient
supplies after an ash fall. Supplies have a moderate
to low dependence on other 'lifelines'.
d) Electricity supplies are important for the operation of
many 'lifelines' and are vulnerable during and after ash
falls. Back-up electricity may not necessarily be avail-
able after an ash fall. Electricity supplies have only
a moderate dependence on other 'lifelines'.
e) Cellular communications have a high priority during
the initial recovery period.
f) Telephone systems have a moderate importance to
other 'lifelines' but are highly dependent on electricity
supplies and air-conditioning.
g) Air-conditioning units are important to a few
lifelines, notably telephones, and are dependent
on electricity and water.
h) Water supplies are required by a few 'lifelines' but
since supply systems are relatively robust in Auckland,
short-term problems should be minimal. However,
water supplies have a high dependence on other
'lifelines', notably electricity supplies. Increased
demand may strain the system. 
i) Stormwater, sewerage, rail, gas supplies and air
transport are not required by most 'lifelines' but
are highly dependent on others.
The interdependence table (Figure 10) is limited in that
it does not indicate the consequence of the failure of cer-
tain lifelines to society in general. Sewerage and storm
water both have low priority factors but are highly vulner-
able to ash falls and their failure will have major societal
impacts. Buildings, whether they are residential, business,
or critical facilities (hospitals, fire and police stations, civil
defence facilities, schools etc.), are extremely vulnerable to
disruptions of lifelines which provide the services that
allow them to operate. Electricity is required for lighting,
ventilation, boilers, water heating, refrigerators/freezers,
kitchens, medical services, lifts and security. Water supply
is required for the satisfactory operation of hot and cold
water systems, fire hoses and sprinklers, kitchens and la-
boratories. Communication facilities are critical for the
operation of emergency management organisations, and
usually require continued electricity supply.
An assessment of the vulnerability of lifelines must
therefore consider the physical vulnerability of the particu-
lar lifeline, its dependence on other lifelines, the flow-on
effects that its disruption may have and the societal de-
mands placed on that lifeline after an event. Failure to
consider all these aspects is illustrated by major water
shortages in Anchorage, Alaska following a light ash fall
from the 1992 Mount Spurr eruption. A vulnerability as-
sessment of the water supply system and subsequent con-
tingency planning had failed to anticipate increased water
Page 12
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 12 of 17
Table 4 Volcanic ash-induced mitigation matrix (source: Daly and Wilkie, 1999)
Structure Before the event  During ashfall event  After the event
Pipework
Open systems
(ie stormwater) 
Increase awareness of potential Monitor turbidity levels, where possible
problems, develop contingency plans limit ash entering systems 
Monitor turbidity levels, where possible limit
ash entering systems, remove ash from pipes.
Closed systems N/A  N/A  N/A
Building structures Increase awareness of potential Close windows, doors and other openings
problems, develop contingency plans 
Initiate ash removal procedures immediately,
prioritize efforts
Building services
Air-conditioning Increase awareness of potential Shut down and cover air-intakes, if still in
problems, develop contingency plans use monitor filters and clean or replace
when necessary 
Initiate ash removal procedures immediately,
prioritize efforts
Gutters  Increase awareness of potential N/A
problems, develop contingency plans 
Remove ash to prevent loading damage
Electricity services Increase awareness of potential
problems, develop contingency plans
Power lines  Cut back tree branches from above Monitor the situation carefully
lines 
Initiate ash removal procedures immediately,
prioritize efforts
Power line and
substation insulators 
Increase awareness of potential Monitor the situation carefully
problems, develop contingency plans 
Initiate ash removal procedures immediately,
prioritize efforts
Civil structures
Roads and rail  Increase awareness of potential Monitor the situation carefully, limit
problems, develop contingency plans vehicle use 
Initiate ash removal procedures immediately,
prioritize efforts, enhance vehicle
maintenance.
Wastewater Increase awareness of potential Warn public against disposing of ash
problems, develop contingency plans in the stormwater system 
Warn public of disposing of ash in the
stormwater system.
Sewage pumps Increase awareness of potential Monitor turbidity levels in the sewage and
problems, develop contingency plans shut down if levels are high 
Monitor turbidity levels in the sewage and
shut down if levels are high.
Sewage treatment plant Increase awareness of potential Monitor turbidity levels in the sewage and
problems, develop contingency plans shut down if levels are high 
Monitor turbidity levels in the sewage and
shut down if levels are high.
Water supply systems Increase awareness of potential Cover reservoir ventilators, disconnect roof
problems, develop contingency plans fed supplies, monitor water quality 
Initiate water supply management
procedures, monitor water quality
Telecommunications Increase awareness of potential
problems, develop contingency plans
Exchange equipment:
External air-
conditioning 
Fit internal air-conditioning units Seal exchanges where possible, shut down if  Initiate ash removal procedures immediately,
required, monitor the situation carefully prioritize efforts
Microwave towers,
other equipment 
N/A  Monitor the situation carefully  Initiate ash removal procedures immediately,
prioritize efforts
Specific infrastructure
Ports  Increase awareness of potential Shut down vulnerability equipment, monitor Initiate ash removal procedures immediately,
problems, develop contingency plans the situation carefully  prioritize efforts
Airports - Air transport Increase awareness of potential Close airspace, shut down airports
problems, develop contingency plans 
Initiate ash removal procedures immediately,
prioritize efforts
Page 13
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 13 of 17
Figure 7 Scenario hazard map for an event in Auckland’s central business district (source: Daly and Wilkie 1999).
Page 14
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 14 of 17
Figure 8 Uniform hazard map of the Auckland Volcanic Field. (source: Daly and Wilkie 1999).
Page 15
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 15 of 17
Figure 9 Example of a worksheet used to guide utilities through the damage, impact and recovery assessment process. Worksheets
were filled in for node and network elements (separately) for each of the three scenario events (one local eruption and two distal eruptions – refer text
for more information). (source: Daly and Wilkie 1999).
usage following such an event and appropriate mea-
sures were not taken once an ash fall warning was re-
ceived (Johnston 1997b).
Conclusions
As well as identifying vulnerable elements and mitiga-
tion measures for individual utilities, the A.E.L.P. meth-
odology allowed the effect on the entire network system
to be assessed by considering a specific eruption sce-
nario (among other hazards).  The assessment focused
on damage and the expected time taken to restore a cer-
tain level of service. This information formed the foun-
dation of a regional response by lifeline utilities to such
an event, and can be further developed to include essen-
tial non-utility services such as hospitals and emergency
service centres. 
The methodology used a mix of workshops and individ-
ual lifeline analyses to collect the information required. It
was time consuming and may have been able to have been
automated. However, the increase understanding about
the network as a system gained through a more interactive
process cannot be understated. Similarly, the relationships
built up between the lifeline utility organisations enabled
more robust and coordinated response planning arrange-
ments to be put in place.
The A.E.L.P. methodology and supporting information
was developed specifically for the lifeline utility sector, but
in doing so provided the impetus for a refocused effort in
understanding Auckland’s volcanic risk. The eruption sce-
nario descriptions, lifeline utility network information,
damage and mitigation tables have remained in current
use up until relatively recently when new studies under-
way are updating the information (e.g. AELP-2, 2014,
Page 16
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 16 of 17
Dependence on for recovery
Electricity  Gas  Fuel  Land 
Comms 
Cell 
Comms 
Broadcasting  Water  Sewage  Stormwater  Road  Rail  Ports  Airport 
Base 
Lifeline
Electricity
Gas
Fuel
Land Comms
Cell Comms
Broadcasting
Water
Sewage
Stormwater
Road
Rail
Ports
Airport
Total 
354555
1  54551
5  1  4552
415 304
4054 2  1
40543 2
514355
5133543
2113554
2154554
4154553
4154522
4154555
44  12  53  45  56  48  36 
115222
115222
115222
024014
024014
014014
115211
15111
1  5111
1  5  133
155 2  1
1452 1
12512
9  26  57  14  19  26
High Priority lifelines for recovery
Interdependence to be assessed against each lifeline item on a
scale from 0- 5 (nil - high requirement for recovery)
Figure 10 Interdependence recovery matrix for Auckland’s lifeline utilities after the scenario eruption. (source: Daly and Wilkie 1999).
DEVORA, 2014).  The damage zones developed formed
the basis of evacuation planning for the region (Auckland
Regional Council 2002) and the damage tables became the
foundation for more quantitative fragility function re-
search (e.g. Wilson et al., 2009; Wardman et al., 2012;
Wilson et al., 2012; Wilson et al. 2014a) and informa-
tion for lifelines on how to manage ash before, during
and after ash fall (Wilson et al. 2014b).
The benefit to the many lifelines of participation in the A.
E.L.P led to the establishment in 2000 of the Auckland
Engineering Lifelines Group (A.E.L.G.) (renamed the
Auckland Lifelines Group 2014) which is continuing
work to reduce the vulnerability of Auckland’s lifeline
utility network to various natural hazard events.
The approach taken to develop the damage levels and
time taken to restore levels of service after a large event
may be useful for other cities around the world as in-
creased emphasis is placed on reducing the vulnerability
of their cities’ infrastructure.
Competing interests
Both authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
DJ developed the commissioned volcanic hazard analysis for the Auckland
Volcanic Field for the A.E.L.P. and developed the damage, probability and
mitigation tables in the paper. MD initiated and project managed the A.E.L.P. 
project. MD also led the development of the overall methodology for the A.
E.L.P. including the hazard assessments, flowcharts and the worksheet. MD
facilitated the workshops referred to in the paper which generated the
interdependency data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Authors’ information
Michele Daly is a disaster risk management specialist at GNS Science in Lower
Hutt, New Zealand. She currently leads a team of 20 social science, hazard,
engineering and risk researchers at GNS Science who focus on practical
strategies for reducing risk.
Dr. (Professor) David Johnston is Director of the Joint Centre for Disaster
Research, a joint Massey University and GNS Science initiative focussed on
graduate teaching and disaster research. Professor Johnston is currently Chair of
the International Science Advisory Board (IAB) of the Integrated Research on
Disaster Risk Scientific Committee (IRDR) Programme and an Honorary Professor
at University College London.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Bianca Jensen (Massey University) and Maureen Coomer
(GNS Science) for assistance with the tables and figures in this paper. The A.
E.L.P. project was supported by the Auckland Regional Council and the many
lifeline utilities of the Auckland Region. We would like to acknowledge the
effort and commitment of these organisations to reducing risk in Auckland.
Received: 30 June 2014 Accepted: 3 February 2015
References
Auckland Council (2013) Auckland Volcanic Field Contingency Plan, April 2013. 54p.
Auckland Lifelines Group (2014) Auckland Engineering Lifelines Project - Stage 2,
v1.1., February 2014 [accessed 28 June 2014, www.aelg.org.nz)
Auckland Regional Council (2002) Contingency Plan for the Auckland Volcanic
Field. Technical Publication No. 165, January 2002. 74p
Page 17
Daly and Johnston Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:7  Page 17 of 17
Blong RJ (1984) Volcanic Hazards: A sourcebook on the effects of eruptions.
Academic Press, Australia, p 424
Centre for Advanced Engineering (1997) Risks & Realities: Vulnerability of Lifelines
to Natural Hazards. Centre for Advanced Engineering, Canterbury University,
New Zealand, p 350
Daly M, Wilkie D (1997) Auckland Engineering Lifelines Project Stage One Report:
Part 1 (Hazard Information) and Part 2 (Network Utility Information).
Auckland Regional Council, Technical Publication No.116, July. 1997, New
Zealand, ISSN 1172 6415
Daly M, Wilkie D (1999) Auckland Engineering Lifelines Project Stage One Final
Report. Auckland Regional Council, Technical Publication No.112, Nov. 1999,
New Zealand, ISSN 1172 6415
DEVORA (2014) Determining Volcanic Risk in Auckland. [URL: "http://www.naturalhazards.org.nz/NHRP/Hazard-themes/Geological-Hazards/Volcano/DEVORA-Determining-Volcanic-Risk-in-Auckland"] http://www.naturalhazards.
 org.nz/NHRP/Hazard-themes/Geological-Hazards/Volcano/DEVORA-
 Determining-Volcanic-Risk-in-Auckland (as at June 2014)
Hopkins DC, Lumsden JL, Norton JA (1993) Lifelines in earthquakes: a case study
based on Wellington. Bulletin of the New Zealand National Society for
Earthquake Engineering 26(2):208–221
Johnston DM (1997a) The physical and social impacts of past and future volcanic
eruptions in New Zealand. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Massey University,
Palmerston North, New Zealand
Johnston, DM (1997b) The impact of recent falls of volcanic ash on public
utilities in two communities in the United States of America. Institute of
Geological & Nuclear Sciences science report 97/5. 21 p
Johnston DM, Alloway BV, Smith IEM (1997a) Auckland Volcanic Impact
Assessment - Distant Eruption Scenarios. Auckland Engineering Lifelines
Project - Stage One Report, p. 171–192
Johnston DM, Nairn IA, Thordarson T, Daly M (1997b) Volcanic Impacts
Assessment for the Auckland Volcanic Field. ARC Environment Division,
Technical Publication Number 79
Lindsay JM, Leonard GS, Smid ER, Hayward B (2011) Age of the Auckland
Volcanic Field: A review of existing data. New Zealand Journal of Geology
and Geophysics 54(4):379–401, doi: 10.1080/00288306.2011.595805
Magill C (2002) Ashes to Ashes - Volcanic Risk in Auckland. Risk Frontiers Seminar
Series 2(1):2, September 2002
Sandri L, Jolly G, Lindsay J, Howe T, Marzocchi W (2012) Combining long- and
short-term probabilistic volcanic hazard assessment with cost-benefit analysis
to support decision making in a volcanic crisis from the Auckland Volcanic
Field, New Zealand. Bulletin of Volcanology 74(3):705–723
Smith IEM, Allen SR (1993) Volcanic hazards at the Auckland Volcanic Field, vol 5.
Ministry of Civil Defence Volcanic Hazards Information, New Zealand, p 34
Wardman JB, Wilson TM, Bodger PS, Cole JW, Johnston DM (2012) Investigating
the electrical conductivity of volcanic ash and its effect on HV power
systems. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C 45–46:128–145
Wilkie D, Daly MC (1998) Auckland Engineering Lifelines Project: assessing seismic
risk. In: New Zealand National Society for Earthquake Engineering Technical
Conference and AGM, Wairakei Resort, Taupo, Friday/Sunday 27–29 March
1998. New Zealand National Society for Earthquake Engineering, Lower Hutt,
pp 130–136
Wilson CJN, Houghton BF, McWilliams MO, Lanphere MA, Weaver SD, Briggs RM
(1995) Volcanic and structural evolution of Taupo Volcanic Zone, New
Zealand: a review. Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research 68:1–28
Wilson TM, Daly M, Johnston D (2009) Review of Impacts of Volcanic Ash on
Electricity Distribution Systems, Broadcasting and Communication Networks.
Auckland Regional Council Technical Report No. 51, April 2009
Wilson TM, Stewart C, Sword-Daniels V, Leonard GS, Johnston DM, Cole JW,
Wardman J, Wilson G, Barnard ST (2012) Volcanic ash impacts on critical
infrastructure. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C 45–46:5–23
Wilson G, Wilson TM, Deligne NI, Cole JC (2014a) Volcanic hazard impacts to
critical infrastructure: A review. Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal
Research 286:148–182
Wilson TM, Stewart C, Wardman JB, Wilson G, Johnston DM, Hill D, Hampton SJ,
Villemure M, McBride S, Leonard GS, Daly MC, Delinge NI, and Roberts L (2014b)
Volcanic ashfall preparedness poster series: a collaborative process for reducing
the vulnerability of critical infrastructure. J Appl Volcanology 3(1): 1-25 
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁ t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
