BOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction
Background
  Relocation of At-risk Communities and Disasters
  Geophysical Vulnerability in El Salvador
  Social Vulnerability in San Vicente
  Community and Livelihoods in Verapaz
Methods
Results and Discussion
  Disaster knowledge of authorities and at-risk populations: Before and after 2009
  The 2009 Event and Official Response
  Community-based early warning system effectiveness
  Mixed Success in Relocation Efforts
  Disruption of Livelihoods due to Relocation
  Disruption of Social and Kinship Networks and Ties to Home
  Relocation success
Conclusion
Abbreviations
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Authors’ information
Acknowledgements
Author details
References
Page 1
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14
DOI 10.1186/s13617-015-0031-0
RESEARCH  Open Access
Disaster risk reduction and resettlement efforts at
San Vicente (Chichontepec) Volcano, El Salvador:
toward understanding social and geophysical
vulnerability
Luke J Bowman1* and Kari B Henquinet2
Abstract
Despite a long history of volcanic debris flows on the northern flank of San Vicente Volcano, El Salvador, authorities and
communities were ill-prepared for the lahars that occurred on Nov. 7–8, 2009. More than 250 people were killed by
lahars resulting from shallow landslides, not to mention millions of dollars (US) in damage to houses, agriculture,
and infrastructure. After the disaster, significant aid was invested in the region to reduce risk in future disasters. This
case study uses the ethnographic tools of qualitative interviews, participant observation, and review of institutional
documents to analyze two particular aspects of disaster risk reduction strategies in the town of Verapaz: 1) relocation of
at-risk residents led by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, and 2) hazard monitoring and emergency
management training programs led by Civil Protection, the University of El Salvador, and NGOs. The relocation effort,
while effective at reducing physical vulnerability to debris flows, failed to incorporate livelihood, social networks, and
cultural ties to homes in their project design and implementation. Since diverse livelihoods are keys to survival, and
tightly-knit social networks help families share responsibilities and withstand shocks during hardships, many families
returned to the high-risk area or opted not to relocate. Others have adapted using unanticipated strategies to benefit
from the resettlement effort. On the other hand, the emergency management training and education programs valued
local input, knowledge, and action, which has helped increase awareness and improved the overall capacity to manage
emergencies through wide, local participation. The different approaches used in the two risk reduction initiatives reveal
important lessons regarding the importance of community participation. Challenges derive from narrow understandings
of vulnerability on the part of disaster risk reduction experts, who neglected to consider and understand kin networks and
residence patterns that help maintain diverse livelihoods, as well as ensure safety and security. As demonstrated in the
2011 Tropical Depression 12E, effective public engagement and empowerment helped bridge the knowledge, awareness,
and preparedness gaps that existed prior to the 2009 disaster.
Keywords: Disaster risk reduction; El Salvador; Relocation; Resettlement; Vulnerability; Livelihoods; Volcanic hazard; Early
warning system; Debris flow
Introduction
Strategies for disaster risk reduction (DRR) in the after-
math of hazard events have evolved over the last decade.
The “Hyogo Framework for Action 2005 – 2015” spon-
sored by United Nations International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (UNISDR) emphasized sustainable development
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:ljbowman@mtu.edu"] ljbowman@mtu.edu
1Department of Geological and Mining Engineering and Sciences, Michigan
Technological University, 1400 Townsend Drive, Houghton 49931MI, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
and disaster prevention rather than reactionary responses
(i.e., search and rescue and provisional sheltering) to cata-
strophic events (United Nations 2007).  Many countries,
including El Salvador, are adapting their risk reduction
strategies around a plan of prevention; however, when di-
sasters do occur, especially in developing countries, govern-
mental and non-governmental relief and development
institutions continue to consider relocation policies as vi-
able, go-to strategies to remove people from geographically
hazardous areas. These strategies narrowly focus on natural
© 2015 Bowman and Henquinet; licensee Springer. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
Page 2
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 2 of 18
hazard vulnerability, while giving little thought to other
types of vulnerability. The case of the response to the 2009
San Vicente, El Salvador disaster illustrates this point, while
also showing ways in which natural hazard monitoring and
communication improvements have been made.
In November 2009, heavy rains at San Vicente volcano in
Central El Salvador (Figure 1) triggered shallow landslides
that formed lahars. The debris flows affected several com-
munities on the northern flank of the volcano, including
Verapaz, triggering a massive relief and recovery effort. Na-
tionally, disaster losses totaled approximately $240 million
(USD), which represents more than 1.1% of GDP (United
Nations 2010). Within the housing sector alone, more than
20,000 homes were either destroyed, badly damaged, or de-
clared to be at-risk (United Nations 2010).  Five months
after the event, a $3.8 million (US) plan to relocate the
most at-risk neighborhoods in Verapaz was underway
(Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores de El Salvador
2012). This research examines the ways in which at-risk
populations in the small town of Verapaz were involved
in mitigation programs and assesses the outcomes of
these programs. Results demonstrate that despite best
efforts, a significant gap persists between the author-
ities’ perception of program success and the experience
of the at-risk population near San Vicente. In particular,
we examine this gap in the implementation of the re-
settlement project, and we contrast this with more 
successful DRR initiatives that involved local residents in
hazard monitoring strategies and communication. The
2009 debris flow disaster resulted in traumatic experiences
for rural Salvadorans and underscored the challenges in
implementing effective risk reduction when livelihoods
and social support networks are disrupted.
Despite these shortcomings, new and sometimes un-
planned livelihood and disaster preparedness strategies
slowly emerged as families adapted to new settlement
patterns after 2009. A long history of repression and the
imposition of unfavorable settlement policies have stifled
poor Salvadorans’ social mobility, but also fostered cre-
ative ways in the disaster’s aftermath for some to benefit
from post-event relocation. Affected residents largely fall
into four distinct groups: 1) those who lost everything
and relocated to New Verapaz; 2) those who attempted
relocating but returned to their original homes; 3) those
who used the relocation project to claim an additional
home to expand livelihood activities, and; 4) those who
remain in risky areas of Verapaz and have no intention
of relocating to New Verapaz. The relocation effort had
mixed results; some thrived while others struggled in the
new settlement and opted to return to their old homes.
We first situate this study within the existing literature
on relocation programs and place Salvadorans’ vulnerabil-
ity within the context of the country’s colonial and polit-
ical history. We next describe ethnographic methods and
Figure 1 Location of El Salvador and principal volcanoes (including San Vicente Volcano). Reprinted from Major et al. (2004).
Page 3
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 3 of 18
data analysis techniques employed throughout this study.
In the results and discussion, we analyze the outcomes of
uneven integration of the concerns and values of at-risk
populations into the resettlement project planning and
disaster risk monitoring efforts. In both cases, DRR ex-
perts focus on reducing vulnerability to natural hazards
rather than incorporating a broader understanding of risk
and vulnerability in people’s lives in Verapaz. The natural
hazard reduction focus was more effective in programs
that incorporated communities in ongoing hazard moni-
toring and communication than in the case of resettle-
ment. This case study illustrates a resettlement program
that failed to view the process holistically and incorpor-
ate affected residents’  concerns. It also highlights the
advantages of engaging stakeholders in the scientific
and decision-making/risk communication process. We
found that resettlement was a more complex issue to
plan for and successfully implement than improving
communication and promoting local monitoring of nat-
ural hazards.
Background
Relocation of At-risk Communities and Disasters
Relocation is a complex issue, often resulting in hard-
ships to those affected and in unanticipated outcomes.
There is an extensive body of literature describing the
challenges and pitfalls of post-disaster relocation pro-
jects (Johnson 2007; Oliver-Smith 2009; Cernea 1999;
De Wet 2009).  Whiteford and Tobin (2004) provide a
comprehensive review of cases showing that, “even
though the literature on natural hazards and disasters
provides ample evidence to suggest that there are signifi-
cant political, economic, social and physical conse-
quences to resettlement policies… resettlement remains
a ‘popular solution to hazard and disaster management’
(Chan 1995: 22)” (p. 190).  Oliver‐Smith (1991) reviews
cases in Turkey, Iran, Peru, and Guatemala to pinpoint
specific aspects of each effort that contributed to either
successful and unsuccessful results–one of the most
important being public engagement and beneficiary par-
ticipation in project design and implementation. Macías
and Aguirre’s (2006) analysis of relocation efforts at
Colima volcano in Mexico points towards similar con-
clusions. Lack of community participation and a top-
down, government-mandated approach led to major
social conflict. Reluctance to move was also attributed to
small home size, poor ventilation, inadequate construc-
tion materials, close proximity to other homes, and a
general poor design—all aspects that “violate the customs
of the people affected by disasters” (Macías and Aguirre
2006: 52). Usamah and Haynes (2012) similarly conclude
that relocation efforts at Mayon volcano in the Philippines
did not consider broader livelihood concerns, meaningful
beneficiary participation, disruption of social networks, 
nor culturally appropriate housing design. It therefore did
not achieve institutions’ nor residents’ desired goals.
A well-studied, Latin American case occurred at
Tungurahua Volcano near the town of Baños, Ecuador
where evacuation and relocation experiences resulted
in varying perceptions of success. The volcanic activity
and subsequent emergency management crisis made
residents, authorities, and aid institutions acutely aware
of each entity’s opposing attitudes regarding evacuation
and relocation (Lane et al. 2004).  Relocation was the
preferred institutional response and, according to the
institutions’  own analyses, was successful; however
some residents have very different, opposing sentiments
(Tobin and Whiteford 2002). It may seem intuitive to sug-
gest that relocation is the most effective strategy to com-
pletely reduce a population’s susceptibility to volcanic
hazards—a disaster can only occur when society and a
hazard overlap in space and time. While efficient at redu-
cing physical exposure to most hazards, relocation efforts
that fail to consider factors influencing social vulnerability
can result in “serious, and often permanent, socioeco-
nomic and cultural suffering and impoverishment” for the
resettled population (De Wet 2009: 78).  Whiteford and
Tobin discuss how in the Tungurahua Volcano case
“emergency evacuation and resettlement policies unfairly
hurt the most vulnerable populations, the poor and the
disenfranchised. Such policies are unhealthy because they
make it more difficult for families to recover economic
losses [and] separate them from their kin and support
networks” (2004: 189).
The challenges of livelihood disruption faced in Baños
are similar to those encountered by residents of Verapaz,
El Salvador. Verapaz is a town of roughly 4,000 residents
at the base of San Vicente volcano in an area of steep
drainages prone to debris flows and flooding. In both
cases, residents were reluctant to leave their homes. In
Verapaz, the reasons for mixed relocation success stem
from residents’  reluctance to abandon their supportive
social networks and livelihoods, among other relevant
concerns detailed below. Increased social and livelihood
challenges in the resettlement dissuaded residents living
in high-risk areas from moving to new, free housing. For
many residents who did move, social vulnerability in-
creased as families were cut off from support. As Oliver-
Smith (2009) notes, resettlement initiatives designed to
avoid disasters can and often do result in unintended
“development disasters.”
In contrast to top-down implementation of the resettle-
ment by the El Salvador Ministry of Housing and Urban
Development, other DRR efforts led by Civil Protection,
the Universidad de El Salvador, and various NGOs included
broad public engagement in hazard monitoring and risk
communication. Public participation in community-based
risk reduction can empower stakeholders by forming
Page 4
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 4 of 18
partnerships with NGOs, universities, and other agencies,
which can “improve the community understanding
and stimulate the willingness to build the culture for disas-
ter prevention and preparedness (Karnawati et al. 2011:
153). Successful community-based early warning systems
(CBEWS) are well-documented: Indonesia (Fathani et al.
2014; Karnawati et al. 2011), Philippines (Allen 2006), Italy
(García and Fearnley 2012),  and Colombia (Coll 2013).
The close collaboration of DRR institutions in San Vicente
allowed for strategic, well-funded education and training
opportunities for local residents to form a CBEWS. These
systems focused on communication during emergencies
and empowered local observers to gather information and
transfer knowledge around San Vicente volcano. Unlike
the relocation cases discussed above, the CBEWS pro-
grams do not significantly disrupt people’s social and eco-
nomic lives.
Geophysical Vulnerability in El Salvador
El Salvador is located in Central America above a sub-
duction zone at the juncture of the Cocos and Caribbean
Plates (Figure 1).  The tropical climate, along with its
geographic location, makes it at risk for a variety of geo-
logical and hydrometeorological hazards, including:
earthquakes (e.g.,  1986, 2001),  volcanic eruptions (e.g.,
2005, 2013),  floods (e.g.,  2009, 2011),  landslides (e.g.,
2005, 2009), debris flows/lahars (e.g., 2005, 2009), trop-
ical storms/hurricanes (e.g., 1998, 2005, 2009), droughts
(e.g.,  2001, 2012),  and tsunamis (e.g.,  1902, 1957).  El
Salvador is frequently ranked in the top ten countries
most susceptible to natural hazards by the United Nations
and often ranks in the top three (CEPAL 2010). Ninety-
five percent of the Salvadoran population are at-risk of
some hazard, according to a 2010 report by the United
Nations, and the World Bank ranks the Salvadoran popu-
lation as the second most exposed to “relatively high mor-
tality risk from multiple hazards”  (UNDAC 2010;
Government of El Salvador 2009; Dilley 2005; World
Bank 2006).
El Salvador’s precarious geographic location presents
many hazards, but other countries exposed to similar
hazards (e.g. Chile, Colombia) do not experience com-
parable disaster losses (De Greiff and Shashank 2012).
Frequent experience with costly disasters has not neces-
sarily translated into improved hazard mitigation in El
Salvador, nor have DRR institutions succeeded in ad-
equately preparing populations to face hazards and their
consequences (Wisner 2001; Bowman and White 2012).
Social Vulnerability in San Vicente
El Salvador’s colonial and political history shapes the
rural poor’s extreme situation of social and geophysical
vulnerability. El Salvador was a Spanish colony from the
early 1500s to the early 1800s, and criollo elites ruled 
large estates, establishing dominance over indigenous
populations. El Salvador’s economy has been predomin-
antly based on agriculture. The early colonial sistema de
encomienda (system of entrustment) was the Spanish
crown’s method to establish and maintain the Spanish crio-
llo and mestizo elites’ dominance in all facets of Salvadoran
life and inhibit the indigenous population’s upward mobility
(Boland 2001: 16). Encomiendas allowed control over large
tracts of arable land that left the indigenous populations
with one option— forced labor for the elite. The en-
comienda system “quickly degenerated into slavery”
(Boland 2001: 16).
After independence from Spain in 1821, elite land-
owners occupied the fertile lowlands in order to
maximize production of indigo. Processes of elite land
tenure further marginalized indigenous populations by
pushing them to less-desirable and more hazard prone
areas like steep ravines and stream banks (Wisner 2001:
254).  In the mid-19th Century, indigo was replaced by
artificial dyes and demand for coffee rose (Williams 1994:
71). Finally, in 1881, any communal and State land that
remained for use by rural Salvadorans was expropriated to
elite families. The national government determined that
the communal land system “impedes agricultural devel-
opment, obstructs circulation of wealth, and weakens
family bonds and the independence of the individual;”
therefore, peasant farmers were instructed to forfeit
their private land titles at which point they could be
sold at “public auction to the highest bidder” (Williams
1994: 74).  Fertile volcanic slopes were quickly repos-
sessed from indigenous communities for coffee produc-
tion, which once again dispossessed the Salvadoran
poor from their lands. During this period, Haggarty de-
scribes that policy-makers:
generally agreed on the promotion of coffee as the
predominant cash crop, on the development of
infrastructure (railroads and port facilities) primarily
in support of the coffee trade, on the elimination of
communal landholdings to facilitate further coffee
production, on the passage of antivagrancy laws to
ensure that displaced campesinos and other rural
residents provided sufficient labor for the coffee fincas
(plantations), and on the suppression of rural
discontent (Haggarty 1988: 1).
The resultant social structure further concentrated
wealth and power and ensured that access to education,
land ownership, social works, and healthcare were kept
out of reach of the oppressed majority (Haggarty 1988:
1). (Wisner 2001: 252–253) describes that “the poor ma-
jority have been scratching out a living on tiny plots
while selling their labor to the coffee barons” or forced
to migrate ever since the 1881 expropriation of land.
Page 5
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 5 of 18
Inaccessibility to land, extreme economic inequality,
and a political system favoring the wealthy led to upris-
ings, rebellions, massacres, and most recently a 12-year-
long civil conflict (1980–1992) which killed 75,000
people (Wisner 2001; Wood 2003: 23, 56). At the start of
the war in 1980, “90% of all farms were less than five hect-
ares, and six families held more property than the 133,000
smallest-scale farmers” (FUSADES and The World Bank
1998: 194). Though some land tenure reforms were estab-
lished throughout the war to appease combatants, mean-
ingful advancements were not achieved until the 1992
Peace Accords. Even these reforms were plagued by
“delays in implementation, disgruntlement concerning
the quality of land to be transferred, high land prices,
and not surprisingly, political tension” (FUSADES and
The World Bank: 197). This political and socioeconomic
reality perpetuates Salvadorans’ physical and social vulner-
ability to natural hazards and limits their overall resilience
when facing hazard events.
Around San Vicente, the fertile volcanic soil, centralized
location, and proximity to the Lempa River make this area
an agricultural hub. For these reasons, much of the terri-
tory has been managed and/or owned by the wealthy elite
since colonization. Presently, the higher elevation is domi-
nated by coffee crops, while the fertile bottomlands are
used for sugarcane production. Hence, the poorest resi-
dents in Verapaz have settled on the high-risk banks of
the Quebradona Creek. Many Vicentinos (people from San
Vicente) comment that, “El volcán es de Cristiani”—refer-
ring to the fact that nearly the entire volcano is owned by
former president Alfredo Felix Cristiani Burkard serving
his coffee production enterprise.
Community and Livelihoods in Verapaz
In order to understand why the communication, educa-
tion, and monitoring strategies implemented in Verapaz
succeeded while the resettlement did not achieve antici-
pated outcomes of planners, the reader needs some
socio-cultural background on the community fabric and
livelihood strategies of the residents. The structures of
community support and livelihoods that exist in Verapaz
are an adaptation to the circumstances of geophysical
and social vulnerability described above. These adapta-
tions help explain how these people can live in precar-
ious circumstances.
In 2009, the ethnically homogeneous, mestizo popula-
tion of Verapaz municipality was 6,257, the majority of
whom live in and around the town center and govern-
ment seat in Verapaz (Fundación Intervida 2012).  The
town is connected to the departmental capital city (San
Vicente) by a paved highway on which public transporta-
tion runs regularly. There is a municipal government,
public health clinic, school center, civil court, National
Civilian Police office, and Cultural House that all form 
the base of institutional support and helped provide ser-
vices after the 2009 disaster. No formal community orga-
nizations are registered with the municipal government in
Verapaz; therefore groups that have formed cannot benefit
directly from governmental financial support. Similarly,
there are no organized governmental or institutional ef-
forts to help diversify livelihoods, strengthen entrepre-
neurship, or support economic growth or local production
of goods. There are four economic-oriented community
groups that support sugarcane production, basic grain
production, egg production, and women’s sewing projects;
however no group has an annual budget or outside sup-
port (Fundación Intervida 2012).
Livelihoods in the town of Verapaz largely revolve
around agricultural activities dominated by a male work-
force. Families often rely on women, however, to help di-
versify livelihoods and income generating activities on top
of their unpaid labor in the home. In addition to ensuring
a smoothly run family unit, women are largely responsible
for small-scale animal husbandry, operating corner stores,
producing and selling dairy and sugar-cane-based prod-
ucts, and making and selling corn tortillas. One hundred
and fifteen families maintained cows and small-scale dairy
production operations, and 85% of families possessed one
to three animals. Household production of chickens, eggs,
pigs, and goats is commonplace and culturally valued by
the women who manage these activities. Downtown
Verapaz is peppered with small mini-mart stores, hard-
ware and agricultural supply businesses, seamstresses,
shoe repair shops, and a couple of household-run pupu-
serias (restaurants)—many of which are overseen by
women. Importantly, some families are supported through
the more recent influence of remesas—financial support
sent from (mostly male) family members that live and
work in the United States and other countries. In Verapaz,
an estimated 10% of families receive monies sent from the
U.S. to help with daily living expenses, which are often
managed by women (Fundación Intervida 2012).
The vast majority of wage earners are employed as day-
laborers by larger landowners, and they are considered
poor working class (Cabrera and Amaya 2015; Fundación
Intervida 2012; San Vicente Productivo 2001). Of the 18
departments in El Salvador, San Vicente Department has
the highest concentration of individuals living in extreme
poverty (Cabrera and Amaya 2015).  In Verapaz, larger
land holdings ranged from 11.5 acres (14 hectares) up to
hundreds of acres and are concentrated among just 19
households who use them commercially for coffee and
sugarcane production or rent plots to local residents
(Fundación Intervida 2012). Individual farmers who are
not wage laborers rent plots of land from large land-
owners to plant corn, beans, maize and other vegeta-
bles. Many of these small-scale farmers are forced
to pursue unfavorable credit options from powerful
Page 6
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 6 of 18
lending institutions or individuals to pay for access to
land, seed, fertilizer, and pesticides (Fundación Intervida
2012). Some are also able to claim small plots of land close
to steep drainages to cultivate for market and subsistence
needs. More than half of the 934 total farmers in Verapaz
cultivate less than 1.16 acres (1.4 hectares) of land for their
households’ use (Fundación Intervida 2012). One resident
day-laborer describes typical farm life in Verapaz:
Here we pretty much all do the same…most of us work
as campesinos, day-laborers. Maybe a mother had a
son in the United States who sent money, but most of
us struggle and work in the [coffee] fincas. Or in the
cane fields. Cleaning and fertilizing coffee. All of the
big fincas are there. He who doesn’t like to go to the
fincas goes to cut sugar cane or work in the sugar
mills. We have to work, even though it doesn’t pay
well, for food… Here we kill ourselves working. But the
profit is for the “Big Guy”—the one who controls the
monopoly. – Interview 1 (Male, mid-30s)
This current reality of land availability and ownership
are indicative of the historical colonial influence that still
plays a major role in livelihood realities for rural farmers.
To this day, Salvadorans frequently refer to the influence
of “The 14 Families”—an influential group of elite families
believed to dominate social structure and politics through-
out El Salvador for generations (Haggarty 1988).  As of
2009, the poorest 20% of Salvadorans earned only 3.71%
of total income shared in the country (ranking 116th in in-
come inequality out of 156 countries) (IndexMundi 2014).
The towns of Verapaz, Guadalupe and Tepetitan are
currently situated near drainages or directly on top of past
debris flow deposits. Citing the inherent danger of living
in close proximity to natural drainages, Civil Protection
and the National Assembly passed a law in 2003 prohibit-
ing construction and development of land in close prox-
imity (50 meters) to active (or potentially active) drainages
(Viceministerio de Vivienda y Desarrollo Urbano de El
Salvador 2013).  This land is legally “protected” and off
limits for ownership and development. However, in San
Vicente department this law was not enforced. For poor,
landless Salvadorans, squatting in these precarious loca-
tions for living and farming practices became their only
viable option, which increased exposure to lahar and flood
hazards.
This history of unstable land tenure is so deeply
entrenched that it continues to be accepted—or at least
expected—by Salvadorans. Ties to land and agricultural
practices run deep—not because rural farmers pass
down large parcels of land from one generation to the
next, but because families carry on livelihood practices
that have sustained them for centuries. In this largely
subsistence and wage-laborer-based agricultural tradition 
in Verapaz, families, neighbors, and friends are often
supportive of one another to help meet basic needs.
Vicentinos have developed diverse livelihood and so-
cial networks in the face of systemic marginalization and
oppression. These coping strategies benefit tight-knit
communities throughout daily life and in times of hard-
ships, war, and disasters. Most importantly, these net-
works persist today. Residents describe the importance
of their family and neighbors during hazard events, and
also exhibit their own collective agency to make deci-
sions contrary to institutional plans or directives.
Residents largely describe a supportive, extended family-
based structure that provides necessary assistance during
times of need and enforces safety and security within the
community. Many families are multi-generational and oc-
cupy the same residences. These assistance networks were
crucial, as survivors reflected on the reliance of family and
trusted neighbors that provided rescue, aid, lodging, and
basic goods during and after the crisis. The tightly-knit so-
cial fabric defining community resilience in Verapaz is
fundamental for weathering adversities born by social and
economic inequality, as well as those provoked by hydro-
meteorological events.
Methods
This study is based on experiences of residents affected
by the 2009 lahar disaster but incorporates analysis of
institutional interventions realized in the region during
the months and years after the event. Understanding social
dynamics (historical, organizational, political, and cultural)
and clearly identifying which strategies are currently being
used by institutions in El Salvador to reduce disaster risk
were key components to the study. Field observations, re-
view of literature and primary documents, and in-depth,
qualitative interviews of targeted populations regarding
the disaster and crisis management experience were
collected in San Vicente and Verapaz during a 15-month-
long field season (April 2011 – June 2012) for this ethno-
graphic research project.
A total of 38 in-depth, semi-structured interviews were
conducted with four, unique target groups:
 Uninhabitable Zone Residents (12 Interviews)
– Most houses in this area were completely
destroyed by the lahar, but 13 homes (though
heavily damaged) remain standing and are
occupied, even though the Ministry of Housing
declared this area legally “uninhabitable.” One
family living in this zone opted not to participate.
 High Risk Road Residents (7 Interviews)
– This is one of several areas located in southern
Verapaz deemed “high risk” but is unique as
some houses were completely destroyed or
heavily damaged in 2009. Though the area was
Page 7
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 7 of 18
heavily affected it was never formally declared
“uninhabitable.” Eight homes remain and are
occupied. One family living in this zone opted
not to participate.
 Relocated Residents (8 Interviews)
– These interviews took place in the new
settlement, New Verapaz. Four were conducted
with residents in permanent homes, and four in
temporary homes awaiting permanent homes.
 Disaster Risk Reduction Institution Representatives
(11 Interviews)
– These interviews were conducted with
representatives from institutions (governmental,
non-governmental, academic) working on disaster
risk reduction initiatives in the region.
New Verapaz was designed to meet housing needs for
244 affected (or potentially affected) families that lie
within the 50 meter boundary of an active (or potentially
active) drainage. Most of these families did not experi-
ence a direct impact from the 2009 disaster, but the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Development sought to
avoid future disaster impacts for these at-risk areas.
Hence, several other less-affected neighborhoods down-
stream the Quebradona Creek were deemed “high risk”,
and these families were offered a new home and encour-
aged to move. The sample for this study focuses on
nearly all of the families within the “uninhabitable” and
“high-risk” zones of Verapaz that were devastated in
2009, as these families would seemingly have the most
interest in moving to a new settlement. All of these fam-
ilies have either stayed in their original (often damaged)
homes or relocated to New Verapaz but decided to
move back to their old “high risk” homes.
The interview guide was developed by both authors
and a professor at the Universidad de El Salvador, then
further modified as relevant themes emerged throughout
interviews. The structure of the interview guide was
open-ended so as to minimize researcher bias and to
allow for a relaxed conversation that could expand and
contract based on the interviewee’s comfort with the
topic (Morgan et al. 1992; Kempton 1996). The goal of
these interviews was to better understand residents’ ties
to their land, reasons for leaving or not leaving their
homes during and after the disaster, reasons for accept-
ing or not accepting homes in the resettlement neigh-
borhood, and experiences (past and current) in working
with relief and development institutions that arrived to
the region after the 2009 disaster.
All interviews were conducted in Spanish (occasionally
alongside a Salvadoran field assistant) and digitally re-
corded. I (first author) or a Spanish-speaking assistant
then transcribed each audio file verbatim. Each tran-
scribed interview was subsequently coded using Atlas.ti 
software in order to more effectively “search for patterns
in data and for ideas that help explain why those pat-
terns are there in the first place” (Bernard 2013 taken
from Saldana 2009: 8). A combination of descriptive and
values coding was used in order to both “document and
categorize” a wide range of varying experiences and
opinions from the interviewees but also to “capture and
label subjective perspectives” from each participant from
the highly variable backgrounds of the aforementioned
target groups (Saldana 2009: 6–7). Codes were established
for each of the transcribed interviews, based on researcher
and informant categories. For example, the broader cat-
egories of “Relocation” and “Livelihoods” contain many
subcategories and codes (Table 1). And these subcategor-
ies were further broken down to identify patterns and dif-
ferences between informants on these topics.
I (first author) translated each quote used throughout
this paper. Field notes taken during each interaction
with interviewees were used to complement audio file
data. Similarly, I  attended a variety of community
events, institution-sponsored risk reduction projects,
planning meetings, UES-FMP-sponsored DRR courses
and workshops, crisis simulations, and an actual emer-
gency (Tropical Depression 12 E, Oct. 2011),  which
permitted rich opportunities to employ the ethno-
graphic tool of participant observation and acquire key
documents on DRR programs. Field notes and key doc-
uments were also coded for themes and integrated with
the categories determined from the interview data.
Table 1 Example categories, subcategories and codes for
data analysis
Category: Livelihoods Category: Relocation
Subcategory 1: Agriculture Subcategory 1: Chose to relocate
Code: Land owner  Code: Relocation challenges
Code: Land renter  Code: Relocation reasoning
Code: Day-laborer  Code: Relocation rights
Code: Sugar-cane  Code: Relocation benefits
Code: Coffee  Code: Relocation and livelihoods
Code: Vegetables (Corn, beans, other) Code: Relocation and kinship
Code: Wages, loans, taxes  Networks
Code: Affected by 2009 disaster Subcategory 2: Chose not to
relocate
Subcategory 2: Small business Code: Challenges to old verapaz
Code: Resources available Code: Reasoning
Code: Credit/Loans  Code: Lahar hazard awareness
Code: Affected by 2009 disaster Code: Legal ramifications
Code: Impacts post-ida  Code: Livelihoods in old verapaz
Code: Relocated  Code: Kinship networks in old
Code: Not relocated  Verapaz
Page 8
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 8 of 18
Participant observations were used to triangulate the
different data sets.
Interview sampling methods varied between the three
target groups. Nearly all of the residents of the uninhabit-
able zone (12 interviews) and high-risk road (7 interviews)
who refused to move to New Verapaz were interviewed.
In New Verapaz, the sample was purposive, as it was im-
portant to capture perspectives from residents who had
moved into their permanent homes (4 interviews) as well
as from residents who were still in temporary, pre-
fabricated homes (4 interviews) awaiting completion of
their permanent home (Bernard 2013: p. 164 – 167).
Key informants (11 interviews) from institutions doing
DRR work were chosen based on the first author’s inter-
action and rapport with them over the course of the
field work, the informant’s expertise and interest in the
study, and their involvement with different risk reduc-
tion interventions in the region. Participants in this
group include faculty from La Universidad de El Salvador –
Facultad Multidisciplinaria Paracentral, the coordinator and
technicians from Civil Protection (municipal, depart-
mental, and regional levels),  National Civilian Police,
the coordinator and technicians from The Center for
Disaster Protection (CEPRODE),  and United Nations
volunteers.
Results and Discussion
In response to the 2009 disaster in Verapaz, hazard
monitoring strategies improved and a new settlement
was built for relocating people living in at-risk zones.
The analysis detailed below explains the state of hazard
monitoring before and after the 2009 disaster; in brief,
communication of hazards improved between DRR ex-
perts and local residents, which was demonstrated in a
subsequent 2011 emergency. The resettlement project,
which aimed to permanently remove residents from at-risk
zones and provide them with new homes in New Verapaz,
did not meet its goals entirely. Instead the at-risk zones
remained fully inhabited, even as New Verapaz filled up
with occupants. These unanticipated outcomes reflect the
lack of consideration for local livelihoods, social networks,
and connections to home when planning the resettlement
project. Because the impact of relocation on these aspects
of life in Verapaz was not explicitly considered, some fam-
ilies found their social vulnerability was increased in some
ways, while others were able to take advantage of new re-
sources to come up with their own hazard mitigation and
improved socioeconomic strategies. Both the hazard moni-
toring and relocation projects focused primarily on geo-
physical vulnerability—getting people out of the path of the
lahars. This understanding of vulnerability lent itself well to
increased local participation in monitoring and planning
for future lahars or other hazards; however, this was not so
straight forward in the case of the resettlement project, 
which also required serious consideration of factors con-
tributing to social vulnerability.
Disaster knowledge of authorities and at-risk populations:
Before and after 2009
Salvadorans’  extreme vulnerability to natural hazards is
well-known among practitioners and authorities, but
hazard knowledge was not disseminated to at-risk popu-
lations or even local authorities tasked with disaster pre-
paredness and response before the 2009 disaster. On the
other hand, our data also show that residents did not
communicate past experiences with disasters to practi-
tioners and institutions before the 2009 lahar disaster. A
complete lack of preparedness, little awareness, and no
institutionalized measures for early warning or evacu-
ation contributed to the human and material losses during
the disaster. However, improvements in disaster know-
ledge and communication started to be implemented after
the 2009 disaster; the success of these changes was
demonstrated by the community response during Tropical
Depression 12E in October 2011.
A prime example of hazard knowledge that was never
shared with the at-risk population is the case of a compre-
hensive, country-wide volcanic hazard assessment con-
ducted in 2004. This effort by SNET and the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) produced a hazard map for San
Vicente volcano that defined possible inundations zones
and high, medium, and low risk areas for lahars of hypo-
thetical volumes (Major 2004). This work was published
(albeit, in English) and made freely available online. For
reasons not fully understood, this hazard map was never
disseminated to the residents or authorities in any of the
five municipalities on the northern flank of San Vicente
volcano. There was no enforcement of the 2003 law prohi-
biting construction within 50 meters of drainages, and no
other restrictions were applied in Verapaz concerning
where people could build homes, regardless of the fact
that past lahars had destroyed parts of the town and that
the new map indicated that populated areas were at high
risk for debris flows. In fact, according to residents, most
were completely unaware that any hazard analysis had
ever been conducted in the region.
[The town] disappeared, because they had never done
a study. They had never done a study to see if the zone
was habitable, but people needed homes, and they
risked living so close to a drainage. Practically at the
shore of the creek, the neighborhood was constructed. –
Interview 3
Similarly, the vast majority of respondents allude to
their lack of awareness of the lahar hazard in Verapaz,
and certainly no one was in any way prepared for the
event that unfolded.
Page 9
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 9 of 18
We never took it seriously, that it was possible that
there could be such destruction…since no one ever told
us that this had happened in the past, we didn’t
know. – Interview 2
Though SNET was aware of lahar hazards in the re-
gion, information was not disseminated to municipal
and departmental government institutions, including
Civil Protection, as they were caught completely off-
guard by the lack of warning and magnitude of the event
in 2009.
The event took the government by surprise…
afterwards, the government changed [its approach]. –
Civil Protection representative 
the areas closest to the drainage where the disaster oc-
curred in 1934. Some study participants remembered
these stories and warnings from the older generation,
but only in hindsight after the disaster. Some also
expressed their lack of understanding that past events
could repeat themselves.
They say—(aside) I don’t remember—that in 1934 the
volcano washed out, and a large part of Tepetitan was
lost with a large part of San Vicente. There was
evidence that something had come down [the volcano].
That was in 1934…the people, the new
generations—no one believed that another situation
would occur. We have personally lived it, and know
that it can. – Interview 10
It is important to reiterate that the three municipalities
near San Vicente considered at high risk for volcanic
debris flows (Verapaz, Guadalupe, and Tepetitán) have
all experienced these hazards first-hand over the last
100 years. The January and February 2001 earthquakes
leveled much of Guadalupe and Verapaz, and in August
of the same year a debris flow killed one person and
damaged infrastructure. In 1913 and 1934, debris-flow
events destroyed a large portion of Tepetitán, for which
it is now called Antiguo Tepetitán (Old Tepetitán). This
area was abandoned, and survivors resettled at (New)
Tepetitán, located a couple hundred meters away from
the ruins of Antiguo Tepetitán. Likewise, deposits from
this event covered southern Verapaz, destroying homes
along the Quebradona Creek and killing many individ-
uals. Memories of this event were, in some cases, orally
passed to younger generations. Experience with recur-
ring disasters, however, does not necessarily translate
into increased awareness or adoption of preparedness
measures.
Grandfather told us when he was just a few months
old, the first one occurred…the first one occurred in
1913—in 1913 it happened. Later, the second one
occurred around 1934. In ’34, this town didn’t suffer as
much as in 1913. Actually, 1913 was very
devastating…practically the same zone that was
destroyed in 1913 is where it happened again in 2009.
– Interview 3
As the memory of the 1934 disaster faded, Verapaz’s
expansion slowly encroached to encompass the exact
area destroyed in 1934. Some structures, including a
new hospital/clinic and many houses, were actually built
around large boulders deposited by the 1934 flow be-
cause they were too large to move. Entire neighborhoods
were constructed on top of lahar deposits, even though
elderly residents recall advising builders not to invade 
Notably, representatives from DRR institutions were
not aware of residents’ past accounts and oral histories.
Indeed, most residents acknowledge that past disasters
were not openly discussed or considered prior to the
2009 event. This fact represents that there has also been
a communication disconnect of local hazard knowledge
held by residents that was not openly communicated to
scientists and authorities, exposing a two-sided hurdle in
risk communication and risk reduction.
The 2009 Event and Official Response
The 2009 lahar disaster at San Vicente volcano made
evident the risk communication and risk reduction prob-
lems outlined above. In the end, the disaster spurred the
Government of El Salvador (GOES) to expand Civil
Protection-led efforts and hire dozens of technicians
who were trained and strategically placed in the most at-
risk communities. In San Vicente, Civil Protection was
free to partner with local GO and NGO institutions to
strengthen their own capacity to engage local residents
in education, preparedness, and training efforts in order
to incorporate them into hazard monitoring activities.
The GOS demonstrated its support to the victims
through this expansion of Civil Protection. The Ministry
of Housing and Urban Development also created a re-
location scheme after the 2009 disaster to reduce the
risk of people living in government-declared uninhabit-
able and high risk zones.
Between 11:00 pm – 3:00 am local time (UTC – 6 hours)
on November 7–8, 2009, a low-pressure system related to
Hurricane Ida caused intense rainfall (355 mm over a
period of five hours) that triggered shallow landslides and
deadly debris flows on the northern flank of San Vicente
Volcano in Central El Salvador. Lahars inundated neigh-
borhoods of towns in five municipalities (Guadalupe,
Verapaz, Tepetitán, San Cayetano Istepeque, and San
Vicente) killing more than 250 people and destroying
between 130 – 200 homes (Figure 2).  Though five
Page 10
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 10 of 18
Figure 2 Five affected municipalities encompassing the northern flank of San Vicente Volcano. Inset of Verapaz and New Verapaz, modified from
Google Earth (2012).
municipalities encompass the northern flank of the volcano,
the town and municipal center of Verapaz immediately be-
came the symbol of the tragedy due to the impressive im-
ages of the damage and the tragic stories told by survivors
(Figure 3).
Lack of warning and effective preparedness, and the
timing and magnitude of the event all exacerbated disaster
losses. Rescue and recovery efforts in the immediate after-
math of the disaster provided survivors with shelter, food,
clothing, and healthcare. National and international devel-
opment and aid institutions quickly conducted needs as-
sessments to identify how to best provide for the affected 
areas and determine longer-term strategies to reduce vul-
nerability to future disasters (CEPAL 2010; Duran 2010;
Government of El Salvador 2009).
Aid poured into the region to help with the short-term
recovery effort, and plans for the resettlement in New
Verapaz (two kilometers northeast of Verapaz) and add-
itional DRR efforts followed (see inset Figure 2). Survivors
reported positive experiences with the generosity offered
by volunteers and aid organizations that provided food,
clothing, and shelter. In the department of San Vicente,
130 – 200 homes were completely destroyed, so four exist-
ing structures (two schools, one church, one community
Figure 3 Aftermath of lahar destruction in Verapaz (Photo Credit: Fredy Cruz).
Page 11
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 11 of 18
center) were converted into provisional shelters. Most
families reported living in shelters from a few weeks up to
three months.
As response and aid distribution shifted from meeting
basic needs to a longer-term solution to reduce risk, the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Development declared
that homes located within 300 meters on either side of
the Quebradona drainage were “uninhabitable”. This de-
cision immediately made 234 homes off-limits, and most
of these families represent the most vulnerable sector of
the population that had encroached into dangerous areas
(Aguirre 2011). Many families resisted this policy deci-
sion—not only the families affected in 2009 but also
many who were not directly affected but fell within the
300 meter “uninhabitable” range. To mitigate backlash
and provide a more permanent risk reduction agenda,
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development pur-
chased a parcel of land outside the high risk area for
the construction of New Verapaz–a proposed settle-
ment of 244 homes for affected residents located two
kilometers away from Verapaz (Aguirre 2011; Gobierno
de El Salvador 2010). Money for the land purchase and
settlement construction was donated from the United
Nations Development Program (UNDP),  the Panama-
nian Embassy, Oxfam, UNICEF, the Italian Episcopal
Conference, and the municipal government of Verapaz,
and costs exceeded 5.4 million (USD).  Government-
issued announcements describe the overall goal of the
resettlement project to “provide housing and new habi-
tat for families” and meet “minimum basic conditions”
for “humble, affected families” but mention nothing
regarding community participation, livelihood consider-
ations, or preservation of social networks (Ministerio
de Vivienda y Desarrollo Urbano 2013a; Ministerio de
Vivienda y Desarrollo Urbano 2013b).
In May 2010 (six months after the disaster), 60 families
who had not made their own housing arrangement
(temporary or permanent) or had not reoccupied their
damaged homes were chosen randomly and given the op-
portunity to reside in temporary, pre-fabricated homes
constructed at the site for New Verapaz (Figure 4). These
60 temporary homes fell far short of the 244 permanent
homes the government promised (Aguirre 2011). Slowly,
however, the temporary settlement evolved into the per-
manent solution designed by the Ministry of Housing and
Urban Development. Eventually, families that completely
lost their homes during the disaster or lived in homes
within the confines of the newly designated “uninhabitable”
area were offered a new, permanent home in New Verapaz.
Groups of homes were constructed in phases, and this
process took years. When a house was finished, a lottery
was held to determine which family in the list of beneficiar-
ies would receive the house. The vice-minister of Housing
and Urban Development, Jose Roberto Gochez, celebrated 
Figure 4 Resettlement homes in New Verapaz (Photo Credit:
Ministerio de Vivienda y Desarrollo Urbano 2013a).
commencing the final phase of construction in October
2012 by announcing that “the initiative will benefit 244
families, which in the coming months can count not only
on adequate housing but a fully developed habitat”
(Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores de El Salvador
2012). The last batch of 123 permanent houses was not
completed until March 2013, more than three years after
the event (Ministerio de Vivienda y Desarrollo Urbano
2013a).
Even the President of the Republic, Mauricio Funes,
indicated that a change needed to be made in order to
avoid future disasters. Five months after the disaster, he
addressed the communities of Guadalupe and Verapaz
to reassure them that the disaster and the institutional
shortcomings will not be repeated in the future.
We promise you, through government support, that
new natural disasters will not have the same tragic
consequences of [Tropical] Storm Ida. I have assured
you personally…next time, institutions will not react
the same, and we will not improvise and risk the lives
of entire communities by not giving priority to risk
prevention…– Mauricio Funes, President of El
Salvador (Funes 2010)
For this reason, the 2009 disaster marks a “before and
after” in terms of DRR in El Salvador. It was immediately
recognized that the emergency overwhelmed not only the
ill-prepared public but also institutional capacity. Lack of
awareness, preparedness, and a reliance on reactionary
strategies were deemed unacceptable, leading to institution-
driven initiatives to reduce risk in the region. Strength-
ening Civil Protection’s capacity and training, hiring new
community-based technicians, and closer collaboration
with University of El Salvador investigations and NGO
DRR initiatives were all improvements from the previous
system. The Center for Disaster Protection (CEPRODE),
the National Foundation for Development (FUNDE), the
Page 12
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 12 of 18
Municipalities for the Jiboa Valley (MIJIBOA), Caritas San
Vicente Diocese, and a United Nations Development
Program (UNDP) project all provided human and financial
support to the broadened DRR strategy. An alliance of GO
and NGO efforts have been effective at training local resi-
dents to monitor rainfall and calculate rainfall rates, better
understand precipitation as a landslide/lahar trigger, and
use a two-way radio communication network to report
daily precipitation data and other observed changes (e.g.,
surface cracks) directly to the municipal Civil Protection
technicians and others in the monitoring network. The re-
sults of these institutional efforts have improved hazard
awareness and disaster preparedness, as demonstrated
below in the response to Tropical Depression 12E in 2011.
Community-based early warning system effectiveness
The participatory approaches used by Civil Protection, the
University of El Salvador, and a cadre of NGOs addressed
the knowledge gap through inclusive training and educa-
tion programs–especially for individuals who opted not to
resettle and remained within the uninhabitable zone.
These residents are now more vigilant to monitor quickly
changing conditions that might indicate a possible lahar.
Local monitors go upstream during heavy rains to check
river levels and listen for landslides upslope or ap-
proaching lahars—information that they spread to the
other residents awaiting news in their homes.
We are vigilant about checking on conditions, and we
even go up to look at the stream to see how much
water there is. – Interview 20 with resident of
uninhabitable zone who claimed a house in New
Verapaz and goes there during heavy rains.
In Agua Agria and in San Emigdio my friends pass
time on the computer and on Facebook and they tell
me when it’s raining. For whatever thing is happening,
they warn me. – Interview 20 with resident of
uninhabitable zone who claimed a house in New
Verapaz and goes there during heavy rains.
Part of this new awareness comes out of having seen
first-hand and survived the destruction in 2009. But on-
going institutional efforts have strengthened Verapaz’s
and the surrounding communities’  organizational cap-
acity to monitor environmental conditions. Participant
observation carried out by the first author during the
training of local observers and during field trips and sci-
entific campaigns showed that community participants
are engaged in the scientific process. Observations of
local observers’ actions and attitudes during the manage-
ment of a real crisis in 2011 and data gathered from the
semi-structured interviews all establish that the partner-
ships between NGOs, the Universidad de El Salvador,
and Civil Protection helped spark and maintain 
community-level interest in local monitoring initiatives.
Rather than be passive recipients of information gener-
ated by unknown entities, local observers are actively
involved in gathering data and making relevant observa-
tions while ensuring that the information is communi-
cated to the authorities and the public.
Local observers within the CBEWS measure rainfall
rates and communicate potentially dangerous conditions
to local Civil Protection authorities via two-way radios.
Observers also use the radios to communicate information
to one another and to the municipal hub in Verapaz. In-
formation is then distributed via cell phones, SMS mes-
sages, social media, and during emergencies the local Civil
Protection technician will communicate information and
recommendations via megaphone throughout Verapaz.
Each municipality is equipped with a weather station,
a communication hub, and a Civil Protection technician/
liaison; and key actors are trained in standard operating
procedures during emergencies. Residents are watchful
and learn to recognize potential precursors and signs
that might provide warning to future hazard events,
such as lahars, landslides, and floods. Residents’  deci-
sions to temporarily relocate and evacuate the high risk
zone during periods of heavy rain or during official Civil
Protection warnings makes effective use of new training,
increased awareness, and a safer space provided in New
Verapaz. Institutional support has made these improve-
ments a priority, and all of these steps have been realized
after the 2009 disaster.
Tropical Depression 12E in October 2011 was the first
time the Centers for Emergency Operations (COE) were
activated. I (first author) was present during the entire,
12-day-long crisis and used participant observation, field
notes, post-emergency reports, and targeted interviews
with DRR representatives to analyze the effectiveness of
the new emergency management strategy. Though partici-
pants’  hypothetical roles and responsibilities were taught
during a five-month-long emergency management certifi-
cation course, Tropical Depression 12E occurred before
trained individuals could participate in a scheduled emer-
gency simulation exercise. The first real-life application of
the training received occurred during the nearly two-
week-long emergency presented by Tropical Depression
12E. The first two days after Civil Protection elevated the
hazard alert level and activated the COE, Civil Protection
and CEPRODE facilitated the designation of actors’ man-
agement roles. Also, communication protocols were estab-
lished between local observers, authorities, and the public.
Throughout the following ten days of emergency manage-
ment, the connection to the network of local observers
proved invaluable at reporting data in near real-time,
which allowed decision makers to evacuate at-risk resi-
dents in a timely manner. As active, trained partici-
pants in risk reduction, local residents and DRR
Page 13
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 13 of 18
institutions are better connected and rely on one an-
other to correct some of the past communication and
hazard awareness problems. The new COE program
was able to successfully utilize the close social networks
of the Verapaz Community to communicate critical
geophysical data, hazard warnings, and evacuation
recommendations.
Mixed Success in Relocation Efforts
Differing understandings of priorities between outside
authorities and Verapaz residents also played out in
other medium and long-term assistance provided for disas-
ter mitigation and recovery, particularly the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Development’s relocation scheme that
developed. Relocation planners aimed to permanently re-
move residents from the uninhabitable and at-risk zones in
Verapaz. This was not achieved, although alternate housing
was provided and occupied by some extended family mem-
bers from at-risk households, newcomers to the area, and
some at-risk residents downstream whose homes fell within
the 50 meter “high-risk” delineation. The results discussed
in this section examine, from the viewpoint of families from
the at-risk zone, how the resettlement project unfolded,
what advantages and disadvantages they saw within the
project, and how they came to decide where to reside.
Based on their responses, a disruption of livelihoods, social
networks, and ties to home were among the most common
reasons why residents decided not to permanently relocate
from their at-risk homes.
The relocation project design demonstrated a lack of
awareness on the part of project planners about day-to-day
survival and social vulnerability in Verapaz. Community
“participation” in the project was limited to families’ obliga-
tory labor during construction of their new homes along-
side the contractors hired by the Ministry of Housing and
Urban Development. Because of the limited incorporation
of local concerns and knowledge, the relocation project
brought some unanticipated outcomes. Affected residents
largely fall into four distinct groups. Some residents were
forced to move to New Verapaz because there were no
other viable housing options when their houses were com-
pletely destroyed. Other residents initially relocated to New
Verapaz but returned to their original, at-risk homes in
Verapaz. Another contingent used the relocation project to
their advantage by claiming a house in New Verapaz with
the intent of remaining in Verapaz while renting the new
house for additional income or gifting it to family members
in need. Finally, there is a group of residents who remained
in Verapaz and has no intention of relocating. The Ministry
of Housing and Urban Development struggled to achieve
desired objectives, because livelihoods, social networks, and
strong ties to homes were not adequately considered during
project design and implementation. 
Except for homes that were completely destroyed and
swept away from their foundations, nearly every other
home left standing was cleaned out and reoccupied in
the days and weeks after the disaster. Houses that were
buried up to their rooftops in mud, boulders, and deb-
ris—houses where family members were killed—were
patched up, swept out, and made livable. For outsiders
(foreigners or national authorities/practitioners), it made
little sense that residents would want to reoccupy their
former homes after having experienced the trauma of
the 2009 debris flows. A seemingly rational institutional
response to the situation facilitated the hasty approval of
the permanent relocation program by government author-
ities at the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development.
Two actions were taken to facilitate this development pro-
ject: 1) southern Verapaz was declared uninhabitable,
which legally prohibited residents’ reoccupation of homes,
and 2) the construction of first temporary, then perman-
ent homes in a new settlement—New Verapaz—where af-
fected families could relocate.
Project implementers in the Ministry of Housing and
Urban Development deem the initiative a success because
each of the new homes is occupied. For the residents in
New Verapaz, as described below, physical exposure to
the lahar hazard has certainly diminished compared to liv-
ing in high-risk or uninhabitable zones. However, occupa-
tion of these new homes does not mean no one is living in
the high-risk or uninhabitable zones. Occupants of the
new homes include not only relocated residents from
Verapaz, but also outsiders who were able to get included
on the beneficiary list, family members who have split off
from multi-generational families residing in Verapaz, and
residents new to the area renting the new home from fam-
ilies that have moved back to or stayed in Verapaz. In real-
ity, the homes that were not totally destroyed in the
uninhabitable zone and high-risk focus area are still nearly
completely occupied, as residents are reluctant to relocate
mainly due to disruption of livelihoods and unwillingness
to abandon social networks. The relocation initiative sys-
tematically (yet unintentionally) exacerbates social vulner-
ability for some households in both Old and New
Verapaz, yet also opened some select opportunities for
particular families that claimed additional free houses,
rented newly claimed homes while continuing to reside in
their old homes, or claimed a new home even though they
were not affected in 2009.
The 19 families interviewed who have reoccupied their
old homes do not live amongst the ruins of their old
neighborhood in their original houses because they have
no other option. A new home in New Verapaz was made
available to each of them. The reasons behind their
reluctance to move are rooted in social, cultural, and
economic realities that dissuade the population from
abandoning a deeply ingrained and advantageous system
Page 14
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 14 of 18
that offers strategies to cope with economic and social
vulnerability. Livelihood disruption, deterioration of so-
cial networks, and strong ties to original homes are the
main reasons why residents were reluctant to relocate.
Disruption of Livelihoods due to Relocation
Most reluctance to relocate revolves around the different
ways this dramatic change would disrupt livelihood
strategies. Since most families rely on agriculture, mov-
ing away from farmland proved difficult. New Verapaz is
too far away from traditional agricultural lands, cher-
ished homes, and other economic opportunities. Access
to lands is not only important for convenience, but it is
also important to be close to ensure that produce and
animals are not stolen.
Our [farm] land is close, but leaving here for [outer
reaches of New Verapaz] our lands would be too far
away. We barely make enough to feed ourselves.
Having to travel and pay for gasoline would take away
any remaining profits. – Interview 1 with resident of
uninhabitable zone who chose not to relocate.
One of the advantages [of living here] is this is the
zone we work. We work the land. If we leave, we
leave everything behind, and it’s taken years of
effort. Thirty years we’ve been here, we couldn’t
leave. We stay here because this is where we have
everything, and if we leave, we have to leave it all
behind. We would have to start all over, alongside
strangers, with a new lifestyle. – Interview 1 with
resident of uninhabitable zone who chose not to
relocate.
Since homes and some plots are passed from gener-
ation to generation, the modifications and improvements
are highly valued, especially since the investments re-
quired to make these changes take so much work. To
abandon years of hard work and dedication to make a
place “home” was considered unthinkable.
In addition, homes in New Verapaz are located off the
main road and far away from the bus route, so unlike
Verapaz very little business traffic arrives to household-
run shops since there is no public transportation into or
throughout the new settlement. Relocation meant an in-
convenient commute for all residents, including wage la-
borers and women traveling to participate in market
activities. Acquiring reliable transportation from New
Verapaz to the main transportation routes in Verapaz
proved to be too much for some residents. One relo-
cated individual who decided to return to the uninhabit-
able zone explained:
Sometimes we got a ride [out of New Verapaz], but
sometimes we had to have money to travel, unless we 
wanted to walk out on foot. Sometimes we found a
ride to drop us off [near Verapaz], but afterwards, I
said, “Its better if we stay here [at our old house]. –
Interview 2 with resident who relocated but chose to
return to the uninhabitable zone
Increased distance is an inconvenience, but access to
electricity and water are vital for many tasks that further
diversify income generation. There was no electricity,
and there were only communal bathroom facilities in
New Verapaz, even two years after the completion of the
first round of permanent houses.
Some of us never left [our original home] even from
the beginning because there was no electricity [in New
Verapaz]. – Interview 2 with resident who relocated
but chose to return to the uninhabitable zone.
I lived in the new settlement for a year. I lived there
for a year because they said they would provide
electricity and that we would each have our own
bathroom, but that never happened. – Interview 4
with resident who relocated but chose to return to the
uninhabitable zone.
For families with diversified livelihoods running small
shops that required power (e.g. seamstresses, dairy ven-
dors needing refrigeration, corner store owners), it was
impossible to run their business without electricity,
which dissuaded small business owners.
There are people here [in their old houses] that have
been given new houses there [in New Verapaz] but
they don’t go because the cheese spoils. There is no
way to refrigerate. – Interview 2 with resident who
relocated but chose to return to the uninhabitable
zone.
Also, gifted plots of land in New Verapaz are small (10 x
20 meters),  especially when compared to the space to
which residents were accustomed. Finally, homes are built
right next to one another (Figure 4). There is no room in
New Verapaz to have animals (e.g., chickens, cows, pigs,
goats),  which are highly valued in the local culture and
help provide families with food and additional income.
Disruption of Social and Kinship Networks and Ties to
Home
In addition to livelihood disruption, the unweaving of
the tightly-knit social fabric was a major factor that dis-
suaded families from relocating. A lottery-type system
was employed to help fairly distribute new homes. Simi-
lar problems with this style of housing distribution were
documented in Turkey, as family units were randomly
Page 15
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 15 of 18
distributed throughout resettlement areas and receivedhomes at different stages of the project (Enginöz 2004).
This system, which was specifically engineered to avoid
suspicions of political favoritism, had the unintended
consequence of destroying familial networks. When fam-
ilies and neighbors were not allowed to move together
as one unit into New Verapaz, moving meant that the
social capital that this network traditionally provides was
fractured. In the nearby Lempa River Basin, social capital
was regarded by (Bankoff et al. 2013: 82) as a major fac-
tor in “reducing vulnerability and an unavoidable start-
ing point for risk reduction.” Residents who had relied
on family and neighbors for generations were suddenly
forced to live apart in different regions of New Verapaz.
New neighbors were sometimes complete strangers, as
many of the people on the beneficiary list were homeless
individuals who had flocked to the area in hopes of tak-
ing advantage of the assistances being offered to the af-
fected population. Families relocated based on the “luck
of the draw” lottery system rather than family and kin-
ship units that defined community life in Verapaz.
During times of need, families and proximal neighbors
support one another. In many instances, extended families
and trusted neighbors occupied an entire block or portion
of a neighborhood. Whether it be watching the house while
a family member was out of town or working the field,
trading different food crops, babysitting or even sharing
child-rearing responsibilities, this social support network
was key to a smooth-functioning way-of-life. Relying on
family and neighbors was considered necessary.
The truth is, with all of the other problems we have,
we don’t have people here looking for more problems
[delinquents]—we don’t allow it…life goes on and we
live on. At least we survive. The truth is, if you need
something but don’t have it and I do, then we both get
by. It’s a form of co-existing. – Interview 3 with
resident of high-risk area who never relocated to New
Verapaz.
People get along really well here, even more so after
[the disaster], we are even more like family. We are
more united. It’s OK if someone needs
something—between everyone we find a way to solve
it…I tried to live [in New Verapaz] but it was
insufferable. – Interview 9 with resident who
relocated but returned to the uninhabitable zone.
Not only did the lottery prohibit extended family and
neighbors to move together, the actual size of the new
house was not conducive for multi-generational families.
The new houses only had two small bedrooms, so the de-
sign of the home made it impossible for entire family units
to move together. This is one of the primary reasons why
newly provided homes in New Verapaz are occupied but 
existing homes within the uninhabitable and high-risk
areas are also occupied by the same extended family. For
many families, select members have relocated, leaving the
other portion of the family behind because there is simply
not enough space.
The mayor came here and told us to go to the new
settlement. I told him “Yes” but only if they gave me
the same size plot. He said, “No” and that he couldn’t
give me any more land. The lot is tiny. So I told him,
“No thanks.” – Interview 1 with resident of
uninhabitable zone who chose not to relocate.
In addition to plots and houses being small, houses are
very close together, which has caused social problems.
We hear about problems with neighbors, that they
don’t get along. Remember that when you have houses
like that, like in San Salvador, where one wall serves
two houses—no way, man! They even know how you
sleep, and it’s terrible! – Interview 3 with resident of
high-risk area who never relocated to New Verapaz.
We are not accustomed to living this way, in these
spaces [closely spaced houses]. – Interview 23 with
relocated resident whose original house in the high-
risk zone was damaged but not destroyed.
This system not only divided familial networks, but it
also brought to light a completely different problem—in-
dividuals and families from outside Verapaz who mysteri-
ously appeared on the list of beneficiaries to receive
houses. Local families continuing to live in their old
homes frequently describe “aprovechados”—people from
other towns that came to take advantage of the aid by say-
ing they resided in the area but lost everything and are
therefore deserving of a new, free house. A majority of in-
terviewees explain that some of the first houses donated
were, in fact, given to complete strangers that no one in
Verapaz recognized. This resulted in major frustration and
overall distrust in the process of project implementation,
as well as cultivated suspicions of political favoritism—the
very thing the lottery system claimed to avoid.
Some groups of families attempted to circumvent the
lottery system by waiting to accept a new, permanent
home. They are waiting until the very end of the lottery,
even though they might come up “next in line” to re-
ceive a new house. This reluctance is based on the hope
that if they forego a home when their name is called, at
the end of the project, the remaining families will all get
to move together in the same area of New Verapaz.
Finally, residents repeatedly refer to their land as their
“home”— it is where the family has lived for generations.
Page 16
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 16 of 18
As long as conditions do not improve in New Verapaz,
there is no incentive to leave the area that is so famil-
iar and has always proved sufficient to meet basic
needs.
I came back in May [2010], and I felt at peace
because this is where I have lived for so long…They
gave me a provisional house, but I couldn’t stand
living there. Firstly, because there wasn’t power. The
house was very small. The sun was so strong, it was so
hot in the afternoon—so hot. And the [communal]
bathrooms were filthy… – Interview 4 with resident of
uninhabitable zone who relocated but returned to
original home.
Simply put, New Verapaz is not “home.”
Relocation success
As noted above, a number of unintended outcomes re-
sulted from the relocation scheme. In particular, some
of these actually served as DRR strategies, although not
in the ways that any DRR experts had intended. For ex-
ample, the design of the resettlement effort and the dis-
tribution of homes at New Verapaz has unintendedly
provided an emergency alternative housing option for
many of the families that have chosen not to relocate.
Having friends, family, or tenants living in their do-
nated house ensures that they have a place to go during
emergencies.
Every rainy season we leave. When it gets bad, I
leave—I pack my bag and I leave. I am scared, but I
live here [uninhabitable zone]. When the rainfall is
strong, I go [to the new settlement]. – Interview 15
with resident of high-risk zone who claimed a new
house but continues to reside in the original home.
People come back here [uninhabitable zone] because
they feel more comfortable with everything they have
in their homes. But in the rainy season, when the
storms come, they leave running. A lot of people still
run over there [to the new settlement]. – Interview 19
with resident of high-risk zone who claimed a new
house but continues to reside in the original home.
This partial relocation was clearly not the intended re-
sult of the new settlement, but at least during times of
crisis, families are aware that they are in danger and flee
to a safer area.
A successful relocation effort that fully removed people
from at-risk zones might be attainable in El Salvador if
certain criteria were met, including:
1) A new home with lands equal to or better than
previous conditions 
2) A guarantee that families, neighbors, and friends live
in close proximity to each other, as was the case
before the 2009 disaster
3) Access to water, electricity, and sanitation facilities
that are essential for healthy living and the needs of
small businesses
4) Proximity to farm lands
5) Adequate space and permission to tend chickens,
pigs, cattle, goats, etc.
6) Easy access to public transportation
However, these criteria were not met, and as a result,
the portions of Verapaz that have been deemed uninhab-
itable are still occupied.
Conclusion
The Salvadoran national government and DRR institutions
active in the region around Verapaz are making strides to
reduce disaster risk within vulnerable Salvadoran commu-
nities. Financial, organizational, and human resource sup-
port invested in Verapaz and surrounding communities is
making a positive contribution in terms of hazard aware-
ness, education, and preparedness. Inter-institutional co-
ordination between Civil Protection, the University of El
Salvador, and a host of NGOs improved since 2009, and
efforts are now undertaken collaboratively building off the
expertise of each agency. The evidence gathered ethno-
graphically in this study shows that institutions and resi-
dents are closing the communication gap that existed
prior to 2009. These programs and this critical informa-
tion focus primarily on community-based monitoring,
open dialogue and improved communication between res-
idents and authorities, and improved planning to reduce
disaster risk.
Nevertheless, a more holistic understanding of vulner-
ability and risk–including both social and geophysical—was
not incorporated by project implementers in Old and New
Verapaz, and outcomes were of mixed success. In this case,
project design and implementation reduced physical vul-
nerability for some but could not achieve broader success
because livelihoods and social networks were disrupted by
relocation. Had the project considered ways to reduce these
impacts, residents would likely have been less reluctant to
leave their high-risk settlement. In lieu of this, residents
adapted the best they could, and some success was achieved
by those who took advantage of the program design to help
diversify livelihoods while providing alternative housing
during emergencies. But many still live in the high-risk and
uninhabitable zone with no alternative housing. Others
have relocated, but found themselves cut off from vital live-
lihood resources and opportunities as well as crucial social
networks. Providing basic needs, adequate living conditions,
and proximity to livelihood activities in addition to allowing
family and social networks to relocate together were the
Page 17
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 17 of 18
main factors that residents felt could have aided successful
project implementation. Since these criteria were not met,
many families that relocated have now returned to their
original homes in the higher risk zones, and others never
left at all.
Throughout the world, relocation programs will likely
continue since they can reduce or eliminate a popula-
tion’s spatial exposure to natural hazards. Success of
these programs, as suggested by this study, depend in
part on how overall vulnerability (including economic,
social, political, etc.) is reduced. Cultural and sociopoliti-
cal context varies from country to country and from
community to community, making a stepwise, universal
relocation “best practices” plan nearly impossible. How-
ever, there are some basic tenets that should be consid-
ered in order to achieve broader community buy-in.
These are:
1) Access to livelihood activities
2) Continuance of social networks
3) Culturally appropriate housing that meets basic
needs
4) Community participation throughout the design and
implementation of the project
This case study shows how historical land tenure and
marginalization of the poor exposed people in Verapaz
to the lahar hazard at San Vicente volcano, but that
through these struggles important kin and social net-
works emerged to provide support to one another. While
some DRR efforts, like CBEWS may find reasonable suc-
cess even though they mainly focus on geophysical haz-
ards, this history and these local adaptive strategies to
social and geophysical vulnerability cannot be ignored in a
relocation scheme. This case also shows the importance of
understanding the dynamics and uniqueness of each
population before implementing a relocation effort. That
said, this approach takes time, money, political will, and
institutional capacity, all resources in short supply in the
immediate aftermath of a disaster.
Abbreviations
CBEWS: Community-Based Early Warning System; CEPRODE: Centro de
Protección para Desastres (Center for Disaster Protection); DRR: Disaster Risk
Reduction; GO: Governmental Organization; NGO: Nongovernmental
Organization; GOES: Government of El Salvador; SNET: Servicio Nacional de
Estudios Territoriales (National Service for Territorial Studies);
MARN: Ministerio de Medioambiente y Recursos Naturales (Ministry of
Environment and Natural Resources); UES-FMP: Universidad de El Salvador –
Facultad Multidisciplinaria Paracentral (University of El Salvador –
Multidisciplinary Faculty of the Paracentral); UNDP: United Nations
Development Program; UNISDR: United Nations International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction; USGS: United States Geological Survey.
Competing interests
LB partnered with the University of El Salvador during his Peace Corps
Response and Fulbright research efforts. His responsibilities as a “Disaster
Mitigation Specialist” included fostering coordination and collaboration 
between various aid institutions and efforts working in the San Vicente
region. LB never received any compensation from any organization or entity,
as his funding was fully provided through Peace Corps and Fulbright
programs. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
LB conducted all interviews and participant observation, coded qualitative
data (interviews, field notes, and documents), translated Spanish quotations
into English, and drafted the manuscript. KH helped with the research
design and development of the interview guide, as well as manuscript
organization, thesis development, and writing. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Authors’ information
LB is a doctoral candidate in the Geology and Mining Engineering and
Sciences Department at Michigan Technological University, where professors
Bill Rose and John Gierke have promoted interdisciplinary “social geology”
research regarding natural hazards in developing countries through the
Peace Corps Masters International program. After living two years in rural
Honduras as a U.S. Peace Corps Volunteer, six months in El Salvador doing
master’s research, and ample travel and research throughout Latin America,
LB was well-poised to collect ethnographic data in El Salvador. The data
collected for this article was obtained during a five-month-long Peace Corps
Response project, a nine-month-long Fulbright Student Scholar project, and
other intermittent visits. LB lived and worked among the affected communities
during the 15-month-long research effort.
KH is the Director of Michigan Tech’s Peace Corps Master’s International
Programs and a Senior Lecturer in the Social Sciences Department at
Michigan Technological University. Trained as a cultural anthropologist, she
has conducted ethnographic research in Niger on development institutions,
gender, and human rights as well as historical work on Cold War U.S.
development and humanitarian aid programs. KH serves on LB’s doctoral
advisory committee.
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, we would like to thank professors John Gierke, Bill Rose,
and Sam Sweitz for their support in pursuing this project. We are grateful for
financial and project support from the U.S. Fulbright Student program, U.S.
Peace Corps Response/El Salvador, NSF/PIRE 0530109, and the NSF
Partnership for Enhanced Engagement in Research (PEER) program for
providing the necessary funds to carry out this research. We thank our field
assistant, Paty Ramirez, for her help conducting interviews. Thanks to Irene
Corrales and Jose Marrero for help transcribing a portion of the interviews.
We are grateful to Ing. Fredy Cruz for his support at the Universidad de El
Salvador – Facultad Multidisciplinaria Paracentral throughout the Peace
Corps Response and Fulbright Students Scholar projects. We would like to
thank the residents of Verapaz and New Verapaz for participating in this
work and the institutions who all provided logistical assistance and valuable
insight: Centro de Protección para Desastres (CEPRODE), Protección Civil,
National Civilian Police, and the Alcaldías de San Vicente y Verapaz.
Author details
1Department of Geological and Mining Engineering and Sciences, Michigan
Technological University, 1400 Townsend Drive, Houghton 49931MI, USA.
2Department of Social Sciences, Michigan Technological University, 1400
Townsend Drive, Houghton 49931MI, USA.
Received: 20 June 2014 Accepted: 27 April 2015
References
Aguirre L (2011) En deuda las viviendas para damnificados. La Prensa Gráfica. San
Salvador. Dutriz Hermanos S.A. de C.V.
Allen KM (2006) Community-based disaster preparedness and climate adaptation:
local capacity-building in the Philippines. Disasters 30(1):81–101
Bankoff G, Frerks G, Hilhorst D (2013) Mapping vulnerability: disasters,
development, and people. LLC, Earthscan
Bernard HR (2013) Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative
Approaches. SAGE Publications.
Boland R (2001) Culture and Customs of El Salvador. Greenwood Press.
Page 18
Bowman and Henquinet Journal of Applied Volcanology (2015) 4:14  Page 18 of 18
Bowman L, White P (2012) ‘Community’ perceptions of a disaster risk reduction
intervention at Santa Ana (Ilamatepec) Volcano, El Salvador. Environmental
Hazards-Human and Policy Dimensions 11(2):138–154
Cabrera O, Amaya P (2015) Informe Final: Vulnerabilidad Socioeconómico ante el
Cambio Climático en El Salvador. Conocimiento y Cambios en Pobreza Rural
y Desarrollo. RIMISP. San Salvador, Conocimiento y Cambios.
CEPAL (2010) El Salvador: Impacto Socioeconómico, Ambiental y de Riesgo por la
Baja Presión Asociada a la Tormenta Tropical Ida en Noviembre de 2009.
CEPAL. Ciudad de México, CEPAL: 21.
Cernea MM (1999) The Economics of Involuntary Resettlement: Questions and
Challenges. The World Bank.
Chan WN (1995) Flood disaster management in Malaysia: an evaluation of the
effectiveness of government resettlement schemes. Disaster Prevention and
Management: An International Journal 4(4):22–29.
Coll MAA (2013) Sistemas de Alerta Temprana (SAT) para la Reducción del Riesgo
de Inundaciones Súbitas y Fenómenos Atmosféricos en el Área
Metropolitana de Barranquilla. Scientia et Technica 18(2):303–308
De Greiff CC, Shashank M (2012) Review, Redefinition and Development of
Disaster Risk Indices to Rank Countries for International Organizations. Master
of Science in Civil Engineering for Environmental Risks. Mitigation,
Politecnico Di Milano
De Wet C (2009) Does development displace ethics? The challenge of forced
resettlement. Development & dispossession: The crisis of forced
displacement and resettlement 77:96
Dilley M (2005) Natural Disaster Hotspots: A Global Risk Analysis International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Vol. 5. World Bank Publications
and Columbia University
Duran E (2010) Síntesis de los informes de evaluación técnica de las lluvias del 7 y 8
de noviembre 2009 en El Salvador: Análisis del impacto físico natural y
vulnerabilidad socio ambiental. Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Recursos.
Naturales, San Salvador
Enginöz E (2004) A study in post-disaster home environments: a comparative
case study between people living in villages and in the town center of Dinar,
Turkey. Second International Conference on Post-Disaster Reconstruction in
Developing Countries.
Fathani, T., D. Karnawati D, Wilopo W (2014) An Adaptive and Sustained
Landslide Monitoring and Early Warning System. Landslide Science for a
Safer Geoenvironment. K. Sassa, P. Canuti and Y. Yin, Springer International
Publishing: 563–567.
Fundación Intervida (2012) Diagnostico Municipal Participativo de Verapaz 2012.
Fundación Intervida, C. E. Ramos. San Salvado, p 88
Funes M (2010) Repoblación parque cafetalero en zonas afectadas por la
tormenta IDA, Guadalupe, San Vicente. Discursos, San Salvador
FUSADES and The World Bank (1998) El Salvador. Rural Development Study,
The World Bank
García C, Fearnley CJ (2012) Evaluating critical links in early warning systems for
natural hazards. Environmental Hazards 11(2):123–137
Gobierno de El Salvador (2010) Ministerio de Gobernación y Desarrollo Territorial.
“Gobierno Central entrega viviendas temporales y paquetes domésticos en
Verapaz para afectados por tormenta Ida” Accessed 2/5/2015.
Google Earth 7.1.2.2041 (December 13, 2012). San Vicente Volcano, El Salvador.
13°35′49.38″N 88°50′21.78″W, Eye alt 49161 ft., 2014 CNES/Astrium [6/2/2014].
Government of El Salvador (2009) El Salvador: Damage, Loss, and Needs
Assessment for Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction after the low pressure
system associated with Tropical Storm Ida. GFDDR, Global Facility for Disaster
Reduction and Recovery
Haggarty RA (1988) El Salvador: A Country Study. Library of Congress,
Washington, D.C.
IndexMundi (2014) El Salvador - Income Distribution. Country Facts.
Retrieved 5/12/2014, 2014, from [URL: "http://www.indexmundi.com/facts/el-salvador/income-distribution"] http://www.indexmundi.com/facts/el-salvador/
 income-distribution
Johnson C (2007) Strategic planning for post‐disaster temporary housing.
Disasters 31(4):435–458
Karnawati D, Fathani TF, Ignatius S, Andayani B, Legono D, Burton PW (2011)
Landslide hazard and community-based risk reduction effort in Karanganyar
and the surrounding area, central Java, Indonesia. J Mt Sci 8(2):149–153
Kempton W (1996) Environmental Values in American Culture. Woburn, MIT
Lane LR, Tobin GA, Whiteford LM (2004) Volcanic hazard or economic destitution:
hard choices in Baños, Ecuador. Global Environmental Change Part B:
Environmental Hazards 5(1–2):23–34 
Macías JM, Aguirre BE (2006) A critical evaluation of the united nations volcanic
emergency management system: Evidence from Latin America. J Int Aff
59(2):43
Major JJ, Schilling SP, Pullinger CR, Escobar DC (2004) Debris-flow hazards at San
Salvador, San Vicente, and San Miguel volcanoes, El Salvador. GSA Special
Paper. 375.
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores de El Salvador (2012) Gobierno inicia la
construcción de última etapa de complejo habitacional en Verapaz, San
Vicente
Ministerio de Vivienda y Desarrollo Urbano (2013a) Últimas 123 familias reciben
casa nueva en Verapaz, San Vicente. Ciudadano, Noticias, Retrieved February
6, 2015.
Ministerio de Vivienda y Desarrollo Urbano (2013b) Viceministerio de Vivienda
entrega Parcelación Habitacional para 244 familias de Verapaz. Ciudadano,
Noticias, Retrieved February 8, 2015.
Morgan M, Fischhoff B, Bostrom A, Lave L, Atman C (1992) Communicating risk
to the public. Environ Sci Technol 26(11):9
Oliver-Smith A (2009) Development and Dispossession: The Crisis of Forced
Displacement and Resettlement, School for Advanced Research Press/SAR
Press.
Oliver‐Smith A (1991) Successes and failures in post‐disaster resettlement.
Disasters 15(1): 12–23.
Productivo SV (2001) Estudio Agroecológico y Socioeconómico en el
Departamento de San Vicente. San Vicente Productivo y Unión. Europea,
San Salvador
Saldana J (2009) The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers, SAGE
Publications.
Tobin GA, Whiteford LM (2002) Community resilience and volcano hazard: The
Eruption of Tungurahua and Evacuation of the Faldas in Ecuador. Disasters
26(1):28–48
UNDAC (2010) United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination: 2010
United Nations (2007) Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015. International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction. Extract from the final report of the World
Conference on Disaster Reduction, Geneva, Switzerland
United Nations (2010) Surge in Demand for Humanitarian Assistance in High-Risk
Environments Informs General Assembly Debate on Strengthening UN
Disaster Relief Assistance. 65th General Assembly Plenary.
Usamah M, Haynes K (2012) An examination of the resettlement program at
Mayon Volcano: what can we learn for sustainable volcanic risk reduction?
Bull Volcanol 74(4):839–859
Viceministerio de Vivienda y Desarrollo Urbano de El Salvador (2003). Marco
Normativo para la Ventanilla Única. Government of El Salvador. San Salvador.
October 2013.
Whiteford LM, Tobin GA (2004) Saving lives, destroying livelihoods: emergency
evacuation and resettlement policies in Ecuador. See Castro & Singer
2004:189–202
Williams RG (1994) States and Social Evolution: Coffee and the Rise of National
Governments in Central America. University of North Carolina Press.
Wisner B (2001) Risk and the Neoliberal State: Why Post-Mitch Lessons Didn’t
Reduce El Salvador’s Earthquake Losses. Disasters 25(3):251–268
Wood EJ (2003) Insurgent Collective Action and Civil War in El Salvador,
Cambridge University Press.
World Bank (2006) Natural Disaster Hotspots: Case Studies. Disaster Risk
Management Series No. 6.
Submit your manuscript to a
journal and beneﬁ t from:
7 Convenient online submission
7 Rigorous peer review
7 Immediate publication on acceptance
7 Open access: articles freely available online
7 High visibility within the ﬁeld
7 Retaining the copyright to your article
Submit your next manuscript at 7 springeropen.com
