Keywords: Long noncoding RNA,Cardiovascular,Disease,Development
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
ModDate: 2020/04/02 12:23:48+02'00'
CreationDate: 2020/04/02 10:57:53+08'00'
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
Subject: Journal of Biomedical Science, 2020, doi:10.1186/s12929-020-00647-w
Author: Chih-Fan Yeh
Title: Expedition to the missing link: Long noncoding RNAs in cardiovascular diseases
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Long noncoding RNA,Cardiovascular,Disease,Development
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s12929-020-00647-w
xmp:dc:publisher: Journal of Biomedical Science
xmp:dc:description: Journal of Biomedical Science, 2020, doi:10.1186/s12929-020-00647-w
xmp:dc:subject: Long noncoding RNA; Cardiovascular; Disease; Development
xmp:dc:title: Expedition to the missing link: Long noncoding RNAs in cardiovascular diseases
xmp:dc:creator: Chih-Fan Yeh; Yu-Chen Eugene Chang; Cheng-Yuan Lu; Chin-Feng Hsuan; Wei-Tien Chang; Kai-Chien Yang
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2020-04-02T12:23:48+02:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2020-04-02T12:23:48+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2020-04-02T10:57:53+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:e826a71e-d316-45be-bdf5-b7997748c8e8
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:47b23628-dd96-4c0f-b746-d9a7b4c4ed42
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:e826a71e-d316-45be-bdf5-b7997748c8e8
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2020-04-02T15:10:05+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A reference to the original document from which this one is derived. It is a minimal reference; missing components can be assumed to be unchanged. For example, a new version might only need to specify the instance ID and version number of the previous version, or a rendition might only need to specify the instance ID and rendition class of the original.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DerivedFrom
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: ResourceRef
xmp:pdfaType:description: Identifies a portion of a document. This can be a position at which the document has been changed since the most recent event history (stEvt:changed). For a resource within an xmpMM:Ingredients list, the ResourceRef uses this type to identify both the portion of the containing document that refers to the resource, and the portion of the referenced resource that is referenced.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Part#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stPart
xmp:pdfaType:type: Part
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/t/pg/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpTPg
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Paged-Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Fonts
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag Font
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: XMP08 Spec: An ordered array of plate names that are needed to print the document (including any in contained documents).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: PlateNames
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaType:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Font#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stFnt
xmp:pdfaType:type: Font
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://www.aiim.org/pdfa/ns/id/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfaid
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/A ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Part of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: part
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Integer
xmpBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction
LncRNAs in the failing heart
  LncRNAs and cardiac hypertrophy
  LncRNAs and myocardial infarction
  LncRNAs and cardiac fibrosis
LncRNAs in cardiac arrhythmias and electrical remodeling
LncRNAs in atherosclerotic vascular diseases
  LncRNAs in endothelial cells (ECs)
  LncRNAs in vascular smooth muscle cells
  LncRNAs in lipid metabolism
LncRNAs in cardiac development
LncRNAs in cardiac regeneration
LncRNAs as biomarkers for cardiovascular diseases
Conclusions
Acknowledgements
Authors’ contributions
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Author details
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12929-020-00647-w
REVIEW  Open Access
Expedition to the missing link: Long
noncoding RNAs in cardiovascular diseases
Chih-Fan Yeh1,2†, Yu-Chen Eugene Chang1†, Cheng-Yuan Lu1†, Chin-Feng Hsuan3,4†, Wei-Tien Chang5† and
Kai-Chien Yang1,2*
Abstract
With the advances in deep sequencing-based transcriptome profiling technology, it is now known that human
genome is transcribed more pervasively than previously thought. Up to 90% of the human DNA is transcribed, and
a large proportion of the human genome is transcribed as long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), a heterogenous group
of non-coding transcripts longer than 200 nucleotides. Emerging evidence suggests that lncRNAs are functional
and contribute to the complex regulatory networks involved in cardiovascular development and diseases. In this
article, we will review recent evidence on the roles of lncRNAs in the biological processes of cardiovascular
development and disorders. The potential applications of lncRNAs as biomarkers and targets for therapeutics are
also discussed.
Keywords: Long noncoding RNA, Cardiovascular, Disease, Development
Introduction
Transcriptional profiling has been utilized extensively to
understand complex disease pathways [1], to identify novel
biomarkers for diagnosing and prognosing diseases [2], and
to examine the efficacy of therapeutic treatments with car-
diovascular diseases [3–5]. Although intriguing results have
been generated, previous transcriptional profiling studies in
cardiovascular system targeted largely the expression of mes-
senger RNAs (mRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs), which in
combination account for only ~ 1% of all transcribed RNA
species [6]. It is now known that the transcription of the
eukaryotic genome is much more pervasive and complex
than previously appreciated [6].  It is estimated that up to
90% of the mammalian genome is transcribed [6], and a large
proportion of the mammalian genome is transcribed as long
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:kcyang@ntu.edu.tw"] kcyang@ntu.edu.tw
†Chih-Fan Yeh, Yu-Chen Eugene Chang, Cheng-Yuan Lu, Chin-Feng Hsuan
and Wei-Tien Chang contributed equally to this work.
1Graduate Institute and Department of Pharmacology, National Taiwan
University School of Medicine, No.1, Sec. 1, Ren-Ai Rd, 1150R Taipei, Taiwan
2Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, No.1, Sec. 1, Ren-Ai Rd, 1150R Taipei, Taiwan
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs),  a heterogeneous group of
non-coding transcripts longer than 200 nucleotides, encoded
from genomic loci within or between (long intergenic RNA,
lincRNA) coding genes [7, 8]. LncRNAs have been shown to
be functional and involved in specific physiological and
pathological processes, including chromatin modification [9,
10], cellular responses to DNA damage [11], stem cell pluri-
potency/differentiation [12], cell cycle control [13], as well as
in the pathogenesis of neurologic diseases [14, 15] and hu-
man cancers [16–18]. Functionally, lncRNAs are known for
their roles as modulators of transcription, including epigen-
etic regulation of chromatin structure [19].  In addition,
lncRNAs have been shown to function as regulators of post-
transcriptional mechanisms including transcript splicing [20],
mRNA decay [21], and protein translation [22]. In this regard
lncRNAs are unique, functioning not dependent solely on se-
quence (as with miRNAs) or structure (as for RNA-binding
proteins).  Rather, lncRNAs seem to function both by se-
quence homology/complementarity with other nucleic acids,
as well as by structure, forming scaffolds for the assembly of
macromolecular complexes that regulate biological processes
[23].  In this review, we describe and summarize recent
© The Author(s). 2020 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the
data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
Page 2
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 2 of 16
evidence on the contributions of lncRNAs to the develop-
ment of cardiovascular diseases including heart failure (and
its precursors like cardiac hypertrophy, myocardial infarction
and cardiac fibrosis), atherosclerosis, and arrhythmias. The
roles of lncRNAs in cardiac development and their utilization
as biomarkers for diagnosing and prognosing cardiovascular
diseases are also discussed.
LncRNAs in the failing heart
The roles of lncRNAs in heart failure (HF) have been in-
vestigated extensively using high-throughput RNA se-
quencing both in human [24–26] and animal models
[27–30].  Using deep RNA sequencing on myocardial
RNA samples from human HF patients before and after
left ventricular assisted device (LVAD) support, we have
revealed the dynamic regulation of myocardial transcrip-
tome, including mRNA, miRNA and lncRNA, in ad-
vanced HF and after LVAD support. We have also
shown that the expression profiles of lncRNA, but not
miRNA or mRNAs, can discriminate failing hearts of is-
chemic vs non-ischemic origins [24], suggesting the im-
portance of lncRNAs in the pathogenesis of HF and
reverse remodeling observed with mechanical support.
LncRNAs and cardiac hypertrophy
Cardiac hypertrophy, caused by abnormal hemodynamic
stress or myocardial injury, is initially induced as a com-
pensatory response to maintain cardiac output. This
pathological hypertrophy, however, is often accompanied
with increased cardiomyocyte death, fetal gene re-
expression and interstitial/perivascular fibrosis, and will
ultimately progress to cardiac dilatation and heart failure
[31]. Recently, Han et al. [32] discovered that a group of
lncRNAs derived from the Myh7 loci, coined myosin
heavy chain associated RNA transcripts (Mhrt), are pro-
tective against cardiac hypertrophy. Mhrt is downregu-
lated in the mouse heart with thoracic aortic
constriction (TAC)-induced cardiac hypertrophy and
was associated with the Myh6/Myh7 isoform switch, a
pathognomonic signature of cardiomyopathy. Con-
versely, restoring Mhrt expression reduced the patho-
logical changes of cardiac hypertrophy. Mechanistically,
Mhrt was found to function via regulating the Brg1-
Hdac-Parp chromatin repressor complex by competi-
tively binding to Brg1, thereby prohibiting it from initiat-
ing the Myh6-to-Myh7 switch. This mechanism appears
to be conserved in humans, with the finding that human
MHRT expression is suppressed in myopathic hearts.
Later on, Luo et al. [33] uncovered an alternative cardio-
protective mechanisms of Mhrt, where Mhrt reduces
cardiac expression of myocardin, a muscle-specific tran-
scription co-activator that promotes the expression of
cardiac hypertrophy related genes, by reducing myocar-
din acetylation via HDAC5. Myocardin also binds to the 
CarG box of the Mhrt promoter and increases the tran-
scriptional activity of Mhrt, forming a positive feedback
loop. These studies together demonstrate the crucial
roles of Mhrt in the pathogenesis of cardiac
hypertrophy.
Exploiting transcriptome analysis in TAC-induced
hypertrophic mouse hearts, Viereck et al. [29] identified a
hypertrophy-associated, cardiomyocyte-specific lncRNA
cardiac hypertrophy-associated transcript (Chast). In vitro
and in vivo cardiac hypertrophy was observed upon over-
expression of Chast, whilst attenuation of hypertrophic re-
sponse was observed when Chast was silenced using anti-
sense GapmeRs, single-stranded antisense oligonucleo-
tides that allows RNase-H-mediated cleavage of target
RNA. The transcription of Chast was activated by prohy-
pertrophic nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT)
signaling. Chast downregulates Pleckstrin homology
domain-containing protein family M member 1
(Plekhm1), a regulator of normal cardiac autophagy, lead-
ing to maladaptive cardiac remodeling and hypertrophy. A
human analog of Chast was also identified and shares
similar functions with its mouse counterpart.
Another lncRNA identified via transcriptome analysis
on pressure-overload-induced mouse hypertrophic
hearts, cardiac-hypertrophy-associated epigenetic regula-
tor (Chaer), was reported to contribute to cardiac hyper-
trophy and fibrosis [30]. Mechanistically, Chaer interacts
with the catalytic subunit of polycomb repressor com-
plex 2 (PRC2) via an EZH2 binding motif, interfering
with the targeting and repressive action of PRC2 on the
promoter regions of genes involved in cardiac hyper-
trophy. The mTOR-dependent Chaer-PRC2 interaction
thus releases pathological gene suppression by H3K27
tri-methylation in cardiomyocytes, resulting in the up-
regulation of pro-hypertrophic genes including Anf,
Myh7,  and Acta1 in response to hypertrophic stimula-
tion. Furthermore, knockdown of Chaer reduced
pathologic cardiac remodeling only within a narrow
timeframe before TAC surgery, suggesting a critical win-
dow immediately following the onset of hypertrophic
stress during which epigenetic regulation by the Chaer-
PRC2 complex occurs. This also suggests an epigenetic
checkpoint of PRC2 present in the progression of car-
diac hypertrophy.
Recently, studies have shown that one class of lncRNAs
modulates physiological and pathological processes
through regulation of miRNAs by acting as an endogen-
ous sponge of the target miRNA to prevent miRNAs from
reducing the stability or interfering the translation of their
target transcripts. These competing endogenous RNAs
(ceRNAs) ultimately derepresses its downstream molecu-
lar pathways, a mechanism that could either salvage inhib-
ited cellular/physiological processes or reactivate/ magnify
responses to pathological stresses.
Page 3
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 3 of 16
One of the first ceRNAs to be recognized as a key
component in cardiac hypertrophy is  cardiac
hypertrophy-related factor (CHRF)  [34],  which was
shown to exert its pro-hypertrophic effects by targeting
the anti-hypertrophic miR-489/Myd88 axis. More re-
cently, another study revealed that CHRF also regulates
the cardiac miR-93/Akt3 axis [35]. In this case, CHRF at-
tenuated the repressive effects of miR-93 on Akt3, a pro-
tein kinase of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway critical for
the regulation of cardiac contractile function and stress
response.
Another ceRNA that has been extensively studied is
myocardial infarction-related transcripts (MIAT).  Zhu
et al. [36] found that MIAT regulates cardiac hyper-
trophy via sponging miR-150, a miRNA exhibiting anti-
hypertrophic effects on cardiomyocyte. P300 was then
determined to be the downstream effector of this MIAT-
miR150 axis in promoting cardiac hypertrophy [37].
Additional studies by Li et al. [38] showed that MIAT
contributes to cardiac hypertrophy also by influencing
the miR-93/TLR4 axis. MIAT-mediated sponging of
miR-93 led to upregulation of TLR4 and activation of
hypertrophic PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling, thereby leading
to AngII-induced cardiac hypertrophy. 
Other examples of lncRNAs that regulate cardiac
hypertrophy-related miRNA as ceRNAs include H19
[39], HOTAIR [40], lncRNA-ROR [41], MAGI1-IT1 [42],
Meg3 [43], Plscr4 [44],  SYNE1-AS1 [45],  and XIST [46,
47]. Table 1 summarizes lncRNAs that are implicated in
the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy and heart
failure.
LncRNAs and myocardial infarction
Myocardial injury following myocardial infarction (MI)
represents a particular challenge in clinical practice as it
almost invariably leads to adverse cardiac remodeling
and fibrosis, causing ischemic heart failure [49].  Deter-
mining the functional contribution of lncRNAs to MI
may shed light on previously unknown cellular processes
and serve as novel targets for therapeutics.
Studying the effects of lncRNAs on autophagy, Liu
et al. [50] found that the lncRNA cardiac autophagy in-
hibitory factor (CAIF) showed cardioprotective proper-
ties by interacting with p53 protein, thereby blocking it
from activating myocardin transcription and subsequent
cardiac autophagy.
An interesting alternative mode of action of lncRNA
was discovered when Greco et al. [51] studied the effect
Table 1 LncRNAs implicated in the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure
LncRNA Target Physiological/pathological impact  Mechanism involved
Mhrt [32, Brg1
33] 
Protective against pathological cardiac
hypertrophy 
1. Inhibit Brg1-Hdac-Parp chromatin repressor complex to prohibit
initiation of Myh6-to-Myh7 switch
2. Reduce myocardin acetylation/expression via HDAC5
Chast [29] Plekhm1 Promotes cardiac hypertrophy  Activated by NFAT signaling and downregulates Plekhm1 to induce
cardiac remodeling processes
Chaer [30] PCR2 Increases pro-hypertrophic gene expression Interact with PCR2 to disinhibit hypertrophic gene expression
CHRF [34,
35] 
1. miR- Induces cardiac hypertrophic responses
489
2. miR-93 
1. Sponge miR-489 to increase expression of Myd88
2. Sponge miR-93 to disinhibit PI3K/Akt pathway
MIAT [36–
38, 48] 
1. miR- Contributing factor to the pathogenesis of cardiac 1. Sponge miR-150 to increase expression of P300
150  hypertrophy, myocardial infarction and cardiac fibrosis 2. Sponge miR-93 to activate PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway via TLR4
2. miR-93  3. Sponge anti-fibrotic miR-24
3. miR-24
HOTAIR
[40] 
miR-19 Inhibiting progress of cardiac hypertrophy Sponge miR-19 to derepress PTEN expression
lncRNA- miR-133 Promoting fetal genes and cardiomyocyte growth
ROR [41] 
Sponge miR-133
MAGI1-IT1 miR-302e Protective against cardiac hypertrophy
[42] 
Sponge miR-302e to derepress DKK1 and inactivate Wnt/beta-ca-
tenin signaling
Meg3 [43] miR-361- Promotes cardiac hypertrophy
5p 
Activated by STAT3 to sponge miR-361-5p and derepress HDAC9
Plscr4 [44] miR-214 Protective against cardiac hypertrophy Sponge miR-214 to derepress Mfn2
SYNE1-AS1 miR-525- Promoting cardiac hypertrophy
[45]  5p 
Activated by SP1 to sponge miR-525-5p to derepress SP1, forming
positive feedback loop
XIST [46,
47] 
1. miR-
101
2. miR-
330-3p 
1. Regulating cardiac hypertrophy
2. Attenuating cardiac hypertrophy 
1. Sponge miR-101 to derepress TLR2
2. Sponge miR-330-3p to derepress S100B
Page 4
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 4 of 16
of β-secretase-1 (BACE1), the enzyme that produces the
β-amyloid peptide, and its antisense transcript BACE1-
AS on HF. They showed that BACE1-AS stabilizes the
BACE1 sense transcript, resulting in their concordant
upregulated expression in cardiomyocytes and endothe-
lial cells. BACE1-AS positively regulates the level of
BACE1 protein, leading to increased β-amyloid protein,
the accumulation of which is toxic to endothelial cells
and cardiomyocytes. These data suggest that the
BACE1-AS/BACE1/β-amyloid pathway contributes to
the pathogenesis of HF.
Similar to the case of cardiac hypertrophy, an increas-
ing number of ceRNAs have emerged that regulate nu-
merous processes of myocardial infarction and cardiac
infarction through miRNA inhibition.
The ceRNA cardiac apoptosis-related lncRNA
(CARL) [52] was shown to regulate mitochondrial fis-
sion and apoptosis by acting as an endogenous
sponge of miR-539 in cardiomyocytes, a miRNA that
represses the expression of PHB2, a critical inhibitor
of mitochondrial fission and apoptosis. Modulating
CARL-miR-539 and PHB2 axis thus could be helpful
in improving survival of cardiomyocytes and preserv-
ing myocardial function.
Another ceRNA autophagy promoting factor (APF)
was reported to target the miR-188-3p/ATG7 axis to in-
duce adaptive cell autophagy in cardiomyocytes after MI
[53].  In this study, miR-188-3p was shown to repress
ATG7 expression, thereby inhibiting autophagy and
causing cell death in cardiomyocytes. APF binds with
miR-188-3p as a ceRNA and leads to increased ATG7
levels and enhanced cardiac autophagy. Increased car-
diac levels of APF preserves myocardial function in re-
sponse to ischemic/reperfusion (I/R) injury.
In addition to cell apoptosis and autophagy, ceRNAs
have also been shown to regulate necrosis in cardiomyo-
cytes. Necrosis-related factor (NRF),  for example, regu-
lates cardiomyocyte necrosis by targeting miR-873 and
RIPK1 (receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein
kinase 1)/RIPK3 (receptor-interacting serine/threonine-
protein kinase 3). In vitro and in vivo experiments reveal
that miR-873 inhibits H2
O2
-induced necrotic cell death
and I/R injury-induced cardiomyocyte necrosis in mouse
hearts by targeting RIPK1/RIPK3. NRF, a ceRNA that is
transcriptionally activated by p53 upon I/R injury, binds
miR-873, leading to increased cardiomyocyte necrosis
mediated by RIPK1/RIPK3 [54].
LncRNAs linked to MI are summarized in Table 2.
LncRNAs and cardiac fibrosis
Exploiting the RNA sequencing data obtained from
mouse heart following MI, Micheletti et al. [55] iden-
tified Wisp2 super-enhancer-associated RNA (WIS-
PER),  a  cardiac fibroblast-enriched lncRNA that 
Table 2 LncRNAs linked to myocardial infarction
LncRNA Target Physiological/pathological Mechanism involved
impact
CAIF P53 Preventing detrimental Block p53 from activating
[50]  autophagy and cell death myocardin transcription
of cardiomyocytes
BACE1-
AS [51] 
BACE1 Increases expression of
toxic β-amyloid protein in
endothelial cells and
cardiomyocytes 
Stabilize β-secretase-1
(BACE1) sense transcript
to increase β-amyloid
protein production
CARL miR- Regulates mitochondrial Sponge miR-539 to dere-
[52] 539 fission and apoptosis press PHB2 expression
APF miR- Induces adaptive cell
[53] 188- autophagy after MI
3p 
Sponge miR-188-3p to
derepress ATG7
expression
NRF miR- Regulates programmed Activated by p53 to
[54] 873 cardiomyocyte necrosis sponge miR-873 and de-
pathways  repress RIPK1/RIPK3
expression
regulates cardiac fibrosis through association with
TIA1-related protein and the regulation of profibrotic
lysyl hydroylase 2. Depletion of WISPER in vivo re-
pressed fibroblast differentiation and proliferation,
inhibiting the development of cardiac fibrosis, sug-
gesting the potential of targeting WISPER as an antifi-
brotic therapeutic strategy.
Maternally expressed gene 3 (Meg3),  a fibroblast-
enriched lncRNA, was reported to be dysregulated in
chronic pressure overload-induced cardiac fibrosis. Silen-
cing Meg3 in cardiac fibroblasts inhibits P53-dependent
transcriptional activation of matrix metalloproteinase-2
(MMP-2), an essential mediator of cardiac fibrosis and re-
modeling. In vivo inhibition of Meg3 prevented pressure
overload-induced MMP-2 induction, leading to reduced
cardiac fibrosis and improved diastolic function [56].
LncRNA MALAT1 has been shown to be upregulated
in infarction-induced fibrotic mouse heart and angioten-
sin II (AngII)-treated cardiac fibroblasts, leading to the
inhibition and downregulation of miR-145, a negative
regulator of of TGFβ1. Knocking down MALAT1 in car-
diac fibroblasts restored miR-145 expression and pre-
vented AngII-induced fibroblast profileration, collagen
production and α-SMA expression [57].
In addition to its role in MI and cardiac hypertrophy,
recent research has shown that lncRNA MIAT also play
roles in cardiac fibrosis. MIAT is markedly upregulated
in post-infarct fibrotic mouse heart, which was accom-
panied by by downregulation of miR-24 and upregula-
tion of Furin and TGFβ1 [48]. Knocking down MIAT1
in the mouse heart or cardiac fibroblasts attenuated
fibrogenic response following pathological stimulations.
LncRNAs shown to contribute to cardiac fibrosis are
summarized in Table 3.
Page 5
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 5 of 16
Table 3 LncRNAs contributing to cardiac fibrosis
LncRNA Target Physiological/
pathological
impact 
Mechanism involved
WISPER
[55] 
Promoting
cardiac fibrosis 
Promotes differentiation and
proliferation of cardiac fibroblasts
by interacting with TIA1-related
protein and regulation of lysyl
hydroylase 2
MEG3
[56] 
MMP2 Promoting
cardiac fibrosis 
Required for TGFβ-mediated, P53-
dependent MMP-2 transcriptional
activity
MALAT1 miR-
[57]  145 
Promoting
cardiac fibrosis 
Promotes fibroblast activity and
collagen production by
downregulating miR-145, a nega-
tive regulator of TGFβ
MIAT1 miR- Promoting Increases fibrosis by sponging miR-
[48]  24  cardiac fibrosis 24
LncRNAs in cardiac arrhythmias and electrical
remodeling
Electrical remodeling, a process involving the dysregula-
tion/dysfunction of cardiac ion channels and trans-
porters under pathological conditions, creates a
proarrhythmogenic substrate that predisposes to the de-
velopment of atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. Re-
cently, lncRNAs have been shown to contribute to the
development of myocardial electrical remodeling and
cardiac arrhythmias.
Downregulation of TCONS_0007546, a lincRNA reported
to act as a competing endogenous RNA of miR-328, was
found to shorten the atrial effective refractory period (AERP)
and reduce atrial fibrillation (Afib) inducibility in rabbits as a
result of downregulation of CACNA1C protein secondary to
increased miR-328 levels [58, 59].
Recently, lncRNA metastasis-associated lung adeno-
carcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT1) was found to mediate
the cardioprotective effects of fentanyl against myocar-
dial ischemia-reperfusion injury [60].  Zhu et al. per-
formed further study on the potential interaction
between MALAT1 and ion channels. MALAT1 was
highly upregulated in the cardiomyocytes from rats with
post-MI ventricular arrhythmias, and like endometrioid
adenocarcinoma, MALAT1 acts as a sponge for miR-
200c in cardiomyocytes. The overexpression of MALAT1
notably inhibited the level of miR-200c, which was
shown to target high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1),
leading to reduced levels of Kv4.2 and Kv4.3 channel, α
subunits of the potassium channels that encode cardiac
transient outward currents (Ito
) [61].  Taken together,
lncRNA MALAT1 regulates cardiac electrophysiology
through miR-200c/HMGB1/Kv channel pathway [62].
LncRNAs were also found to contribute to the patho-
genesis of ventricular arrhythmia. LncRNA Kcna2-AS,
for example, negatively regulates Kcna2, which encodes
Kv1.2 potassium channel subunit that plays a pivotal 
role in regulating several physiological functions, includ-
ing heart rate [63]. Long et al. observed that the Kcna2-
AS level was significantly upregulated, while the expres-
sion of Kcna2 was downregulated, in rat failing cardiac
ventricles. In addition, knocking down Kcna2 in the
heart led to reductions in delayed rectifier potassium
current IKs 
and prolonged action potential (AP) dura-
tions in rats. Therefore, the upregulation of cardiac
Kcna2-AS downregulates Kcna2/Kv1.2, leading to in-
creased susceptibility to ventricular arrhythmias in rats
with CHF [63].
Connexins (Cx),  known as gap junction proteins, are
indispensable for the electrical conduction in the myo-
cardium. Recently, lncRNA CCRR (cardiac conduction
regulatory RNA) was found to regulate connexin 43
(Cx43),  normally localized at the intercalated disc that
connects cardiomyocytes, via binding with CIP85 (Cx43-
interacting protein of 85 kDa).  CIP85 interacts with
Cx43 and promotes its endocytosis and degradation.
Zhang et al. demonstrated that CCRR protected Cx43
from endocytic trafficking through forming the CCRR:
CIP85 complex. Therefore, overexpression of CCRR in-
creased cardiac Cx43 levels, rescued intercellular con-
duction block and contractile dysfunction in heart
failure (HF) mice [64].
Sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA)
serves as the major Ca2+ efflux mechanism in cardiomyo-
cytes and plays an essential role in maintaining sarcolem-
mal Ca2+ homeostasis and excitation-contraction (EC)
coupling. During HF, the transcript/protein expression
levels and enzyme activity of SERCA2a, the principal
SERCA isoform in cardiomyocytes, are significantly re-
duced, leading to delayed clearance of cytosolic Ca2+, ele-
vated diastolic [Ca2+],  reduced SR Ca2+ store and
decreased peak Ca2+ transient, which can lead to cardiac
contractile dysfunction and electrical instability. LncRNA
ZFAS1,  which was upregulated with ischemic HF, was
found to represses the expression and availability of SER-
CA2a, resulting in intracellular Ca2+ overload in
cardiomyocytes. Mechanistically, ZFAS1 directly binds
SERCA2a protein, leading to reduced SERCA2a activity
and expression levels. Targeting the functional domain by
which ZFAS1 interacts with SERCA2a with an antisense
oligonucleotide fragment (AsZFAS1-FD) blocks the dele-
terious effects of ZFAS1 in the heart [65].
Although lncRNAs, by definition, do not encode pro-
teins, recent studies discovered that some lncRNAs actu-
ally have open reading frames (ORFs) and may be
translated into functional micropeptides [66–68]. Micro-
peptides translated from putative long non-coding RNAs
have been reported to play critical roles in modulating
muscle function. Magny et al. reported a 31 amino-acid
micropeptide Sacrolamban (Scl), encoded from the ORF
of pncr003:2 L (putative noncoding RNA 003 in 2 L), in
Page 6
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 6 of 16
Drosophila. They showed that this arthropod peptide ex-
hibits homologous structure and function with sacrolipin
and phospholamban in vertebrate cardiac tissue. Scl pep-
tides is localized to Drosophila SR membrane and regu-
lates SERCA activity directly. Alteration of the level of
Scl leads to dysregulation in calcium trafficking and ir-
regular cardiac contraction [69].  In mammals, a 34
amino-acid micropeptide DWORF (dwarf open reading
frame) encoded from lncRNA LOC100507537,  was
highly enriched in muscle tissue. Nelson et al. showed
that DWORF shares the same binding sites with other
SERCA binding regulators, such as phospholamban
(PLN) in cardiac muscle, sacrolipin (SLN) in atrium, or
myoregulin (MLN) in fast skeletal muscle, on the M6
transmembrane alpha-helix of SERCA. DWORF acts as
a physiological competitive antagonist that interferes the
interaction between PLN, SLN, or MLN with SERCA. In
contrast with the inhibitory effects of SERCA activity by
PLN, SLN, or MLN, increased DWORF activated the
calcium influx induced by SERCA that resulted in de-
creasing the time of individual contraction-relaxation
cycle. Increasing DWORF levels in failing heart relieved
the inhibition of SERCA2a by PLN and restored cardiac
contractile function [70, 71].  Table 4 summarized the
aforementioned lncRNAs shown to regulate cardiac ar-
rhythmias and electrical remodeling. 
international epidemic of obesity, type 2 diabetes and
aging, all of which are potent risk factors for atheroscler-
osis [73].
The early events that lead to the development of the
atherosclerotic plaque include endothelial activation and
recruitment of circulating leukocytes to the affected arter-
ial intima, as well as local deposition of lipids and accumu-
lation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and
extracellular matrix proteins [74, 75]. VSMCs and endo-
thelial cells (ECs) play crucial roles in vascular remodeling
and atherosclerosis. Dysfunction of the endothelial lining
of the arterial vasculature is an important contributor to
the pathobiology of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.
Pathological stresses, such as oxidized low-density lipo-
protein (oxLDL) and hyperglycemia, lead to changes in
lncRNA expression in human EC [76, 77]. On the other
hand, atherogenic cytokines and growth factors transform
VSMCs from a contractile, quiescent state to an active,
synthetic state with increased VSMC proliferation, migra-
tion and extracellular matrix protein deposition. In
addition, abnormal lipid metabolism contributes critically
to the development of atherosclerotic lesions. Emerging
evidence suggests that lncRNAs serve as a key regulators
of lipid homeostasis. Here, we focus on atherorelevant
lncRNAs that function through regulating ECs, VSMCs
and lipid metabolism.
LncRNAs in atherosclerotic vascular diseases
Atherosclerosis is the underlying cause of cardiovascular
diseases including coronary artery disease (CAD),  cere-
brovascular disease, aortic aneurysm, and peripheral ar-
terial occlusive disease (PAOD),  which are the
precursors of myocardial infarction, stroke, limb ische-
mia and sudden cardiac death [72]. Collectively, cardio-
vascular diseases resulting from atherosclerosis have
become the leading cause of death around the world,
and the incidence is on the rise as a result of the 
LncRNAs in endothelial cells (ECs)
H19 is one of the first identified maternally imprinted
lncRNAs, and is involved in cell differentiation and
growth. H19 is abundantly expressed during embryonic
development and subsequently suppressed in adult vas-
culature [78, 79].  Interestingly, even though its expres-
sion was only retained in a few adult tissues, H19 was
found to be involved in the dysregulation of ECs during
atherosclerosis. Hyperglycemia leads to H19 downregu-
lation in ECs, which is linked to impaired angiogenesis
Table 4 LncRNAs reported to regulate cardiac arrhythmias and electrical remodeling
LncRNA Target Physiological/pathological impact  Mechanism involved
TCONS_0007546 miR-328
[58, 59] 
Reduces atrial fibrillation inducibility Functions as a sponge of miR-328 to derepress CACNA1C
expression
MALAT1 [61, 62] miR-200c
Kcna2-AS [63] Kcna2 
Reduces Kv4.2 & Kv4.3 expression→ reduced Ito 
Sponging miR-200c to derepress HMGB1 expression
Increases susceptibility to ventricular arrhythmia in Reducing Kcna2 → reduced IKs 
→ APs 
prolongation in rat failing
failing heart  heart
CCRR [64]  CIP85 Preserving cardiac Cx43 expression, conduction Forms complex with CIP85 and prevents CIP85-mediated Cx43
and contractile function  endocytosis and degradation
ZFAS1 [65]  SERCA2a Upregulated in ischemic HF, causing impaired
contractile function 
Repress SERCA2a expression and availability, leading to
intracellular Ca2+ overload
Sacrolamban
(Scl) [69] 
SERCA Mediating the calcium reuptake in cardiomyocytes of Drosophila
DWORF [70, 71] PLN, SLN, or Enhance cardiac contractility
MLN 
Decrease the time of individual contraction-relaxation cycle
Page 7
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 7 of 16
in diabetes through repressing insulin-PI3K-Akt signal-
ing. Both Akt activity in ECs and diabetic wound healing
were enhanced by extracellular vesicle-mimetic nanove-
sicles carrying H19 [80], strongly suggesting the critical
role of H19 in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.
MALAT1 is a  conserved lncRNA ubiquitously
expressed in a number of cells and tissues, and can be
induced in response to many pathological stimulations
including hypoxia, high glucose and oxidative stress. Si-
lencing MALAT1 reduced endothelial cell proliferation
by inhibiting cell cycle progression through reducing the
S-phase cyclins CCNA2, CCNB1, and CCNB2, while in-
creasing the cell cycle inhibitors P21 and P27kip1 [81].
Malat1−/− mice showed a delayed vessel extension in the
retina revascularization, while pharmacological inhib-
ition of MALAT1 reduced blood flow recovery and ca-
pillary density after hindlimb ischemia and ameliorate
diabetic retinopathy, such as microvascular leakage, and
retinal inflammation [81, 82],  suggesting an important
role of MALAT1 in promoting endothelial cell prolifera-
tion and blood vessel growth. Interestingly, genetic dele-
tion of Malat1 in mice did not impact the recovery of
blood flow and capillary density under non-ischemic
conditions [83].
LncRNA MEG3 is found to regulate both angiogenesis
and diabetes-related microvascular dysfunction. It has
been shown that MEG3 affects angiogenesis through
Notch signaling. In a stroke model of transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion, MEG3 was downregulated. Si-
lencing of MEG3 resulted in a proangiogenic effect
through upregulation of Notch pathway-related genes in
both ischemia brains and endothelial cells, leading to en-
hanced functional recovery and reducing the focal ische-
mia volume after a stroke [84]. In addition, MEG3 was
highly increased in senescent HUVECs and human atrial
samples, whereas silencing MEG3 prevented aging-
mediated suppression of vascular sprouting activity and
led to improved blood flow in an ischemic hindlimb
mouse model by enhancing regenerative angiogenesis
[85].  Meg3-KO mice showed increased expression of
VEGF pathway genes and increased cortical microvessel
density in Meg3-null embryos, suggesting the import-
ance of MEG3 in vascularization and angiogenesis [86].
MEG3 expression is down-regulated in the retinas of
streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic mice, where re-
duced MEG3 leads to capillary degeneration and in-
creased microvascular leakage and inflammation. In this
context, MEG3-mediated endothelial regulation is medi-
ated by the activation of PI3K/Akt signaling [87].
Nexilin F-actin–binding protein (NEXN),  also called
Nexilin, is an actin-binding protein that regulates cell ad-
hesion and migration. NEXN and its anti-sense lncRNA
NEXN antisense RNA 1 (NEXN-AS1), expressed both in
humans and mice, are reduced in human atherosclerotic 
plaques; circulating NEXN is also significantly decreased
in patients with CAD, MI or HF. NEXN-AS1 interacts
with the chromatin remodeler BAZ1A to increase the
transcriptional activity of the 5′ flanking region of the
NEXN gene. NEXN exerts atheroprotective effects by
inhibiting endothelial activation and monocyte recruit-
ment via the TLR4/NF-κB–mediated pathway. In addition
to endothelial cells, NEXN-AS1 was also shown to modu-
late NEXN expression in monocytes and VSMCs. NEX-
N+/−ApoE−/−mice (NEXN−/−ApoE−/−  mice were
embryonically lethal) had substantially increased athero-
sclerotic burden and thinner cap fibroatheroma than
ApoE−/−mice, indicating that NEXN plays a protective role
against the development of vulnerable atherosclerotic pla-
ques and atherosclerosis [88].
Hemodynamic disturbed flow pattern makes endothe-
lia atherosusceptible, and hence atherosclerosis preferen-
tially develops at sites of curvature, branching and
bifurcation in elastic and muscular arteries. MANTIS, a
nuclear-localized lncRNA controlled by the histone
demethylase JARID1B, regulates angiogenesis by inter-
acting in trans with BRG1 and facilitates the binding of
BRG1 and BRG1-stimulating factor BAF155 on angio-
genic genes [89]. Of note, the expression of MANTIS in
endothelial cells was induced by atheroprotective flow
and statin through mechanisms involving epigenetic re-
arrangements and the transcription factors KLF2 and
KLF4. MANTIS, especially its Alu element, limits endo-
thelial ICAM-1 expression by reducing the binding of
the BRG1 at the ICAM-1 promoter. Interestingly, statins
also mediate their atheroprotective effects, at least par-
tially, through MANTIS. Importantly, the expression of
MANTIS in human carotid artery endarterectomy ma-
terial was lower compared with healthy vessels and this
effect was prevented by statin therapy [90].
LncRNAs in vascular smooth muscle cells
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) revealed a
strong association between DNA sequence variants on
chromosome 9p21.3 and the risk of coronary artery dis-
ease, accounting for ~ 10–15% of disease in non-African
populations [91–94]. The 9p21.3 risk locus is adjacent to
the last exons of the antisense ncRNA in the INK4 locus
(ANRIL) and encompasses multiple single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). The function of ANRIL remains
incompletely understood, but a number of studies sug-
gest ANRIL regulates cell proliferation and senescence
of VSMCs either by Alu motif-dependent trans regula-
tion of atherorelevant genes through polycomb protein
complexes [95],  or by regulating miR-181a/Sirt1 [96].
Using iPSC-derived VSMCs, VSMCs carrying 9p21.3 risk
allele exhibit globally altered transcriptional networks
that intersect with previously identified coronary artery
disease (CAD) risk genes and pathways and risk-
Page 8
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 8 of 16
dependent gene networks drive cell state instability, par-
tially through ANRIL [97].  Deleting the risk haplotype
rescues VSMC stability, while expression ANRIL induces
risk phenotypes in non-risk VSMCs. This provides evi-
dence for crosstalk between CAD risk loci and possible
vascular therapeutic targets.
Although H19 expression is normally suppressed in
adult vasculature, it is re-expressed in the neointimal le-
sions, particularly in VSMCs, upon vascular injury [79].
H19 is barely detectable in proliferating neointimal
VSMCs, but becomes highly abundant in postconfluent,
differentiated neointimal VSMCs, suggesting its role in
the phenotypic changes of VSMCs during post-injury
neointimal formation [79].  H19 is by far the only
lncRNA that has been linked to abdominal aortic
aneurysm (AAA).  H19 was highly upregulated in the
medial layer, particularly in VSMCs, of aortic tissues
from human AAA patients, as well as from mouse
models of AAA induced by Ang II or porcine pancreatic
elastase. Increased H19 levels promote VSMC apoptosis,
independent of miR-675, through cytoplasmic inter-
action with hypoxia-inducible factor 1α and sequential
p53 stabilization. Knockdown of H19 with site-specific
antisense oligonucleotides (LNA-GapmeRs) in vivo sig-
nificantly limited aneurysm growth in mouse models of
AAA [98].  However, opposite effects of H19 have also
been reported, where knockdown of H19 using siRNA
suppressed proliferation and promoted apoptosis in hu-
man aortic VSMCs following the treatment of ox-LDL,
both in normoxic and hypoxic condition [99, 100]. The
contradictory effects of H19 on VSMCs observed in dif-
ferent studies may result from differences in the knock-
down strategy and the atherogenic stimuli used.
LncRNA MALAT1 has also been shown to contribute
to vascular diseases. In VSMCs, MALAT1 form a tern-
ary complex with histone deacetylase HDAC9 and the
chromatin-remodeling enzyme BRG1 to recruit PRC2
and inhibit gene expression of contractile proteins by
epigenetical silencing [101].  Targeting HDAC9-BRG1-
MALAT1 complex by deletion of Malat1 or Hdac9
in vivo restores contractile protein gene expression, im-
proves aortic mural architecture, and inhibits experi-
mental aneurysm growth in Fbn1C1039G/+  (Marfan
syndrome) mouse model.
LncRNAs in lipid metabolism
LncLSTR (liver-specific triglyceride regulator) is a mouse
lncRNA predominantly expressed in liver, but no human
orthologue was found. Mice with liver-specific depletion
of lncLSTR exhibit a marked reduction in plasma trigly-
ceride (TG) levels through clearance of TG by ApoC2-
mediated lipoprotein lipase activation. Interestingly,
lncLSTR doesn’t  regulate ApoC2 through a  cell-
autonomous mechanism. It was found lncLSTR regulates 
expression of Cyp8b1, a rate-limiting enzyme in bile acid
biosynthesis, by interacting with RNA-binding protein
TDP-43 to reduce TDP-43 occupancy and inhibition of
the Cyp8b1 promoter. The change in bile pool compos-
ition by Cyp8b1 alters the activity of bile acid receptor
FXR in liver, leading to induction of ApoC2 genes, an im-
portant component of very low-density lipoproteins and
chylomicrons. Moreover, FXR deficiency did not com-
pletely block the lipid-lowing effects of lncLSTR depletion,
which indicated the interaction between lncLSTR and
TDP-43 might have additional molecular and physio-
logical functions [102].  Importantly, lncLSTR not only
plays a unique role in TG metabolism, but also exhibits
tissue- and species-specific characteristics of lncRNAs.
LeXis (liver-expressed LXR induced sequence) is a
conserved, liver-enriched lncRNA that is robustly in-
duced by high cholesterol diet and activation of liver X
receptor (LXR).  LeXis inhibits cholesterol biosynthesis
by acting as an important conduit between the nutrient-
sensing nuclear receptor liver X receptor and the master
cholesterol regulator SREBP2. LeXis reduces cholesterol
synthesis by interacting with and affecting the DNA in-
teractions of RALY, a heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein
that acts as a transcriptional cofactor for cholesterol bio-
synthetic genes in the mouse liver [103]. Notably, a gene
therapy utilizing AAV8.hTBG.LeXis significantly reduced
atherosclerotic burden in Ldlr−/− mice [104].
MeXis (macrophage-expressed LXR-induced sequence),
a conserved and macrophage-enriched lncRNAs, is an
amplifier of LXR-dependent transcription of the gene
Abca1, a critical regulator of cholesterol efflux. MeXis ex-
pression is markedly induced by physiologic lipid signals,
such as oxidized or acetylated LDL, and LXR activation.
MeXis−/− mice show reduced Abca1 expression in a
tissue-selective manner in response to Western diet, and
MeXis is required for maximal Abca1 expression in the
face of macrophage cholesterol loading. MeXis modulates
nearby gene Abca1 expression through interacting with
and guiding promoter binding of the transcriptional coac-
tivator DDX17. Furthermore, loss of MeXis in mouse
bone marrow cells alters chromosome architecture at the
Abca1 locus, impairs cellular responses to cholesterol
overload, and accelerates the development of atheroscler-
osis, supporting role of macrophage MeXis in Abca1-me-
diated cholesterol efflux and atherosclerosis development
[105]. Table 5 summarized lncRNAs that are implicated in
the development of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
diseases.
LncRNAs in cardiac development
LncRNA Bvht (Braveheart),  transcribed from a regula-
tory locus located on mouse chromosome 18, has spe-
cific expression pattern during the mouse embryonic
stem cells (ESC) differentiation and cardiac lineage
Page 9
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 9 of 16
commitment. The depletion of Bvht using short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) results in failure to promote a MESP1-
driven gene expression program because Bvht regulates
upstream of Mesp1. Bvht has also been revealed to react
to SUZ12, a core component of PRC2, a complex that
has histone methyltransferase activity and mediates tran-
scriptional repression. Therefore, Bvht is thought to play
a critical role in mediating gene expression in the devel-
oping heart [106].  Linc1405 (Large intergenic non-
coding RNAs-1405) was also shown to be involved in
regulation of Mesp1 expression. Eomes, a transcription
factor participating in the control of developmental pro-
gression, was recruited to Mesp1 promotor by Linc1405.
Meanwhile, it has been shown that the Linc1405/Eomes
complex united WDR5 and GCN5 to activate Mesp1 in
primitive streak, thereby promoting cardiac mesoderm
specification and cardiogenesis [107].
Like Bvht,  CARMEN (Cardiac mesoderm enhancer-
associated noncoding RNA), a lncRNA overlapping with
the miR143/miR145 locus, also interacts with EZH2 and
SUZ12 of the PRC2 complex. CARMEN knockdown
leads to inhibition of cardiac specification and differenti-
ation in cardiac precursor cells. CARMEN silencing also
represses Bvht induction without affecting miR143/ 
miR145 expression, indicating that CARMEN controls
upstream of Bvht. Moreover, CARMEN also regulates
the expression of cardiac transcription factors and differ-
entiation makers, inclusive of GATA4, NKX2.5, TBX5,
MYH6, MYH7, and TNNI [108].
Another lncRNA Fendrr (Fetal-lethal non-coding de-
velopmental regulatory RNA), which is restricted to the
caudal end of the lateral mesoderm, is located upstream
of and co-expressed with Foxf1. Fendrr was found to oc-
cupy the promoters of specific transcriptional factor
(Foxf1, Pitx2 and Irx3) by modulating PRC2 and TrxG/
MLL complexes, leading to increased level of
H3K27me3 and epigenetic silencing of these transcrip-
tion factor genes. Moreover, knockdown of Fendrr in
embryonic stem cells significantly increases the level of
H3K4me3 at the promoter of Gata6 and Nkx2–5, result-
ing in gene activation [109].
PITX2 expression is a critical factor that determines
left-right organ pattern and gut looping during develop-
ment. Several lncRNAs have been reported to control
PITX2 expression. PANCR (PITX2 adjacent noncoding
RNA) and PITX2 express coordinately during the car-
diogenic differentiation. Knockdown of PANCR decrease
the expression of  PITX2 in hESC-derived
Table 5 LncRNAs implicated in the development of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases
LncRNA Clinical Relevance Physiological/pathological impact  Mechanism involved
H19 [79, ↑ in VSMC of neointima
98–100] and AAA 
EC: Improved wound healing in diabetic rats
VSMC: promotes SMC apoptosis and development
of AAA 
EC: Hyperglycemia-induced reduction impaired angio-
genesis in diabetes through insulin PI3K-Akt pathway
VSMC: Regulate VSMC apoptosis through interaction
with HIF1α and sequential p53 stabilization
MALAT1 ↑ in VSMC and EC in
[81–83, response to stresses like
101] hypoxia or high glucose 
EC: Deletion delayed vessel extension in the retina
revascularization, and reduced blood flow recovery
after hindlimb ischemia
VSMC: Deletion restores contractile protein gene
expression, improves aortic mural architecture, and
inhibits experimental aneurysm growth 
EC: Inhibit cell cycle progression through reducing the
S-phase cyclins while increasing the cell cycle inhibitory
genes P21 and P27kip1
ANRIL Adjacent to 9p21.3 CAD VSMC: Deleting the risk haplotype rescues VSMC
[95, 96] risk locus  stability 
VSMC: regulated cell proliferation and senescence of
VSMCs either by a scaffold, guiding effector-proteins to
chromatin, or by regulating miR-181a/Sirt1
MEG3 Downregulated with EC: Deletion results in a proangiogenic effect
[85–87] stroke and diabetic retina 
EC: Deletion upregulate Notch VEGF pathway-related
genes
NEXN- Reduced in arterial
AS1 [88] plaques 
NEXN plays a protective role against development of EC: inhibit endothelial activation and monocyte
vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques and  recruitment via the TLR4/NF-κB–mediated pathway
atherosclerosis
MANTIS
[89, 90] 
Induced by disturbed
flow;
Reduced in arterial
plaques 
EC: statins mediate their positive effects through the EC: flow sensitive, limit endothelial ICAM-1 expression
MANTIS  by reducing the binding of the BRG1 at the ICAM-1
promoter
LncLSTR
[102] 
LncLSTR deletion reduces plasma triglyceride levels
by increasing hepatic expression of lipoprotein
ApoC2 
Regulate expression of Cyp8b1, which alters the activity
of bile acid receptor FXR in liver, leading to induction
of ApoC2 genes
LeXis
[103,
104] 
Reduce hepatic cholesterol biosynthesis, serum
cholesterol and atherosclerotic lesion 
Inhibit cholesterol biosynthesis as a conduit between
LXR and SREBP2
MeXis
[105] 
Deletion in mouse bone marrow cells impairs
cellular responses to cholesterol overload, and
accelerates atherosclerosis 
Modulate nearby gene Abca1 expression through
interacting with and guiding promoter binding of the
transcriptional coactivator DDX17
Page 10
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 10 of 16
cardiomyocytes, suggesting that PITX2 expression re-
quire PANCR [110, 111]. Another lncRNA Playrr (Pitx2
locus-asymmetric regulated RNA),  transcribed from
right-specific enhancer element 926 (e926), is expressed
on the right side and repressed by Pitx2 and Playrr and
Pitx2 were found to exhibit mutual antagonism. These
genes are parts of topologically associating domain
(TAD). Conformational changes which alter the distance
between the Pitx2 and Playrr loci modulate their expres-
sion in this TAD, and CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor), a
sequence-specific scaffold protein, is required to this
interaction between Pitx2 and Playrr [112].
HAND2, a transcription factor playing a critical role
in cardiac development and reprogramming cardiac fi-
broblasts into cardiomyocytes, was found to be regu-
lated by lncRNAs Upperhand and Handdown, two
lncRNAs that were transcribed from upstream and
downstream of Hand2 DNA locus, respectively.
Upperhand,  also named as Uph or Hand2os1,  is a
cardiac-enriched lncRNA that shares a bidirectional
promoter with Hand2, has been shown to be essential
for the transcription of Hand2.  Anderson et al. re-
vealed that Uph regulates the expression of Hand2
through recruiting GATA4 to interact with Uph-
HAND2 super-enhancer. Knockout of lncRNA Uph
locus resulted in congenital heart defects and peri-
natal lethality in mice, demonstrating the essential
role of Uph-Hand2 regulatory partnership in cardiac
development [113].  On the other hand, another
lncRNA locus Handdown (also named as Hdn),  lo-
cated 7.2 kb downstream of Hand2, is active in early
cardiac cells. The transcriptional activity of Hdn
locus, but not Hdn transcript itself, suppresses Hand2
expression and is essential for murine development
[113–115].
Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is one of the most com-
mon congenital heart diseases, characterized by de-
fective ventricular septum and irregular cardiomyocyte
differentiation, leading to the narrowing of right ven-
tricular outflow tract (RVOT).  Wang et al. reported
that increased cardiac tissue (RVOT) levels of HA117,
a lncRNA known to have anti-differentiation function,
is associated with poorer McGoon ratio, Nakata
index, and left ventricular end-diastolic volume index
(LVEDVI) in patients with TOF [116].  In addition,
patients with higher levels of HA117 had longer car-
diopulmonary bypass (CPB) time, ICU stay and
poorer percentage improvement in SpO2 at 6 months
after surgery. Although the functional contribution of
HA117 to the pathogenesis of TOF remains unknown,
Wang et al. proposed that HA117 could serve as a
prognostic biomarker for TOF [116]. Table 6 summa-
rizes lncRNAs that are involved in the development
of cardiovascular system. 
LncRNAs in cardiac regeneration
LncRNA CAREL (cardiac regeneration-related lncRNA),
a lncRNA that was continuously upregulated in the post-
natal heart in parallel with the loss of regenerative cap-
acity, was found to suppress cardiomyocyte division and
proliferation by functioning as a ceRNA for miR-296.
MiR-296 suppresses the expression of Trp53inp1, a pro-
tein known to repress the proliferation in neural stem
cell [117], as well as Itm2a, a protein essential for chon-
drogenic cellular differentiation [118].  Low expression
levels of CAREL increases miR-296, thereby repressing
the levels of anti-proliferative Trp53inp1 and Itm2a pro-
teins, leading to the regeneration and differentiation of
cardiomyocytes both in vitro and in vivo. Myh6-driving
cardiomyocyte-specific CARE trans-genic (TG) mice had
lower cardiac regenerative capacity, which was rescued
by miR-296 [119].
CPR (cardiomyocyte proliferation regulator) is a
cardiac-restricted lncRNA that shows significant upregu-
lation in adult than in embryonic mouse heart [120].
The percentage of EdU, pH 3 and Aurora B-positive
CMs was significantly increased in the CPR KO neonatal
mice, indicating the deletion of CPR promoted postnatal
CM proliferation. By contrast, neonatal cardiomyocyte
proliferation and cardiac regeneration were significantly
suppressed in transgenic mice with cardiac-specific over-
expression of CPR (CPR Tg). Although the gross morph-
ology of CPR Tg mouse heart was practically identical to
that in WT, the biomarkers of cardiac hypertrophy, in-
cluding ANF (atrial natriuretic factor) and β-MHC (β
myosin heavy chain) were substantially upregulated in
CPR Tg, compared to WT control, mouse heart. These
results suggest that overexpressing lncRNA CPR induce
cardiac hypertrophic response instead of the CM prolif-
eration in adult mice. Mechanistically, CPR was found to
function by targeting minichromosome maintenance 3
(Mcm3),  an initiator of DNA replication and cell cycle
progression, thereby suppressing cardiomyocyte prolifer-
ation [120, 121].  CPR inhibits MCM3 transcription by
directly interacting with and recruiting DNMT3A
(DNA-methyltransferase 3A) at Mcm3 promoter, leading
to hypermethylation and suppressed Mcm3 promoter ac-
tivity [120].
NR_045363, a mice ortholog lncRNA of human
LOC101927497, was remarkably conserved in other
mammals and birds during neonatal cardiac regener-
ation. The overexpression of NR_045363 was found in
the period of embryonic and neonatal stages and grad-
ually reduced from childhood to adulthood. LncRNA
NR_045363 promotes CM proliferation and cardiac re-
generation by sponging miR-216a, a negative regulator
of JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway [122].
In another study, comparative RNA-Seq analyses on fetal
and normal adult human heart identified lncRNA
Page 11
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 11 of 16
Table 6 LncRNAs involved in cardiovascular development
LncRNA Physiological/pathological impact
Bvht [106] Bvht is essential for promoting ESC differentiation to cardiovascular cell fate
Linc1405 [107] Participate in developmental process, activate primitive streak differentiation.
CARMEN [108]
Fendrr [109] 
Inhibit the expression of Bvht to control the cardiac differentiation, mediate the
cardiac transcriptional factors, play roles in cardiac specification and homeostasis
Regulate histone modifier complexes, restrict the caudal end of the lateral
mesoderm formation
PANCR [110,
111] 
Indirect but necessary to activate CM differentiation
PLAYRR [112]
Upperhand
(Uph) [113] 
Reprogramming cardiac fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes
Handdown Reprogramming cardiac fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes
(Hdn) [113–115]
HA117 [116] Anti-differentiation function in leukemia and Hirschsprung’s disease 
Mechanism involved
1. Upstream of MesP1 to promote MesP1-
related gene expression
2. Modulating cardiovascular commitment
through interacting with PRC2
1. Recruit Eomes to bind on MesP1
promotor
1. Upstream of Bvht to function with EZH2
and SUZ12
1. Downstream modulate Foxf1
2. Occupy the Foxf1, Pitx2 and Irx3
promotors to reduce the genes expression
1. Inhibit the promoter of Gata6 and Nkx2–5
1. Coordinately improve the cardiogenic
differentiation with PITX2C
1. Act as PITX2C exhibit mutual antagonism
1. Upregulate the expression of HAND2
1. Interact with Uph to regulate HAND2
level
1. Regulate the neighboring gene, DPF3 and
RGS6
2. Hypothesis as a biomarker for TOF
NONHSAG007671,  or CRRL (cardiomyocyte regeneration-
related lncRNA), as a novel mediator of CM regeneration.
CRRL is highly conserved across species, including human,
chimp, mouse and rat. Loss of CRRL significantly attenuated
post-MI LV remodeling and fibrosis compared to control.
Knockdown of CRRL in vivo enhanced cardiac function and
activated CM proliferation, but not hypertrophy, after myo-
cardial infarction. Mechanistically, CRRL acts as a ceRNA by
sponging miR-199a-3p, thereby increasing the expression
levels of Hopx, a miR-199a-3p target gene that plays a critical
role in repressing CM proliferation [123].  Using a similar
approach, the same group identified another CM prolifera-
tion regulator lncRNA ECRAR (Endogenous cardiac
regeneration-associated regulator). Overexpression of ECRAR
increased the number of EdU, pH 3, aurora B-positive cardi-
omyocytes in both postnatal and adult rat hearts after 14
days of the MI surgery, suggesting that ECRAR modulated
CM proliferation and post-MI regeneration without causing
hypertrophy. ECRAR promotes CM proliferation by direct
binding with and increasing the phosphorylation of ERK1/2,
a critical mediator of cell cycle progression. In addition, fur-
ther analysis revealed that E2F1 transcriptionally upregulates
ECRAR.  Therefore, E2F1-ECRAR-ERK1/2 form a positive
feedback loop to drive CM proliferation [124].
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling has been
shown to be essential for CM proliferation and cardiac
regeneration [125, 126],  Li et al. discovered that Sirt1
antisense lncRNA was highly upregulated in cardiomyo-
cytes following IGF 1 treatment [127].  Sirt1 antisense
lncRNA is highly expressed in the embryonic day 16.5 
(E16.5) CMs and sharply decreases from embryonic
heart to postnatal heart. Overexpression of Sirt1 anti-
sense lncRNA promotes the proliferation of CMs, while
depletion of Sirt1 antisense lncRNA represses CM prolif-
eration. Mechanistically, Sirt1 antisense lncRNA stabi-
lizes Sirt1 mRNA by direct binding with the 3’UTR
region of Sirt1 mRNA [127];  moderately increased
SIRT1 levels then promotes CM proliferation and car-
diac regeneration.
AZIN2-sv, a splice variant of AZIN2 (Antizyme inhibitor
2), is highly expressed in adult, compared to fetal, human
heart [128]. Li et al. showed that AZIN2-sv repressed the
proliferation of cardiomyocytes both in vitro and in vivo
and the loss of AZIN2-sv stimulated the CMs proliferation
and preserved cardiac function in post-MI mouse heart.
Moreover, AZIN2-sv acts as a ceRNA for miR-214, a
miRNA which negatively regulated the expression of
PTEN (Phosphatase and tensin homolog). PTEN, a tumor
suppressor that inhibits Akt/PKB signaling pathway, was
also directly interacted with and stabilized by AZIN2-sv.
Thus, the silence of AZIN2-sv promotes CM proliferation
and cardiac regeneration through direct and indirect
modulation of PTEN/Akt/PKB signaling pathway [128].
LncRNAs shown to be involved in the process of cardiac
regeneration are summarized in Table 7.
LncRNAs as biomarkers for cardiovascular
diseases
The potential value of lncRNAs as diagnostic biomarkers
has been widely explored. Although lncRNAs are not as
Page 12
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 12 of 16
Table 7 LncRNAs shown to be involved in the process of cardiac regeneration
LncRNA Target Physiological/pathological impact  Mechanism involved
CAREL [119] MiR-296 Repress the cardiac regeneration and differentiation A sponge for miR-296, repress miRNA-296, following by activate
Trp53inp1 and Itm2a
CPR [120, 121] DNMT3A Induce cardiac hypertrophic response instead of the Interact with DNMT3A to repress the level or MCM3
CM proliferation
NR_045363 [122] MiR-
216a 
Activate neonatal cardiac regeneration Promote JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway
CRRL [123]  MiR- Regulating CM proliferation
199a-3p 
Protect Hopx from degeneration of CRRL
ECRAR [124]  Modulated CM proliferation and post-MI rehabilita- Promote the expression of cyclin D1, cyclin E1, and E2F1
tion without causing hypertrophy proteins via ERK1/2 pathway
Sirt1 antisense
lncRNA [127] 
Sirt1 Trigger the cardiac regeneration
mRNA 
Deacetylated and inhibited the activity of Nkx2.5, stabilized and
increase the Sirt1 mRNA expression
AZIN2-sv [128] MiR-214 Stimulate CM proliferation  Increase the level of PTEN and inhibit Akt/PKB signaling
pathway
abundant as other non-coding RNAs, the cell type- and
disease-specific expression pattern make them suitable
biomarker candidates. Because of the space limit, this re-
view only covers a few of the important and well-
established lncRNAs as biomarkers for CV diseases.
As mentioned earlier, ANRIL, located adjacent to the
9p21.3 risk locus, has been linked to increased CAD risk
in several GWAS. This increased CAD risk associated
with the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in this
region is independent of all known CAD risk factors
[93].  Interestingly, the risk alleles for atherosclerosis-
related phenotypes were consistently associated with a
low expression levels of ANRIL splice variant spanning
exons 1–2, but not exon 17–18, of ANRIL, suggesting
that different splicing variants of ANRIL might play dis-
tinct roles [129]. Indeed, different ANRIL splice variants
have distinct expression patterns in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from carriers of the risk
haplotype, which suggests that differential splicing or
transcript stability may confer different atherosclerosis
susceptibility [130]. In one study enrolling 414 patients
with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) treated by pri-
mary percutaneous coronary intervention, levels of hyp-
oxia inducible factor 1A antisense RNA 2, KCNQ1OT1,
MALAT1 and ANRIL in peripheral blood cells were sig-
nificantly altered with AMI. Among them, ANRIL and
KCNQ1OT1 improved the prediction of post-MI left
ventricular dysfunction in a multivariate, prognostic re-
gression model that includes demographic features, clin-
ical parameters, and cardiac biomarkers [131].
CoroMarker, also named as Aldo-Keto Reductase
Family 1 Member B1 Pseudogene 3, was discovered in a
cohort study of patients receiving diagnostic coronary
angiography for suspected CAD. CoroMarker from
PBMCs was found to be a good biomarker with high
sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of CAD. The
expression levels of CoroMarker showed positive 
correlation with genes involved in atherosclerosis. Of
note, CoroMarker was stable in plasma [132] and knock-
down of CoroMarker decreased the production of pro-
inflammatory cytokines from THP-1 monocytes [133].
However, the exact mechanisms via which CoroMarker
regulates monocytes or atherosclerosis remain to be
determined.
LIPCAR (long intergenic noncoding RNA predicting
cardiac remodeling), a mitochondria-derived lncRNA, is
highly expressed and consistently detectable in human
plasma samples. Plasma LIPCAR has been shown to be
an independent predictor for CAD and correlates with
the severity of clinical presentation (highest in patients
with AMI) [134].  In another study on patients with
AMI, LIPCAR was downregulated early after AMI but
upregulated during later stages, suggesting its role in
chronic heart failure. Consistent with this observation,
plasma LIPCAR level is elevated even more in CAD pa-
tients with heart failure. In addition, LIPCAR expression
level is associated with future maladaptive cardiac re-
modeling in patients who experienced an episode of
AMI. Of note, LIPCAR is independently associated with
cardiovascular mortality in patients with chronic heart
failure, regardless of the pathogenesis [135]. The mech-
anism, however, underlying the correlation between LIP-
CAR and CAD/AMI remains unclear.
LncRNA GAS5 was significantly increased in the
plaque of atherosclerosis patients compared to normal
people [136].  However, the expression level of plasma
lncRNA GAS5 was significantly lower in patients with
CAD. GAS5 decreased the level of p-mTOR without
change of total mTOR in human coronary artery endo-
thelial cells, which is an important initiator of pro-
inflammatory response of monocytes/macrophages
[137].  Furthermore, gain- and loss- of function studies
showed that GAS5 modulates macrophages and ECs
apoptosis in vitro. Interestingly, these effects of GAS5 on
Page 13
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 13 of 16
Table 8 LncRNAs as biomarkers for cardiovascular diseases
LncRNA Clinical Application Physiological/pathological impact  Mechanism involved
CoroMarker
[132, 133] 
Diagnosis of CAD  Decrease pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion from Unknown
THP-1 monocytic cells
LIPCAR [135] Prediction of cardiac
remodeling 
Associated with future development of cardiac
remodeling 
Unknown
GAS5 [136–138] ↑ in arterial plaques Modulate macrophages and ECs apoptosis after ox- Unknown
↓ in plasma of CAD patients LDL stimulation
SENCR [139–
141] 
Diagnosis of early onset CAD: Regulation of commitment from pluripotent cells
↓ in circulating ECs  and angiogenic capacity of EC
↑ in monocytes 
Regulate myocardin gene regulation to
stabilize the contractile state of VSMCs
DKFZP434I0714 Prediction of adverse CV
[144]  events in uremic patients 
Modulate stress-induced EC apoptosis, endothelial Unknown
dysfunction, and vascular inflammation
EC apoptosis is mediated by macrophage derived
exomes after oxLDL stimulation, which demonstrated
the interplay of macrophage and EC during atheroscler-
osis development [138].
SENCR (Smooth muscle and Endothelial cell enriched
migration/differentiation-associated long NonCoding
RNA) is highly expressed in ECs, SMCs and aortic tis-
sues (vascular-enriched lncRNA) [139].  SENCR, local-
ized mainly in the cytoplasm, stabilizes the contractile
state of VSMCs by increasing myocardin expression
[139].  Moreover, it was found that SENCR contributes
to endothelial commitment in pluripotent cells and an-
giogenic capacity of ECs. SENCR expression was dimin-
ished in vascular ECs derived from superficial forearm
veins of patients with critical limb ischemia and pre-
mature coronary artery disease [140]. Using FISH-Flow
assay, SENCR is downregulated in circulating ECs, but
upregulated in monocytes, in early-onset CAD patients
(EOCAD). Moreover, the combination of four molecular
markers (intra-circulating EC SENCR, intra-monocyte
SENCR, surface/intra-circulating EC CD146 and sur-
face/intra-monocyte CD14) along with diabetes mellitus
may serve as the early diagnostic tool for EOCAD [141].
Cardiovascular (CV) diseases are the major cause of
morbidity and mortality in patients with end-stage renal
disease (ESRD), accounting for nearly 50% of deaths in
this population [142, 143]. In a cohort of patients with
chronic kidney disease, end-stage renal disease (ESRD)
with or without cardiovascular (CV) event, circulating
lncRNA expression profiles discriminate between ESRD
patients with and without an adverse CV event. Among
the differentially expressed lncRNAs, eight plasma
lncRNAs were identified as potential predictors of ad-
verse CV outcomes in uremic patients, and lncRNA
DKFZP434I0714 was confirmed as an independent pre-
dictor of adverse CV outcomes in patients with ESRD.
LncRNA DKFZP434I0714 is not dysregulated in human
failing heart, but it is shown to regulate endothelial func-
tion. Gain- and loss- of function studies showed lncRNA
DKFZP434I0714 modulates stress-induced EC apoptosis, 
endothelial dysfunction, and vascular inflammation,
which are hallmarks of vascular complications associated
with uremia [144]. Table 8 summarizes the examples of
lncRNAs that have been shown to be potential bio-
markers for cardiovascular diseases.
Even though the cellular and pathological specificity of
lncRNAs make them as suitable biomarkers, using
lncRNAs as clinical biomarkers is potentially limited by
the difficulties in their isolation and quantification. RNA
is very difficult to isolate in reasonable quantities from
acellular bodily fluids such as plasma or serum. In
addition, the high cost and low throughput associated
with RNA processing and quantification also limits the
application of lncRNA as a biomarker. For example, it
seems unlikely that lncRNA could replace cardiac tropo-
nins in the diagnosis of AMI, as clinical tests for cardiac
troponins are relatively cheap, fast and well-validated.
Therefore, the potential usage of lncRNAs as biomarkers
is more likely to be prognostic, rather than diagnostic, in
cardiovascular diseases.
Conclusions
Emerging evidence indicates the important roles of
lncRNAs in the complex regulatory network of cardio-
vascular development and diseases. It has been well-
demonstrated that many of these lncRNAs could be uti-
lized as novel therapeutic targets and/or biomarkers for
diagnosis/prognosis for cardiovascular diseases including
cardiac hypertrophy, myocardial infarction, heart failure
and atherosclerosis. It will require extensive efforts, how-
ever, to refine the approaches of modulating lncRNA ex-
pression in vivo and to improve/standardize the
quantitative assays for lncRNA biomarkers to make clin-
ical translation possible.
Acknowledgements
None.
Authors’ contributions
C.F.Y., Y.C.C., C.Y.L. C.F.H. W.T.C. and K.C.Y. drafted, revised and approved the
manuscript.
Page 14
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 14 of 16
Funding
This work was funded by Taiwan Ministry of Science Technology Grants 103–
2320-B-002-068-MY2 (KCY), 105–2628-B-002 -042-MY4, 108–2314-B-002-199-
MY3 (KCY);; Taiwan National Health Research Institute Career Development
Grant NHRI-EX104-10418SC and Innovative Research Grant NHRI-EX109-(KCY);
a CRC Translational Research Grant from the Institute of Biomedical Sciences
at Academia Sinica, Taiwan IBMS-CRC108-P03 (KCY) and grants from National
Taiwan University Hospital NTUH.109-T15 (PNT), 106-P02, 105-CGN01,
UN106–026, 106-N3740, VN106–12, 107-T02, UN107–019, 107-N4062, VN107–
03, 108-T16, VN108–06, NTUH.108-P04, 108-N4198, 108-S4247, 108-EDN03
(KCY). These funding agencies had no role in the preparation of the manu-
script or decision to publish.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Author details
1Graduate Institute and Department of Pharmacology, National Taiwan
University School of Medicine, No.1, Sec. 1, Ren-Ai Rd, 1150R Taipei, Taiwan.
2Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, No.1, Sec. 1, Ren-Ai Rd, 1150R Taipei, Taiwan. 3Division of
Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, E-Da Dachang Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. 4Department of Medicine, I-Shou University School of
Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. 5Department of Emergency Medicine, National
Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
Received: 5 November 2019 Accepted: 27 March 2020
References
1.  Hannenhalli S, et al. Transcriptional genomics associates FOX transcription
factors with human heart failure. Circulation. 2006;114(12):1269–76.
2.  Kittleson MM, et al. Identification of a gene expression profile that
differentiates between ischemic and nonischemic cardiomyopathy.
Circulation. 2004;110(22):3444–51.
3.  Margulies KB, et al. Mixed messages: transcription patterns in failing and
recovering human myocardium. Circ Res. 2005;96(5):592–9.
4.  Matkovich SJ, et al. Reciprocal regulation of myocardial microRNAs and
messenger RNA in human cardiomyopathy and reversal of the microRNA
signature by biomechanical support. Circulation. 2009;119(9):1263–71.
5.  Ramani R, et al. A micro-ribonucleic acid signature associated with recovery
from assist device support in 2 groups of patients with severe heart failure.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58(22):2270–8.
6.  Mattick JS. The central role of RNA in human development and cognition.
FEBS Lett. 2011;585(11):1600–16.
7.  Mercer TR, Dinger ME, Mattick JS. Long non-coding RNAs: insights into
functions. Nat Rev Genet. 2009;10(3):155–9.
8.  Esteller M. Non-coding RNAs in human disease. Nat Rev Genet. 2011;12(12):
861–74.
9.  Navarro P, et al. Tsix-mediated epigenetic switch of a CTCF-flanked region
of the Xist promoter determines the Xist transcription program. Genes Dev.
2006;20(20):2787–92.
10. Gupta RA, et al. Long non-coding RNA HOTAIR reprograms chromatin state
to promote cancer metastasis. Nature. 2010;464(7291):1071–6.
11. Huarte M, et al. A large intergenic noncoding RNA induced by p53
mediates global gene repression in the p53 response. Cell. 2010;142(3):
409–19.
12. Guttman M, et al. lincRNAs act in the circuitry controlling pluripotency and
differentiation. Nature. 2011;477(7364):295–300.
13. Hung T, et al. Extensive and coordinated transcription of noncoding RNAs
within cell-cycle promoters. Nat Genet. 2011;43(7):621–9. 
14. Faghihi MA, et al. Expression of a noncoding RNA is elevated in Alzheimer's
disease and drives rapid feed-forward regulation of beta-secretase. Nat Med.
2008;14(7):723–30.
15. Johnson R. Long non-coding RNAs in Huntington's disease
neurodegeneration. Neurobiol Dis. 2012;46(2):245–54.
16. Calin GA, et al. Ultraconserved regions encoding ncRNAs are altered in
human leukemias and carcinomas. Cancer cell. 2007;12(3):215–29.
17. Yildirim E, et al. Xist RNA is a potent suppressor of hematologic cancer in
mice. Cell. 2013;152(4):727–42.
18. Garding A, et al. Epigenetic upregulation of lncRNAs at 13q14.3 in leukemia
is linked to the In Cis downregulation of a gene cluster that targets NF-kB.
PLoS Genet. 2013;9(4):e1003373.
19. Zhao J, et al. Polycomb proteins targeted by a short repeat RNA to the
mouse X chromosome. Science. 2008;322(5902):750–6.
20. Beltran M, et al. A natural antisense transcript regulates Zeb2/Sip1 gene
expression during Snail1-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Genes
Dev. 2008;22(6):756–69.
21. Ogawa Y, Sun BK, Lee JT. Intersection of the RNA interference and X-
inactivation pathways. Science. 2008;320(5881):1336–41.
22. Carrieri C, et al. Long non-coding antisense RNA controls Uchl1 translation
through an embedded SINEB2 repeat. Nature. 2012;491(7424):454–7.
23. Wang KC, Chang HY. Molecular mechanisms of long noncoding RNAs. Mol
Cell. 2011;43(6):904–14.
24. Yang KC, et al. Deep RNA sequencing reveals dynamic regulation of
myocardial noncoding RNAs in failing human heart and remodeling with
mechanical circulatory support. Circulation. 2014;129(9):1009–21.
25. Li H, et al. Identification of cardiac long non-coding RNA profile in human
dilated cardiomyopathy. Cardiovasc Res. 2018;114(5):747–58.
26. Saddic LA, et al. The Long Noncoding RNA Landscape of the Ischemic
Human Left Ventricle. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2017;10:1.
27. Ounzain S, et al. Genome-wide profiling of the cardiac transcriptome after
myocardial infarction identifies novel heart-specific long non-coding RNAs.
Eur Heart J. 2015;36(6):353–68a.
28. Zangrando J, et al. Identification of candidate long non-coding RNAs in
response to myocardial infarction. BMC Genomics. 2014;15:460.
29. Viereck J, et al. Long noncoding RNA Chast promotes cardiac remodeling.
Sci Transl Med. 2016;8(326):326ra22.
30. Wang Z, et al. The long noncoding RNA Chaer defines an epigenetic
checkpoint in cardiac hypertrophy. Nat Med. 2016;22(10):1131–9.
31. Nakamura M, Sadoshima J. Mechanisms of physiological and pathological
cardiac hypertrophy. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2018;15(7):387–407.
32. Han P, et al. A long noncoding RNA protects the heart from pathological
hypertrophy. Nature. 2014;514(7520):102–6.
33. Luo Y, et al. The mechanism of myocardial hypertrophy regulated by the
interaction between mhrt and myocardin. Cell Signal. 2018;43:11–20.
34. Wang K, et al. The long noncoding RNA CHRF regulates cardiac
hypertrophy by targeting miR-489. Circ Res. 2014;114(9):1377–88.
35. Wo Y, et al. Long non-coding RNA CHRF facilitates cardiac hypertrophy
through regulating Akt3 via miR-93. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2018;35:29–36.
36. Zhu XH, et al. LncRNA MIAT enhances cardiac hypertrophy partly through
sponging miR-150. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016;20(17):3653–60.
37. Li Z, et al. Long noncoding RNA myocardial infarctionassociated transcript is
associated with the microRNA1505p/P300 pathway in cardiac hypertrophy.
Int J Mol Med. 2018;42(3):1265–72.
38. Li Y, et al. LncRNA myocardial infarction-associated transcript (MIAT)
contributed to cardiac hypertrophy by regulating TLR4 via miR-93. Eur J
Pharmacol. 2018;818:508–17.
39. Liu, L., et al., The H19 long noncoding RNA is a novel negative regulator of
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Cardiovasc Res, 2016. 111(1): p. 56–65.
40. Lai Y, et al. HOTAIR functions as a competing endogenous RNA to regulate
PTEN expression by inhibiting miR-19 in cardiac hypertrophy. Mol Cell
Biochem. 2017;432(1–2):179–87.
41. Jiang F, Zhou X, Huang J. Long non-coding RNA-ROR mediates the
reprogramming in cardiac hypertrophy. PLoS One. 2016;11(4):e0152767.
42. Zhang Q, et al. Long noncoding RNA MAGI1-IT1 regulates cardiac
hypertrophy by modulating miR-302e/DKK1/Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
pathway. J Cell Physiol. 2019.
43. Wu H, et al. Long noncoding RNA Meg3 regulates cardiomyocyte apoptosis
in myocardial infarction. Gene Ther. 2018;25(8):511–23.
44. Lv L, et al. The lncRNA Plscr4 controls cardiac hypertrophy by regulating
miR-214. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2018;10:387–97.
Page 15
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 15 of 16
45. Wang Y, et al. SP1-SYNE1-AS1-miR-525-5p feedback loop regulates Ang-II-
induced cardiac hypertrophy. J Cell Physiol. 2019;234(8):14319–29.
46. Chen Y, et al. The long noncoding RNA XIST protects cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy by targeting miR-330-3p. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018;
505(3):807–15.
47. Xiao L, et al. The long noncoding RNA XIST regulates cardiac hypertrophy
by targeting miR-101. J Cell Physiol. 2019;234(8):13680–92.
48. Qu X, et al. MIAT is a pro-fibrotic Long non-coding RNA governing cardiac
fibrosis in post-infarct myocardium. Sci Rep. 2017;7:42657.
49. Prabhu SD, Frangogiannis NG. The biological basis for cardiac repair after
myocardial infarction: from inflammation to fibrosis. Circ Res. 2016;119(1):
91–112.
50. Liu CY, et al. LncRNA CAIF inhibits autophagy and attenuates myocardial
infarction by blocking p53-mediated myocardin transcription. Nat Commun.
2018;9(1):29.
51. Greco S, et al. Increased BACE1-AS long noncoding RNA and beta-amyloid
levels in heart failure. Cardiovasc Res. 2017;113(5):453–63.
52. Wang K, et al. CARL lncRNA inhibits anoxia-induced mitochondrial fission
and apoptosis in cardiomyocytes by impairing miR-539-dependent PHB2
downregulation. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3596.
53. Wang K, et al. APF lncRNA regulates autophagy and myocardial infarction
by targeting miR-188-3p. Nat Commun. 2015;6:6779.
54. Wang K, et al. The long noncoding RNA NRF regulates programmed
necrosis and myocardial injury during ischemia and reperfusion by
targeting miR-873. Cell Death Differ. 2016;23(8):1394–405.
55. Micheletti R, et al. The long noncoding RNA Wisper controls cardiac fibrosis
and remodeling. Sci Transl Med. 2017;9:395.
56. Piccoli MT, et al. Inhibition of the cardiac fibroblast-enriched lncRNA Meg3
prevents cardiac fibrosis and diastolic dysfunction. Circ Res. 2017;121(5):575–83.
57. Huang S, et al. Long noncoding RNA MALAT1 mediates cardiac fibrosis in
experimental postinfarct myocardium mice model. J Cell Physiol. 2019;
234(3):2997–3006.
58. Lu Y, et al. MicroRNA-328 contributes to adverse electrical remodeling in
atrial fibrillation. Circulation. 2010;122(23):2378–87.
59. Li Z, et al. Altered long non-coding RNA expression profile in rabbit atria
with atrial fibrillation: TCONS_00075467 modulates atrial electrical
remodeling by sponging miR-328 to regulate CACNA1C. J Mol Cell Cardiol.
2017;108:73–85.
60. Zhao ZH, et al. Long non-coding RNA MALAT1 functions as a mediator in
cardioprotective effects of fentanyl in myocardial ischemia-reperfusion
injury. Cell Biol Int. 2017;41(1):62–70.
61. Liu W, et al. High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) downregulates cardiac
transient outward potassium current (Ito) through downregulation of Kv4.2
and Kv4.3 channel transcripts and proteins. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010;49(3):438–
48.
62. Zhu P, et al. Long noncoding RNA MALAT1 downregulates cardiac transient
outward potassium current by regulating miR-200c/HMGB1 pathway. J Cell
Biochem. 2018;119(12):10239–49.
63. Long QQ, et al. Long Noncoding RNA Kcna2 Antisense RNA Contributes to
Ventricular Arrhythmias via Silencing Kcna2 in Rats With Congestive Heart
Failure. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:12.
64. Zhang Y, et al. Long non-coding RNA CCRR controls cardiac conduction via
regulating intercellular coupling. Nat Commun. 2018;9(1):4176.
65. Zhang Y, et al. LncRNA ZFAS1 as a SERCA2a inhibitor to cause intracellular
Ca(2+) overload and contractile dysfunction in a mouse model of
myocardial infarction. Circ Res. 2018;122(10):1354–68.
66. Chilley PM, et al. The POLARIS peptide of Arabidopsis regulates auxin
transport and root growth via effects on ethylene signaling. Plant Cell. 2006;
18(11):3058–72.
67. Bi P, et al. Control of muscle formation by the fusogenic micropeptide
myomixer. Science. 2017;356(6335):323–7.
68. Stein CS, et al. Mitoregulin: a lncRNA-encoded microprotein that supports
mitochondrial Supercomplexes and respiratory efficiency. Cell Rep. 2018;
23(13):3710–20 e8.
69. Magny EG, et al. Conserved regulation of cardiac calcium uptake by
peptides encoded in small open reading frames. Science. 2013;341(6150):
1116–20.
70. Nelson BR, et al. A peptide encoded by a transcript annotated as long
noncoding RNA enhances SERCA activity in muscle. Science. 2016;351(6270):
271–5. 
71. Anderson DM, et al. A micropeptide encoded by a putative long noncoding
RNA regulates muscle performance. Cell. 2015;160(4):595–606.
72. Lusis AJ. Atherosclerosis. Nature. 2000;407(6801):233–41.
73. Braunwald E. Shattuck lecture--cardiovascular medicine at the turn of the
millennium: triumphs, concerns, and opportunities. N Engl J Med. 1997;
337(19):1360–9.
74. Ross R. Atherosclerosis--an inflammatory disease. N Engl J Med. 1999;340(2):
115–26.
75. Libby P. Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Nature. 2002;420(6917):868–74.
76. Singh KK, et al. Endothelial long non-coding RNAs regulated by oxidized
LDL. Mol Cell Biochem. 2017;431(1–2):139–49.
77. Singh KK, et al. A global profile of glucose-sensitive endothelial-expressed
long non-coding RNAs. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2016;94(9):1007–14.
78. Lustig O, et al. Expression of the imprinted gene H19 in the human fetus.
Mol Reprod Dev. 1994;38(3):239–46.
79. Kim DK, et al. H19, a developmentally regulated gene, is reexpressed in rat
vascular smooth muscle cells after injury. J Clin Invest. 1994;93(1):355–60.
80. Tao SC, et al. Extracellular vesicle-mimetic nanovesicles transport LncRNA-
H19 as competing endogenous RNA for the treatment of diabetic wounds.
Drug Deliv. 2018;25(1):241–55.
81. Michalik KM, et al. Long noncoding RNA MALAT1 regulates endothelial cell
function and vessel growth. Circ Res. 2014;114(9):1389–97.
82. Liu JY, et al. Pathogenic role of lncRNA-MALAT1 in endothelial cell
dysfunction in diabetes mellitus. Cell Death Dis. 2014;5:e1506.
83. Zhang X, et al. Long Non-Coding RNA Malat1 Regulates Angiogenesis in
Hindlimb Ischemia. Int J Mol Sci. 2018;19:6.
84. Liu J, et al. Downregulation of the Long non-coding RNA Meg3 promotes
angiogenesis after ischemic brain injury by activating notch signaling. Mol
Neurobiol. 2017;54(10):8179–90.
85. Boon RA, et al. Long noncoding RNA Meg3 controls endothelial cell aging
and function: implications for regenerative angiogenesis. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2016;68(23):2589–91.
86. Gordon FE, et al. Increased expression of angiogenic genes in the brains of
mouse meg3-null embryos. Endocrinology. 2010;151(6):2443–52.
87. Qiu GZ, et al. Long noncoding RNA-MEG3 is involved in diabetes mellitus-
related microvascular dysfunction. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016;
471(1):135–41.
88. Hu YW, et al. Long noncoding RNA NEXN-AS1 mitigates atherosclerosis by
regulating the actin-binding protein NEXN. J Clin Invest. 2019;129(3):1115–28.
89. Leisegang MS, et al. Long noncoding RNA MANTIS facilitates endothelial
Angiogenic function. Circulation. 2017;136(1):65–79.
90. Leisegang MS, et al. Pleiotropic effects of laminar flow and statins depend
on the Kruppel-like factor-induced lncRNA MANTIS. Eur Heart J. 2019;40(30):
2523–33.
91. Samani NJ, et al. Genomewide association analysis of coronary artery
disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(5):443–53.
92. Helgadottir A, et al. A common variant on chromosome 9p21 affects the
risk of myocardial infarction. Science. 2007;316(5830):1491–3.
93. McPherson R, et al. A common allele on chromosome 9 associated with
coronary heart disease. Science. 2007;316(5830):1488–91.
94. Myocardial Infarction Genetics, C, et al. Genome-wide association of early-
onset myocardial infarction with single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy
number variants. Nat Genet. 2009;41(3):334–41.
95. Holdt LM, et al. Alu elements in ANRIL non-coding RNA at chromosome
9p21 modulate atherogenic cell functions through trans-regulation of gene
networks. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(7):e1003588.
96. Tan P, et al. LncRNA-ANRIL inhibits cell senescence of vascular smooth
muscle cells by regulating miR-181a/Sirt1. Biochem Cell Biol. 2019.
97. Lo Sardo V, et al. Unveiling the role of the Most impactful cardiovascular
risk locus through haplotype editing. Cell. 2018;175(7):1796–810 e20.
98. Li DY, et al. H19 induces abdominal aortic aneurysm development and
progression. Circulation. 2018;138(15):1551–68.
99. Zhang L, et al. H19 knockdown suppresses proliferation and induces
apoptosis by regulating miR-148b/WNT/beta-catenin in ox-LDL -stimulated
vascular smooth muscle cells. J Biomed Sci. 2018;25(1):11.
100. Hou J, et al. Long noncoding RNA H19 upregulates vascular endothelial
growth factor a to enhance mesenchymal stem cells survival and
angiogenic capacity by inhibiting miR-199a-5p. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2018;
9(1):109.
Page 16
Yeh et al. Journal of Biomedical Science (2020) 27:48  Page 16 of 16
101. Lino Cardenas CL, et al. An HDAC9-MALAT1-BRG1 complex mediates
smooth muscle dysfunction in thoracic aortic aneurysm. Nat Commun.
2018;9(1):1009.
102. Li P, et al. A liver-enriched long non-coding RNA, lncLSTR, regulates
systemic lipid metabolism in mice. Cell Metab. 2015;21(3):455–67.
103. Sallam T, et al. Feedback modulation of cholesterol metabolism by the lipid-
responsive non-coding RNA LeXis. Nature. 2016;534(7605):124–8.
104. Tontonoz P, et al. Long noncoding RNA facilitated gene therapy reduces
atherosclerosis in a murine model of familial hypercholesterolemia.
Circulation. 2017;136(8):776–8.
105. Sallam T, et al. Transcriptional regulation of macrophage cholesterol efflux
and atherogenesis by a long noncoding RNA. Nat Med. 2018;24(3):304–12.
106. Klattenhoff CA, et al. Braveheart, a long noncoding RNA required for
cardiovascular lineage commitment. Cell. 2013;152(3):570–83.
107. Guo X, et al. A Linc1405/Eomes complex promotes cardiac mesoderm
specification and Cardiogenesis. Cell Stem Cell. 2018;22(6):893–908 e6.
108. Ounzain S, et al. CARMEN, a human super enhancer-associated long
noncoding RNA controlling cardiac specification, differentiation and
homeostasis. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015;89(Pt A):98–112.
109. Grote P, et al. The tissue-specific lncRNA Fendrr is an essential regulator of
heart and body wall development in the mouse. Dev Cell. 2013;24(2):206–14.
110. Banerjee P, et al. Long noncoding RNA RP11-380D23.2 drives distal-proximal
patterning of the lung by regulating PITX2 expression. Stem Cells. 2018;
36(2):218–29.
111. Gore-Panter SR, et al. PANCR, the PITX2 adjacent noncoding RNA, is
expressed in human left atria and regulates PITX2c expression. Circ
Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2016;9(1):e003197.
112. Welsh IC, et al. Chromatin architecture of the Pitx2 locus requires CTCF- and
Pitx2-dependent asymmetry that mirrors embryonic gut laterality. Cell Rep.
2015;13(2):337–49.
113. Anderson KM, et al. Transcription of the non-coding RNA upperhand
controls Hand2 expression and heart development. Nature. 2016;539(7629):
433–6.
114. Han X, et al. The lncRNA Hand2os1/Uph locus orchestrates heart
development through regulation of precise expression of Hand2.
Development. 2019;146:13.
115. Ritter N, et al. The lncRNA locus Handsdown regulates cardiac gene
programs and is essential for early mouse development. Dev Cell. 2019.
116. Wang Q, et al. Potential association of long noncoding RNA HA117 with
tetralogy of Fallot. Genes Dis. 2018;5(2):185–90.
117. Garg N, et al. microRNA-17-92 cluster is a direct Nanog target and controls
neural stem cell through Trp53inp1. EMBO J. 2013;32(21):2819–32.
118. Deleersnijder W, et al. Isolation of markers for chondro-osteogenic
differentiation using cDNA library subtraction. Molecular cloning and
characterization of a gene belonging to a novel multigene family of integral
membrane proteins. J Biol Chem. 1996;271(32):19475–82.
119. Cai B, et al. The Long noncoding RNA CAREL controls cardiac regeneration.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72(5):534–50.
120. Ponnusamy M, et al. Long noncoding RNA CPR (Cardiomyocyte
proliferation regulator) regulates Cardiomyocyte proliferation and cardiac
repair. Circulation. 2019;139(23):2668–84.
121. Thommes P, et al. Properties of the nuclear P1 protein, a mammalian
homologue of the yeast Mcm3 replication protein. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992;
20(5):1069–74.
122. Wang J, et al. A long noncoding RNA NR_045363 controls cardiomyocyte
proliferation and cardiac repair. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2019;127:105–14.
123. Chen G, et al. Loss of long non-coding RNA CRRL promotes cardiomyocyte
regeneration and improves cardiac repair by functioning as a competing
endogenous RNA. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2018;122:152–64.
124. Chen Y, et al. Long non-coding RNA ECRAR triggers post-natal myocardial
regeneration by activating ERK1/2 signaling. Mol Ther. 2019;27(1):29–45.
125. Kajstura J, et al. The IGF-1-IGF-1 receptor system modulates myocyte
proliferation but not myocyte cellular hypertrophy in vitro. Exp Cell Res.
1994;215(2):273–83.
126. Huang Y, et al. Igf signaling is required for Cardiomyocyte proliferation
during Zebrafish heart development and regeneration. PLoS One. 2013;8(6):
e67266.
127. Li B, et al. Sirt1 antisense Long noncoding RNA promotes Cardiomyocyte
proliferation by enhancing the stability of Sirt1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;
7(21):e009700. 
128. Li X, et al. Loss of AZIN2 splice variant facilitates endogenous cardiac
regeneration. Cardiovasc Res. 2018;114(12):1642–55.
129. Congrains A, et al. Genetic variants at the 9p21 locus contribute to
atherosclerosis through modulation of ANRIL and CDKN2A/B.
Atherosclerosis. 2012;220(2):449–55.
130. Holdt LM, et al. ANRIL expression is associated with atherosclerosis risk at
chromosome 9p21. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010;30(3):620–7.
131. Vausort M, Wagner DR, Devaux Y. Long noncoding RNAs in patients with
acute myocardial infarction. Circ Res. 2014;115(7):668–77.
132. Yang Y, et al. Plasma long non-coding RNA, CoroMarker, a novel biomarker
for diagnosis of coronary artery disease. Clin Sci (Lond). 2015;129(8):675–85.
133. Cai Y, et al. Circulating ‘lncRNA OTTHUMT00000387022’ from monocytes as
a novel biomarker for coronary artery disease. Cardiovasc Res. 2016;112(3):
714–24.
134. Zhang Z, et al. Increased plasma levels of lncRNA H19 and LIPCAR are
associated with increased risk of coronary artery disease in a Chinese
population. Sci Rep. 2017;7(1):7491.
135. Kumarswamy R, et al. Circulating long noncoding RNA, LIPCAR, predicts
survival in patients with heart failure. Circ Res. 2014;114(10):1569–75.
136. Chen L, et al. Global transcriptomic study of atherosclerosis development in
rats. Gene. 2016;592(1):43–8.
137. Yin Q, Wu A, Liu M. Plasma Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) GAS5 is a new
biomarker for coronary artery disease. Med Sci Monit. 2017;23:6042–8.
138. Chen L, et al. Exosomal lncRNA GAS5 regulates the apoptosis of
macrophages and vascular endothelial cells in atherosclerosis. PLoS One.
2017;12(9):e0185406.
139. Bell RD, et al. Identification and initial functional characterization of a
human vascular cell-enriched long noncoding RNA. Arterioscler Thromb
Vasc Biol. 2014;34(6):1249–59.
140. Boulberdaa M, et al. A role for the Long noncoding RNA SENCR in
commitment and function of endothelial cells. Mol Ther. 2016;24(5):978–90.
141. Ziaee S, et al. Non-invasive diagnosis of early-onset coronary artery disease
based on cell type-specific gene expression analyses. Biomed Pharmacother.
2018;108:1115–22.
142. Foley RN, Parfrey PS, Sarnak MJ. Clinical epidemiology of cardiovascular
disease in chronic renal disease. Am J Kidney Dis. 1998;32(5 Suppl 3):S112–9.
143. Go AS, et al. Chronic kidney disease and the risks of death, cardiovascular
events, and hospitalization. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(13):1296–305.
144. Lai CF, et al. Circulating long noncoding RNA DKFZP434I0714 predicts
adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with end-stage renal disease.
Int J Cardiol. 2019;277:212–9.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
