By City Clerk at 9:07 am, Jan 03, 2022 
MEMORIAL BUILDING
150 Concord Street
Framingham, MA 01702
TRAFFIC COMMISSION – Traffic Regulation Subcommittee 
AGENDA: January 5, 2022 
WILLIAM SEDEWITZ, CHAIR  LINCOLN LYNCH, VICE CHAIR 
DPW, 100 WESTERN AVE 
MARIO ALVAREZ | STEVE CROCI | BRINSLEY FULLER 
3:00 P.M. 
NICOLAS HEBERT | DEP. CHIEF FELIX TORRES | LT. HARRY WAREHAM 
SUBCOMMITTEE MEMBERS 
BRINSLEY FULLER, CHAIR | STEVE CROCI, VICE CHAIR | WILLIAM SEDEWITZ 
CALL TO ORDER
DISCUSSION
1. Regulation Schedules
a. Schedule 13 – School Zones
b. Other schedules being compiled 
APPROVAL OF MINUTES
December 15, 2021
ADJOURNMENT
Page 2
Schedule #
Schedule 1
Schedule 2
Schedule 3
Schedule 4
Schedule 5
Schedule 6
Schedule 7
Schedule 8
Schedule 9
Schedule 10
Schedule 11
Schedule 12
Schedule 13
Schedule 14
Schedule 15
Schedule 16
Schedule 17 
Schedule Name
Parking, Standing, & Stopping Restrictions
Resident Parking Sticker
Tow Zones
Disabled Parking
Taxicab Stands
Parking Fees
Parking Fines
Approved Traffic Signals
Stop Signs
Yield Signs
One Way Streets
Heavy Commercial Vehicles Prohibited
School Zones
Speed Regulations
Turns Only As Designated
U Turns Prohibited
No Turn On Red Signal 
Approved by Subcommittee Comments
11/17/2021 
In progress
10/6/2021
11/17/2021, 12/1/2021
10/20/2021 
Ready for subcommittee
12/15/2021 
In progress
10/20/2021
12/1/2021
Traffic Regulation Subcommitttee Meeting 1/5/2022
Page 3
[This page is intentionally left blank] 
Page 4
SCHEDULE 13 - SCHOOL ZONES
Street  School
Beacon St.
Beaver St.
Belknap Rd.
Brook St.
Dudley Rd.
Elm St.
Elm St.
Flagg Dr.
Flagg Dr.
Frost St.
Kendall Ave
Leland St.
Pleasant St.
Potter Rd.
Summer St.
Water St.
Water St.
Wheeler Ave. 
Juniper Hill?
Harmony Grove Elementary School
Brophy Elementary School
Walsh Middle School
Barbieri Elementary School
Cameron Middle School
Stapleton Elementary School
Fuller Middle School
McCarthy Elementary School
Dunning Elementary School
Harmony Grove Elementary School
Harmony Grove Elementary School
Brophy Elementary School
Potter Road Elementary School
Juniper Hill?
Hemenway Elementary School
King Elementary School
Saint Bridget School
Notes:
R&O - Rules & Orders 
Times  In Current R&O
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Flashing
When Children Present 
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No 
Abuts Street Direct Access Crosswalk Flashing Signal Comments
No  No  No  Yes
No  No  (Kendal) Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
No  No  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  Yes
Yes  Yes  Yes  No 
Don't recommend
Don't recommend
Don't recommend
Ex.
1/5/2022 Traffic Regulation Subcommittee Meeting
Page 5
[This page is intentionally left blank] 
Page 6
Section 6F.57 End Road Work Sign
The END ROAD WORK (G20-2) sign shall be placed near the downstream end of the termination
area, as determined by engineering judgment. 
Section 6F-61 Arrow Boards
For shoulder work, blocking the shoulder, for roadside work near the shoulder, or for temporarily
closing one lane on a two-lane, two-way roadway, arrow boards shall only be used in the caution
mode with a four-corner matrix display. 
Section 6F-64 Cones
All cones used on state owned roadways or state funded projects shall be a minimum of 36 inches in
height. 
CHAPTER 7E -  OFFICIAL STANDARDS FOR SCHOOL ZONES 
As required by Chapter 90, Section 17 of the MGL (Tercentenary Edition as Amended) 
The Department hereby adopts the following standards for the establishment of school zones to
provide increased protection for school children on highways in the vicinity of schools: 
Any variance from the requirements of these Standards without the written approval of the
Department shall constitute the establishment of a non-standard School Zone and shall render the
provisions of Chapter 90, section 17 inapplicable insofar as they refer to the speed of vehicles in
School Zones. 
7E-1 SCHOOL ZONE DEFINED 
A School Zone as referred to in Chapter 90, Section 17 shall only be construed to be that section of a
way which abuts the grounds of a school and is posted and marked in accordance with these
Department Standards to indicate the applicability of the statutory speed limits of twenty miles per
hour for all vehicles in accordance with the terms of the permit for the Zone. 
7E-2 WARRANTS FOR SCHOOL ZONES 
The following minimum warrants are specified for the establishment of a School Zone. 
  The school property abuts the public right of way within the limits of the proposed
zone area.
  School Children have direct access to the street or roadway from the school property.
  The zone must contain a marked crosswalk.
  The school must involve one or more grades between Grade1 and Grade 8, inclusive.
MassDOT Highway Division  66  January 2012 
Page 7
A School Zone is not warranted:
  When children are not required to cross the street on foot within the limits of the
proposed zone area and sidewalks are provided.
  Where abutting school property is fenced or the crosswalk has been signalized except
in the cases where investigation shows that there is no conflict between the signal
indication and the school zone speed limit sign.
7E-3 SCHOOL ZONE SPEED LIMIT SIGNS 
The flashing sign is available in two variations. Specifications are shown in Section 7E-9. The
flashers and the numeral shall be energized only during the hours when the 20 M.P.H. speed limit
is legally effective, which shall be defined as “The hour(s) children are walking to school, the
hour(s) children are leaving school, or during the school noon hour if children are allowed to leave
the school property. 
A non-illuminated school zone speed limit sign is also acceptable, and must be accompanied by a
supplementary sign indicating the hours the 20 M.P.H. limit is in effect, or “When Children are
Present”.
7E-4 SCHOOL ZONE SPEED LIMIT SIGN USE 
The School Zone Speed Limit Sign may be used at all locations to establish legal school zone speed
limits of 20 MPH where the school building or the grounds thereof abuts the street or highway. It
shall not be used at any other location. 
The School Zone shall not begin more than 300 feet in advance of a point where the projected nearer
line of the School Building intersects the abutting highway. The sign should be placed within 50
feet of the limits of the school zone, facing traffic entering the zone. The sign may erected on the
shoulder, or it may be erected overhead. 
The School Zone Speed Limit Sign should be erected over the roadway where curves, roadside
development and other physical conditions do not permit at least 500 feet of advance sight distance
to a side-mounted sign. Over the road mounting is recommended for all divided highways and
highways of four or more lanes. 
7E-5 SCHOOL ZONE SIGNS ON STATE HIGHWAYS 
It is the policy of the department to install standard warning signs at all approaches to potentially
hazardous locations. In the case of a school abutting a State Highway, the Department will, by
permit, authorize the establishment of School Zones at the request of the municipality wherein the
highway lies. All costs for the establishment and maintenance of a school zone speed limit on State
Highway shall be borne by the municipality. A permit for each School Zone will be issued to the
municipality setting forth the applicable terms for the zone operation. 
MassDOT Highway Division  67  January 2012 
Page 8
7E-6 APPROACH WARNING SIGNS 
The School Advance Sign (S1-1) as provided in Section 7B.08 of the 2009 MUTCD shall be
supplemented by a tab bearing the legend “School Zone Ahead” and shall be erected in advance of
the beginning of each school Zone to notify motorists of their approach to School Zone. (See Figures
1, 2 & 3, pgs. 70, 71, 72) 
7E-7 WORD AND SYMBOL MARKINGS (See Section 7C.03) 
The word “SCHOOL” shall be placed at the beginning of the school zone facing 
approaching traffic. It shall extend across the full width of the approach lanes. The word
“SCHOOL” shall be wholly on the right half of the roadway. 
On approaches with two lanes a height of ten feet shall be used. 
On approaches with only one lane a height of six feet shall be used. 
7E-8 SCHOOL ZONES WITHIN SPEED ZONES 
Where a school is within the limits of an authorized speed zone, the beginning of the speed zone
shall be not less than 850 feet in advance of the school grounds in rural areas; 500 feet, or one block, 
whichever is less, in urban areas. There shall be no speed limit sign, other then a School Zone Limit
20 between the advance School Warning sign and the School Zone. A speed limit sign, to mark an
authorized speed zone, shall be placed just beyond the end limit of the school zone facing traffic
which has passed the school property. 
When a School Zone is located on a highway not legally speed zoned the end limit of the zone shall
be designated by a standard rectangular advisory sign with the legend “END SCHOOL ZONE” 
7E-9 SIGN SPECIFICATIONS 
A. SCHOOL ZONE AHEAD TAB
1.  Color: Yellow background with black legend and border
2.  Shape: Square
3.  Size: Minimum 30” x 30” 
B. SCHOOL ZONE SPEED LIMIT SIGNS
1.  COLOR: 
a). “SCHOOL” tab portion - Yellow background with black legend and border
b). SPEED LIMIT portion – black legend and border on white background with two
yellow lenses separated by a lens which shows red numeral 20 only when energized. 
2.  SHAPE: Rectangular, ground mount - long axis vertical. Overhead mount - long
axis horizontal. 
MassDOT Highway Division  68  January 2012 
Page 9
3.  SIZE:
a). Ground mount sign minimum size 24” x 48”. Overhead mount sign minimum size
72” x 60”.
b). Ground mount legend: “School” 4” series C, “Speed Limit” 4” series B, “When
Flashing” 4” series B. Overhead sign panel specifications available upon request.
4.  LENS: Size – 6” minimum; Color – yellow
5.  NUMERAL 20: Size not less than 6”
Color: shall be as set forth for “Don’t Walk” signal in Standard Specifications of
MassDOT.
6.  HEIGHT: Ground mount sign no less than 7 feet to bottom of sign. Overhead mount
sign minimum clearance of 16 feet over roadway.
C. END SCHOOL ZONE
1.  USE: To be installed only where there is no legal speed zone beginning at the end of
school zone.
2.  COLOR: White with black legend and border.
3.  SHAPE: Rectangular, long axis vertical.
4.  SIZE: 18” x 24” minimum.
D. LATERAL CLEARANCE
A clearance of 1 foot from the curb line is permissible where sidewalk width is limited or
where existing poles are close to the curb. Otherwise, where a raised curb, guardrail or
paved shoulder is present, a sign should be ordinarily placed with its nearest edge at least two
feet outsider such curb line, guardrail or paved shoulder. 
7E-10 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL
On State Highways, approval of the use of school zone speed limit signs will be granted by
permit from the Department to a municipality upon written application setting forth the
proposed operation of the sign. 
7E-11 PERMISSIBLE TIMES OF OPERATION 
School zones signs may be permitted to flash and show the 20 mph speed limit only during
the school noon hour, school recess or during those periods when children are going to or
leaving school during opening and closing hours. 
MassDOT Highway Division  69  January 2012 
Page 10
MassDOT Highway Division  70  January 2012 
Page 11
MassDOT Highway Division  71  January 2012 
Page 12
MassDOT Highway Division  72  January 2012 
Page 13
[This page is intentionally left blank] 
Page 14
Traffic Commission – Traffic Regulation Subcommittee Meeting – December 15, 2021
Present – Brinsley Fuller, Steve Croci, William Sedewitz, Adam Kiel & Simon Alexandrovich, 
FDPW
The meeting was called to order at 3:01 pm
The committee continued the discussion on draft schedules and contents for the draft rules &
orders document working off the “Waltham model” 
SCHEDULES: 
SPEED REGULATIONS – “Schedule 14”
  Reviewed current regulations of record with the City with MassDOT representatives
  Created new table format of regulations and actual field conditions
  Committee reviewed and discussed presented document
  A motion was made to adopt and recommend the speed regulations - schedule 14 as
presented and proposed for the draft traffic rules & orders document (Motion by Steve C.,
William S. 2nd, Pass 3-0) 
The committee briefly discussed other schedules for future meetings, including stop signs, school
zones, and turns only as designated
Minutes of subcommittee meeting of 12/1/21 
  A motion was made to approve the minutes as written (Motion by Brinsley F., William S. 
2nd ; Pass 3-0) 
A motion to adjourn was made at 4:08pm (Motion by William S., Setve C. 2nd ; Pass 3-0) 
