By City Clerk at 10:44 am, Jan 06, 2022
AGENDA
FRAMINGHAM PUBLIC LIBRARY
Board of Library Trustees Meeting
Monday, January 10, 2022, 7:00 P.M. 
VIRTUAL MEETING ON ZOOM (SEE BELOW)1] 
Guest: Jim Paolini, Director of Facilities Management
Introduction and welcome of new Trustees
Consent Agenda* 
•  Approval December 13, 2021 Minutes
•  Subcommittee Reports
o Facilities 
o Finance 
o Governance 
o Personnel 
•  Other Subcommittees/Liaisons
o FPL Foundation 
o Adult Programming 
o Friends of the Library 
o Homework Center 
o Literacy Unlimited 
1. Public Comment 
2. Welcome New Trustees 
3. Jim Paolini 
4. Consent Agenda 
5. Treasurer’s Report 
6. Director’s Report 
•  COVID Update 
•  City’s Transition
•  Teen Room
•  Technology Learning Center 
•  Bench
•  Volunteer Program 
•  Staffing, staff activities 
7. Sub Committees 
8. Election, New Officers 
9. Homework Center 
10. Unfinished Business—Warrant signing 
11. New Business 
[✔]
[ ]
[ ]
[✔]
[ ]
[✔]
[ ]
[ ]
[ ]
[✔]
5 minutes
10 minutes
15 minutes
10 minutes
10 minutes
30 minutes 
All ACTION
All ACTION
Art
Lena
5 minutes Deb
10 minutes Deb
10 minutes
15 minutes
5 minutes
10 minutes
5 minutes 
Ruth/Lena
All ACTION
Nancy
All ACTION
All
Page 1 of 2 
Page 2
12. Adjournment  5 minutes All ACTION
* ✔ denotes Consent Agenda Report included in Trustee mailing. 
Handouts included: Minutes 12/13/21; Newsletter; Promotional flyers, Circulation, other
statistics. 
AGENDA
FRAMINGHAM PUBLIC LIBRARY
Board of Library Trustees Meeting
(continued) 
[1] This meeting will be conducted remotely using Zoom. Zoom is a videoconferencing system
compatible with a variety of devices and platforms. Video is accessed through Zoom online. Audio
can be connected online or by phone. (Only audio is required to participate.)
•  Join Zoom Meeting 
 https://us02web.zoom.us/j/83643984493?pwd=NS90NFA0MzJQQkR5Y2w1MENnNlB6dz09
Meeting ID: 836 4398 4493
• (If you have not used Zoom before, you will be prompted to load the software) 
Enter Meeting ID: 836 4398 4493
For AUDIO BY PHONE: 
• To join by mobile phone with one tap, click: +16465588656,,83643984493# 
• To join by any phone, dial: 
Enter Meeting ID: 
+1 646 558 8656
836 4398 4493
If you are outside Massachusetts, additional dial-in numbers are available
here: [URL: "https://zoom.us/u/ac59LWQPUU"] https://zoom.us/u/ac59LWQPUU 
If you have trouble connecting, please email [URL: "mailto:lkilburn@minlib.net"] lkilburn@minlib.net
Page 2 of 2 
Page 3
Framingham Public library
Library Board of Trustees
Monday, December 13, 2021
Minutes
(pending approval) 
Consent Agenda
The Board of Library Trustees met on November 8, 2021 in a Hybrid meeting in the Costin Room and on
Zoom. 
Zoom meeting details: 
For VIDEO and AUDIO online: Meeting ID: 848 8539 5894
Present: Mesdames Coville-Wallace, Dodd, Harrington, Klish, Thompson, Winett and Messrs. Dodd, 
Doherty, Finstein, Malchman and Wray. 
Absent: Ms. Gonzalez. 
Present Trustees Elect: Ms. Jenny DeArcangelis, Ms. Leslie White Harvey, Ms. Isabella Petroni, Ms. 
Heather Woods
Also present: Guests: Mr. Jim Paolini, Director of Facilities Management; Ms. Emily Toombs, Head of
Bookmobile Experience, Director Ms. Lena Kilburn and Assistant Director Ms. Deborah Hinkle. 
Chair Ms. Winett called the meeting to order at 7:05 pm. She welcomed recently elected Trustees and
will talk about the swearing-in procedures regarding new Trustees later in the meeting. 
The Board continued with Guest speaker Mr. Paolini. 
Ms. Winett welcomed Mr. Paolini and invited him to present his report. 
o Mr. Paolini has been in communication with the architect regarding the Main Library roof project. 
He showed various types of Spanish tile chosen for the roof on screen share. The Barrel vault on
the existing roof is made of cardboard and plywood and has the gutter system inside it. It has not
worn well over the years and is vulnerable to ice dam formation. It would be advisable to replace
it. Various designs for replacement fascia were shown on screen; a choice of design needs to be
made. 
o The 4 choices of fascia design are Flush, Entablature, Stepped and Mini Barrel. Each has its own
merits. The Flush design is clean lined and will provide a good contrast to the tile color chosen. 
The Entablature design may hold ice back better similar to the Mini Barrel design. 
o Various colors of the Spanish tile were shown on screen. A blend of a particular tile color can also
be considered. This may reflect color well and avoid a dark, heavy look compared to a roofline
with a single tile color. The weight of tiles and materials chosen will be kept in mind to figure out
structural tolerances of the roof. Due to supply chain delays, Mr. Paolini would like the Board to
make choices as quickly as possible. It could be 4-5 months for the supplies chosen to be
delivered. 
o The Board discussed the fascia designs. All agreed that form and function of the fascia chosen to
work with the existing roof structure and to prevent future ice dam problems is critical. With Mr. 
Paolini’s advice, most liked the Entablature design. 
Mr. Finstein moved (Mr. Doherty seconded) to choose the Entablature style of fascia design. Vote
passed unanimously. 
Minutes  Page 1 of 6  12/13/2021 
Page 4
o The Board discussed various tile color choices that would work well with the fascia style chosen. 
The Board debated various solid colors and blends for the tiles. They considered the overall look
of the building, the Library logo colors, the suitability of any color chosen against the existing red
brick portions of the building and the cost of any choice made. Mr. Paolini confirmed that the cost
may be marginally higher if a blend of tile colors is chosen due to the extra labor for design and
layout of the blend of colors of tiles. If a base color choice is made, he can get renderings of how
the color will look as a blend. 
o Trustees were in favor of Patina Green, Royal Blue and Zinc-Cote colors of tile. When consulted, 
the Director favored a bold blue color to provide dimension, interest and attract attention. 
o The Board requested renderings of the final 4 colors chosen: Teal, Royal Blue, Patina Green and
Evergreen. Mr. Paolini will get the renderings to the Board ASAP. The color will be voted on at
the next meeting. 
o Ms. Harrington mentioned not being able to clearly hear the discussion in the Costin Room on
Zoom. Ms. Winett assured her that all Trustees will have a chance to view all tile related materials
before a vote is called in the next meeting. 
The Board thanked Mr. Paolini for his report; he thanked the Board and exited the meeting at 7:38 pm. 
The Director Ms. Kilburn introduced Ms. Emily Toombs, Head of Bookmobile Experience. 
o Ms. Toombs introduced herself and provided a brief history of her previous work experience. She
is excited to join the Library team and has many exciting ideas for the Bookmobile service for the
future. She is very happy to see how enthusiastically the community has welcomed the restart of
Bookmobile services after the covid hiatus. She has some informational pamphlets, she
welcomed all questions from the Board. 
o The Trustees are excited to see the Bookmobile resume services; it is a vital link to the
community. They asked Ms. Toombs about the ongoing routes. Ms. Toombs is working on
biweekly stops. The Bookmobile also visits after school programs, local parks, assisted living
facilities and local home-schooling demographics. She is working on adding more routes and
looking into homebound delivery routes too. 
o Answering Ms. Thompson’s question; Ms. Toombs explained that the routes are chosen to be
geographically and fuel efficient. Underserved areas get priority and routes are planned when
requests for service are made too. Ms. Dodd advised reaching out to the Callahan Center for
advice when planning homebound delivery routes. Ms. Toombs will arrange for information
sharing meetings. Mr. Dodd was happy to see the Bookmobile in Cushing Park. Ms. Toombs
hopes to add and increase the areas of service for the Bookmobile as the weather gets warmer. 
Ms. Toombs thanked the Board for its time and looked forward to bringing a great Bookmobile
experience to the community. She exited the meeting at 7:44 pm. 
Public Comment: None. 
The Board considered the Consent Agenda and the Minutes of the November 8th meeting. 
Ms. Thompson moved (Ms. Dodd seconded) to approve the Minutes of the November 8th meeting. 
Passed unanimously by individual voice vote by Trustees both on Zoom and in the Costin Room. 
The Board acknowledged the service of outgoing Trustees. Ms. Winett presented and read aloud the
Citations and Certificates of Appreciation presented to Ms. Thompson, Mr. Finstein and Ms. Gonzalez. 
Ms. Thompson was presented with a Citation from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and signed by
state legislators. She has been a stellar Trustee for 37 years; her work, support and commitment to
various Library projects and causes has been exemplary. She brought her knowledge, experience and
Minutes  Page 2 of 6  12/13/2021 
Page 5
network of contacts to support the new Library building initiatives for the McAuliffe Branch, fundraising for
the Bookmobile and Annual Appeals. She was one of the leading members to help in the setting up of
the Foundation. Her kindness and willingness to help in any way in all causes to support the Library has
been a longtime asset to the Board and community. Mr. Dodd spoke of her kindness and support when
he first contested the election for a Trustee position and her advise and help as he worked to become
familiar with his duties as a Trustee. The Board thanked Ms. Thompson and wished her well; Ms. 
Thompson will be missed as a Trustee! 
Certificates of Appreciation were also presented to Mr. Art Finstein, Ms. Heather Klish and Ms. Millie
Gonzalez. 
Ms. Coville-Wallace spoke in appreciation of Mr. Finstein’s 13 years of service as Trustee. A retired
music teacher and an active participant in the local Heritage Chorale group, Mr. Finstein brought his
experience to the various music programs hosted by the Library. He also served very capably on the
Finance Committee. His detailed work with the Library’s Trust funds and quarterly reports, were clear, 
concise and very understandable. The Board is very appreciative of his efforts in this important task. 
Through Mr. Finstein, the Library has also been able to access the talents and experience of his
daughter Ms. Amy Finstein who has advised and participated in various Library programs and during the
construction of the new McAuliffe Branch Library. The Board wished Mr. Finstein well and hoped his
family would continue to support the Library in the future. 
The Board thanked Ms. Heather Klish for her service on the Board for the 2019-2021 years. She has
been a valuable member and was the go-to Trustee for her Zoom experience in a tough covid year. 
Her support and willingness to be a hands-on Board member on the Governance, Building and Advocacy
committees was very useful and appreciated. Trustees commended her work and talent in gathering
forces and all information needed when bringing any matter before the City for approvals. The Board
wished her well and invited her to continue to be involved in Library support and advocacy as time
permits. 
The Board thanked Ms. Millie Gonzalez for her service this past year. She was always willing to pitch in
with ideas for new programs and Library projects. Her partnership and advise on various partnership
programs with Framingham State University helped elevate the quality of programs offered to the
community. The Board wished her well and hoped that she will continue to support the Library. 
The Board thanked Graphics Staff member Ms. Tara Hall for her help with the Citation and Certificates. 
Mr. Dodd reported on the well-attended weekend programs. The NEA Big Read program featuring “An
American Sunrise” a book of poems by Joy Harjo the first Native American Poet Laureate was a
success. Sunday Music Concerts continue to be popular; on screen movie programs in the Costin Room
have also attracted good audience numbers. 
Ms. Dodd moved (Mr. Finstein seconded) to approve the complete Consent Agenda items. Unanimous
by individual voice vote. 
Director’s Report: Director Ms. Kilburn presented her report: 
The Director started her report by thanking out going Trustees. She has always appreciated their help, 
work and advise, it was a privilege to work with them. 
•  Staffing, staff activities: 
o Assistant Director Ms. Hinkle continues to work on the process of hiring new staff. Interviews are
ongoing. A current staff member has been chosen as an internal hire for one of the open
positions. The Downtown U Facilitator position has been posted. Additional job postings are up
and in process; a good number of qualified applications have been received and are under
consideration. 
Minutes  Page 3 of 6  12/13/2021 
Page 6
•  COVID update and Winter Outlook: 
o The Director is in regular contact with the City Board of Health. The City is monitoring the
situation with the new Omicron variant. The Library is continuing with business as usual at this
time; all precautions that have been put in place continue. Popular hybrid programs will continue
to be offered; in-person programs will also continue. A transition report requested by the Mayor
has been completed by City departments. The Director will inform the Trustees if anything
changes in the Winter outlook. 
•  Teen Room: 
o The Director reported on progress on the new Teen Room setup. The existing Collection and
shelves have all been emptied in the area designated. Data and Tech installs are ongoing. Meeting
with furniture reps is scheduled. The Director and staff are excited to set up the new Teen Room
space soon! 
•  Capital Requests: 
o Capital Request for the Technology Learning Center has been submitted and approved by the
Mayor’s Office. 
o A CDBG funds grant for the Technology Learning Center was completed on Friday last week. 
o Answering questions from the Trustees, the Director confirmed that the request for funding for
new parking spots for staff at the Branch was not supported at this time. It can be requested
again next year or we can watch the Plaza development and consider if an arrangement can be
reached with the developers of the Plaza. 
o The Director informed the Board that the first installment of State Aid for $66,545 has come
through. A second installment for a similar amount is expected soon. 
•  Framingham Business Resource Center, Staff Training; Downtown U launch: 
o The FBRC and Downtown U are progressing well. Relevant City Department officials offered a
training session for Library staff for the Business Center use. Training focused on business
resources and the best way to help patrons seeking information. The aim is to make the FBRC a
research arm for the City. A second training session will be offered to staff soon. 
o The Library is working with Ms. Isabelle Perez of Framingham Community Connections Coalition
to start a new employment program for students. This will give students real life job experience. 
Students will be paid and will work at the Library at different times including Summer and vacation
weeks. 
•  Technology Learning Center/Upgrades: 
o The Tech upgrade for staff and public PCs will be completed early next year. This was a big project
and a major overhaul. Former Technology Supervisor Ms. Dawn Dellasanta did great work on this
project. Ms. Winett enquired about what happens to the computers that are phased out as a result
of the upgrade. The Director replied that some of the computers are obsolete and owned by the
City. Ms. Woods offered to reach out and explore the possibility of donating/recycling the
computers. Ms. Kilburn thanked Ms. Woods. Ms. Dodd enquired if MAC computers can be included
in the Learning Center. The Director will explore funding possibilities for this. 
o New self-checkout machines are set. The Director is looking into possibilities of installing a remote
book locker. This would be a vending machine style pick up and drop off location. She is considering
SMOC as a location as it is a busy location with need for this type of service. She is open to other
ideas like the YMCA and other locations too. Ms. Thompson suggested locations outside stores
like Target and Walmart. The Director will look into this further. 
o AV facilities upgrade for the smaller meeting rooms at the Main Library are complete. 
o The Solar project is not yet online at the Branch. The Director will reach out to the City to check on
progress. 
•  McAuliffe AV project: 
o Meeting with supplies vendors took place today. All materials needed will take 6-8 weeks for
delivery due to supply chain issues. The Director confirmed that on completion of this project, the
Minutes  Page 4 of 6  12/13/2021 
Page 7
Community Room at the Branch will have AV facilities similar to the Costin Room at the Main
Library. 
•  Bench: The Director is happy to report that generous donations from Trustees, staff and various
community members total about $700 to date. She reminded all that the deadline is still open; the
total cost for the Bench will be about $2000. 
•  Volunteer program: 
o The Assistant Director spoke about this project. She thanked Graphics Staff Ms. Tara Hall for the
excellent work on the Volunteer pamphlets. Trustees have received copies of the pamphlet. The
pamphlets will be digitized and printed. General information is included in the pamphlet to start
anyone interested in volunteering. Applications are available on the Library’s website. Almost all
departments can use volunteers. Currently 13 volunteers work at the Main Library and 5 at the
Branch. 6 more are waiting to be placed. Literacy Unlimited and the Homework Center will also
seek volunteers in the future. 
o Ms. Hinkle listed some of the possible tasks that volunteers could work on: weeding and shelf
reading of the Collection, Teen area relocation work, Costin Room AV recordings, Sparklab
events, online community calendars updating, Literacy tutoring and working with Therapy dogs
who help with the Book Buddy program. Volunteers range in age from 14 years to adults. There
has been a lot of recent interest in volunteering, the Director and Assistant Director are excited to
offer this great package to an already interested community! The Board is happy to note that the
program is already inspiring interest and participation! 
o Answering questions about how volunteers to the Friends and Library are recruited, Ms. Hinkle
mentioned that anyone interested in volunteering with the Friends specifically is redirected to the
Friends. People who express more general interests are directed to the Library website if
suitable. Ms. Winett has also received interest for volunteering with the Foundation; she has been
redirecting patrons based on their interests either to the Library or Foundation. 
o Mr. Dodd enquired about the progress in checking on the need for CORIs for teenagers under 18
years of age who volunteer at the Homework Center. Mr. Doherty has reached out to the City
Solicitor on this, he is waiting to hear back. The current City requirement is to run CORIs on
teenagers too. 
FPLF Annual Appeal: Ms. Thompson presented a report. The Annual Appeals have been mailed. About
950 pieces of mail were sent out this year! 11 people attended the first work session to stuff and address
envelopes. It was quick, smooth and a fun process after a difficult covid year; Ms. Thompson was very
grateful for the help! PayPal donations are already coming in, the Foundation is hopeful that it will be a
good fundraising year! 
January BoT Meeting Plans: New Trustees; Election, etc: Ms. Winett informed all that the new Trustees
will be sworn in on January 1, 2022 in the Nevins Hall at City Hall. All necessary paperwork will be
signed then to complete the swearing in process. Newly elected Trustees will attend the January 10th 
Board meeting. The meeting will involve election of Board officers. 
Homework Center: Ms. Coville-Wallace presented her report. The number of available tutors has
decreased recently as many tutors prefer to help only virtually. The current ratio is about 1 in-person tutor
to 5-6 students. Ms. Coville-Wallace confirmed that this is a new situation as tutors are preferring to coach
online due to covid concerns. Coordinator Ms. Gatlin has reached out to the Greater Boston Jewish
Coalition for Literacy to request in-person tutor volunteers. Ms. Coville-Wallace requested all to reach out
to their network of contacts for in-person tutor volunteers. Trustees recommended reaching out to
Framingham State University and MassBay Community College too. 
Minutes  Page 5 of 6  12/13/2021 
Page 8
Unfinished Business: 
•  The updated/revised and approved BOT By-Laws were made available to all. Mr. Doherty requested
all newly elected Trustees attending the meeting to consider serving on the Governance Committee. 
The Board thanked Mr. Doherty and the Governance Committee for its work. 
•  Mr. Malchman informed the Board of the upcoming Book Sale on Saturday. The Book Sale has been
doing well; Sales are up after the covid year. He confirmed that the Friends continue to accept
donation of books and other materials for the Sale. Ms. Dodd requested all newly elected Trustees to
consider putting up Book Sale signs in their yard for publicity for the Sale. Ms. DeArcangelis would
like a sign; Ms. Kilburn agreed to coordinate to make a lawn sign available from the Friends for her. 
•  Ms. Harrington requested confirmation on how the final materials for the Main Library roof would be
selected. Ms. Winett invited all to look at the samples in person when convenient; discussion of
choices can be completed in future Board meetings and vote can be taken for the final choice. 
•  Ms. Leslie White Harvey requested a revision of her name as mentioned in the October Meeting
Minutes. 
New Business: 
•  As Ms. Thompson will no longer be on the Board in January 2022; arrangements for a Trustee to
sign the Warrants needs to be considered. Ms. Thompson who has been signing the Warrants online
during the covid year explained how the process works. Pre-covid either the Treasurer or the backup
Trustee reviewed and signed the Warrants in person and the Warrant was passed around to all
Trustees during a Board meeting. Ms. Winett requested all to consider if they would be interested in
performing this task. The Treasurer and backup will be decided in the January 2022 meeting after
Board officer elections. 
Ms. Thompson addressed the Board and thanked them for their support during her years as a Trustee. It
was a wonderful experience and privilege to serve and advocate for the Library over the years; she will
miss being on the Board. She feels confident that the newly elected Trustees will bring in fresh ideas, 
energy and enthusiasm in their roles. She will continue her Foundation duties and will always be a strong
supporter of the Library! 
The Board thanked Ms. Thompson again for her service and requested Ms. Klish to be involved in
organizing work as her schedule permits. The Board concluded with thanks also to outgoing Trustees Mr. 
Finstein and Ms. Gonzalez. 
The next meeting of the Board will be held at 7 pm on January 10, 2022. 
Ms. Thompson moved (Mr. Doherty) that the meeting be adjourned at 8:47 PM. Unanimous by individual
voice vote. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Bhagya Nadabar
Administrative Assistant. 
Minutes  Page 6 of 6  12/13/2021 
Page 9
Memorandum 
TO: Library Board of Trustees 
FROM: Lena Kilburn, Library Director 
RE: Suspension of all group activities per City ordinance for 2 weeks 
Dear Board of Trustees: 
On Wednesday, January 5, Mayor Sisitsky’s office issued an ordinance that all in-person, group activities
be suspended for 2 weeks, through midnight on January 21, 2022. This includes all in-person
programming, all gatherings by outside groups held at both Library buildings, and any group gathering
on the Bookmobile. The Bookmobile will continue its routes, but allow only 2 patrons on at once or 4
total individuals including staff. 
Wherever possible, we will move all programming to an online format, Zoom or live streaming on
Facebook and YouTube. This will include the Sunday concert, which we will live stream. 
Thank you. 
Lena 
Page 10
Framingham Public Library
Board of Trustees
Governance: Consent Agenda item for January 10, 2022, BOT meeting
Topic: City Solicitor Access Policy 
While looking into the issue concerning CORI requests for minors, I submitted some
questions to Chris Brown, a member of the City Solicitor’s office. Chris got in touch with
me to ask if I was aware of the City Solicitor Access Policy, which I was not. 
Apparently, members of some Framingham boards (not the FPL trustees, though!) were
submitting so many questions that City Solicitor staff had to spend too much time
prioritizing which requests to deal with first. 
In short, the Policy requires that before a member or members of an elected or
appointed board submit a query to the City Solicitor’s office, the board, at a meeting
with a quorum, must vote to approve the submission of the query with a simple majority
of those present. 
Alternatively, department heads -- in our case, Lena -- may submit requests as needed, 
so I anticipate that for most instances, we can funnel our requests through her. This is
what I did with the CORI-related questions. 
I am presenting this to the trustees via the consent agenda so that all are made aware
of the policy. 
~ Eric Doherty
Governance Subcommittee, Chair
Page 11
Framingham Public Library Foundation Report
FPL Board of Trustees Consent Agenda
Monday, January 10, 2022
Report as of January 2, 2022
2021 Annual Appeal -- Technology Learning Center
2020 Annual appeal - Teen Room 
from the Friends) 
2019 Annual Appeal - Teen Room 
TOTAL FOR TEEN ROOM 
$25,123.55 (from 63 donors)*
$58,259.21 (includes recent $2,500
$33,934.61
$92,193.82 
TLC total does not include a forthcoming matching donation ($2,500) and donations made in early 2022. 
Thanks to the Trustees and others who help us meet our fundraising goals. 
Page 12
LVM Literacy Unlimited Report for December 2021
Prepared by Elyse Brown, January 4th, 2022 
Consent Agenda
Enrollment, Student Information, and Statistics
•  There are currently 102 confirmed matches with 12 matches that are pending. Our December tutoring
hours are not yet compiled. (November 2021 hours: 864.1) 
•  We have 134 active students and 97 students on the waiting list from 2020-2021; we completed new
student registration in early October. 
•  We continue to work on calling everyone on the waitlist to learn what their current needs are, and if they
still need our services. 
Tutor Training 
•  Our fourth virtual ESOL Tutor Training dates are set: January 4th – February 8th, on Tuesdays from
1:00-3:00pm led by Anne O’Connell and Laurie Christie. We have 17 new Framingham/Natick tutors
registered for this session. 
•  In December we held one virtual information session; 13 people signed up for the session and enjoyed
the concise presentation. Online information sessions typically run for one hour now; we recognize that
folks are busy and would prefer to spend less time on Zoom. 
•  In this Tutor Training session we will work hard to engage and empower our new volunteers to feel
ready to dive into working with ESOL students. We are bringing more guests to the online sessions, and
will pair one of our regular offerings, Tutor Time, with a session to help our volunteers learn more about
our community offerings. 
Tutor Get-Togethers
•  We held one virtual Tutor Time last month due to the busy holiday schedule. Laurie led an in-depth
lesson on how to use Google Slides with lessons for one-to-one tutoring or a small group of English
learners. 
•  In January we will hold a virtual Tutor Time on the 25th at 2:00pm during Tutor Training. Its repeat
session will be January 26th at 6:30pm. Our learning topic is still being decided on; we hope to use the
session as an opportunity to build connection between new and seasoned tutors. 
•  In December we held our second in-person Social Hour which was a lot of fun; about 15 future tutors
and students attended. We completed some icebreaker activities and played winter-themed Bingo! We
held another virtual Social Hour mid-December; also holiday-themed. 
•  In January we will hold a virtual Social Hour on January 19th at 10:00am. 
Conversation Classes
•  We run 13 online Conversation Classes at Beginner, Intermediate, and Advanced levels. 
•  Conversation Class leader Peg Wihtol will hold in-person Low Beginner English classes for four weeks
starting January 10th. They will be drop-in friendly. 
•  In January we will work on increasing class sizes and offerings on Zoom with our seasoned
Conversation Class leaders. 
Page 1 of 2 
Page 13
Fundraising/Grants
•  We wrapped up our Calendar Fundraiser and sold almost all of them! We held a small raffle drawing
mid-December with four lucky winners. We thank ATAC: Downtown Music & Arts, Exhibit ‘A’ 
Brewing Company, Jack’s Abby, and SKM Collection for donating gift cards to the local raffle drawing. 
•  Literacy Unlimited was awarded a 2021 Family Support Grant for $12,000 from the Foundation for
MetroWest (FFMW)! We are honored to receive the grant which will go towards our general operating
budget and ensure several staff members receive long-overdue raises. FFMW is a community
foundation based in Natick, established in 1995 to connect “philanthropic opportunity with
demonstrated need.” Besides a robust Grants Program, FFMW offers volunteer opportunities, nonprofit
resources and workshops, and stepped up with a comprehensive COVID-19 Emergency Relief Fund last
year. Literacy Unlimited thanks FFMW for their generous support! [URL: "https://foundationmw.org/"] https://foundationmw.org/ 
•  I submitted the application for City of Framingham’s Community Block Development Grant in early
December. The public hearing will be January 18th on Zoom. 
Citizenship Corner 
•  Long-time volunteer Brian Judge wrapped up an online American History and Civics class in late
December. We will potentially schedule another American History and Civics class in winter or spring
2022. 
Meetings, Events, Etc. 
•  The next few months will be about cleaning up our student waitlist and recruiting an enthusiastic band
of new volunteer tutors! 
•  I dropped into an online Conversation Class on December 21st to meet some students and share my love
for theater and language. I led a brief Readers Theater activity and enjoyed connecting my hobby to all
the great work tutors and students do at Literacy Unlimited. 
•  Literacy’s Advisory Board meets bi-monthly from September to June; meetings will be held on Zoom
until further notice. Here is the remainder 2021-2022 schedule: 
o Wednesday, February 2nd
o Thursday, April 7th
o Wednesday, June 1st 
Page 2 of 2 
Page 14
Framingham Public Library Roof Replacement
Simulated Spanish Tile Color Options
Page 15
SIMUL AT ED SPANISH TILES-COLORS
• Royal Blue  • Patina Green
• Teal  • Evergreen 
2
Page 16
SIMUL AT ED SPANISH TILE – ROYA L BLUE
ROYAL BLUE 
3Page 17
SIMUL AT ED SPANISH TILE – TEAL
TEAL 
4
Page 18
SIMUL AT ED SPANISH TILE – GREEN BLEND
PATINA GREEN / EVERGREEN BLEND 
5
Page 19
LOOK HERE 
 www.framinghamlibrary.org 
FIRST
Space and Exploration Week at the McAuliffe Branch 
Christa McAuliffe 36th Anniversary Commemoration: January 24-28
January 28, 1986, Space Shuttle Challenger exploded, traumatizing the nation and taking the
lives of the NASA crew, including Christa McAuliffe, the first Teacher in Space. Her life and
death have inspired millions around the world. The Christa
McAuliffe Branch Library is hosting a series of events during
this week to honor and celebrate McAuliffe’s legacy. 
All ages events are below. More events can be 
found on our Young Adult and Children’s pages. SPACE &
EXPLORATION
WEEK
Green Screen Space Photos
January 24-28, 3-6pm – Lobby (other hours upon request)
Stop by and take a space-themed photo using our Spark Lab
Green Screen. Photos will be on our Facebook page at the end of the week. 
Movie: Christa McAuliffe: Reach for the Stars 
(2009) 1h. 15min. Not rated, parental discretion advised.
Wednesday January 26, 2pm – Community Room
Moment of Silence
Friday January 28, 11:39am – Cafe
Join us for a moment of silence in remembrance of the 36th 
anniversary of the Challenger disaster.
All About Tea: Camellia
Sinensis Demystified 
with MEM Tea Imports
Wednesday January 19, 
7pm – on Zoom
Join Suanne Scalise from MEM Tea, “Boston’s
premier tea purveyor” for an evening of
flavor and discovery. Taste your way through
the history and evolution of the Camellia
Sinensis or tea plant. Pick up your tea leaves
at the library to make and taste at home
during the program! [URL: "http://bit.ly/FPL-Events"] REGISTER to attend
the presentation. [URL: "https://bit.ly/FPL-MEM-Tea"] REGISTER to pick up your
free tea leaves for tasting (supplies are limited). 
Ice Fishing
with Jim Lagacy
from Mass Fish and
Wildlife
Monday January 31, 
7pm – on Zoom
If you have ever wanted 
to learn this fun wintertime activity, now 
is your chance! You will learn how to feel safe
and confident standing on the ice, as well
as all the tools and techniques needed for
catching fish. Please [URL: "http://bit.ly/FPL-Events"] REGISTER by 5pm on
January 31. In partnership with Ashland 
Public Library.
Introduction to Citizen Science All Ages
Wednesday January 26, 7-8pm – Main
Library, Costin Room
Framingham Public Library received a grant from Arizona State University
to fund the creation of Citizen Science kits that will be available for check
out! Join this session to learn what Citizen Science is all about, and to get
a peek at the kits we’ll be rolling out over the first half of 2022. 
Our Winter-Spring
Lifelong Learning
programs begin 
in January!
Details on page 2.
1Registration or program questions: email [URL: "mailto:framinghamlibraryevents%40gmail.com?subject="] framinghamlibraryevents@gmail.com or call 508-532-5570. 
January 2022
Vol. 8 I  No. 1
Framingham Public
Libraries Are Open! 
Main Library
49 Lexington Street |  508-532-5570
Monday-Thursday 9-9
Friday-Saturday 9-5
Sunday 1-5
Christa McAuliffe 
Branch Library
746 Water Street | 508-532-5636
Monday-Thursday 9:30-9
Friday-Saturday 9:30-5
Sunday 12-4
Holiday Hours
Both Libraries will be closed Friday
December 31 through Sunday 
January 2 for New Year’s, and Sunday
January 16 and Monday January 17 
for Martin Luther King, Jr. Day. 
• Be safe and keep others safe. 
If you feel unwell, please don’t enter
the Library. A face mask is required
for everyone over the age of 5
and please maintain proper social
distance from others. 
• N o Late Fees for returned
materials continues.
Free tutoring for grades K-12
available in all subjects! 
See page 5.
CONNECT WITH US ON:
Sign up for [URL: "http://framinghamlibrary.org"] email updates of Library
news and events on our homepage!
Funding for Library programs is
provided in part by the Friends of the
Framingham Library.
[URL: "https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC9pfy9i1ehWuYRT6n5WBDbg/videos"]
Page 20
Enjoy remote courses for seniors 60+!
Romanticism and Beyond: 1800-1860 
Fridays January 7, 14, 21 and 28
Online Registration opens December 6 at 11am
JOHN L. HEINEMAN INTERSESSION 2022 
Please go to www.[URL: "http://www.framinghamlibrary.org/adventures"] framinghamlibrary.org/adventures or [URL: "https://www.framingham.edu/academics/continuing-education/community-education/adventures-in-lifelong-learning/"] bit.ly/
 Adventures-FSU for course descriptions and registration information.
Adventures in Lifelong Learning courses are free to all
participants, thanks to partial funding support from the Older
Americans Act as granted by BayPath Elder Services, Inc., and
grants from Framingham Cultural Council, Marlborough Cultural Council, 
Natick Cultural Council and Sudbury Cultural Council. 
Lifelong Learning Lecture Series Winter-Spring 2022
This free Thursday 7pm lecture series via Zoom is a partnership 
between Framingham State University (FSU) and Framingham 
Public Library. If you have not registered for Lifelong Learning 
Lectures before, please register HERE.
January 20 – A President Like No Other: Andrew Jackson 
Guest speaker: Dr. David Smailes, Associate Professor, Political Science, and Program
Coordinator, Master of Public Administration, FSU
January 27 – Tina Turner 
Guest speaker: Tim Riley, Associate Professor of Journalism, Emerson College
This Lecture Series is sponsored by The Joseph L. and Ray L. Freund Foundation, courtesy of Elizabeth F. Fideler.
Virtual Reality Tour: Anne Frank House
Thursday January 27, 10am-7pm – McAuliffe Branch, 
Community Room
Join us on International Holocaust Remembrance Day by signing
up for a time block to experience a Virtual Reality Tour of the
Anne Frank House using Oculus Rift. Please call the McAuliffe
Branch at 508-532-5636 x3 to reserve your 45 minute time block.
FILMS
FRIDAY NIGHT FILM: No Time to Die
(2021) 2h. 43min. PG-13. 
Friday January 7, 6:30pm – Main Library, 
Costin Room
No registration is required but space is limited; first come, first 
served. Lexington St. doors open at 6pm.
MCAULIFFE MATINEE: The Martian 
(2015) 2h. 24min. PG-13. 
Wednesday January 19, 2pm – McAuliffe Branch, 
Community Room
No registration required but space is limited; first come, 
first served.
MONDAY MATINEE: Jungle Cruise 
(2021) 2h. 7min. PG-13.
Monday January 24, 2pm – Main Library, 
Costin Room
No registration is required but space is limited; first come, 
first served. 
Framingham Public
Library’s Downtown U: 
Entrepreneurship and
Career Support
In partnership with Framingham State
University! More details [URL: "https://framinghamlibrary.org/services/downtown-u/"] HERE.
All offerings are via Zoom. 
Single workshops or webinars
may be attended. Please
 REGISTER HERE. 
Entrepreneur Workshops Framingham Public Library
Framingham State University
Tuesdays January 4 and 18, 7pm
Career Building Webinars 
Thursdays January 6 and 20, 11am
Led by Mark Hardie, Director of Framingham
State University’s Entrepreneurship and
Innovation Center.
One-on-one Mock Interviews, and
Resume Building Led by Ed Lawrence.
One-on-one Mock Interviews: 
Thursday January 6, 2-3:30pm
One-on-one Resume Building: 
Thursdays January 6, 13, 20, and 27, 
9am-1:30pm
This pilot program of the new Downtown U made
possible by grant funding from the Massachusetts
Board of Library Commissioners.
Sunday Classical
Concert: 
Matthew Graybil and
Rhiannon Banerdt 
Sunday January 9, 
3pm – Main Library, 
Costin Room and
YouTube Livestream
Pianist Matthew Graybil 
and violinist Rhiannon
Banerdt will perform works by
Beethoven, Ben-Haim, Mozart and Ravel. 
No registration required to attend in
person or online via [URL: "http://www.youtube.com/framinghampubliclibrary"] YouTube. In-person
space is limited; first come, first served. 
The series is sponsored in part by Metro Credit Union, 
Roche Brothers Markets, Brookdale Cushing Park, St. 
Mary’s Credit Union, and Friends of the Framingham
Library.
Spot our 
Bookmobile 
on the road 
this winter! 
DOWNTOWN
DOWNTOWN 
DOWNTOWN 
Registration or program questions: email [URL: "mailto:framinghamlibraryevents%40gmail.com?subject="] framinghamlibraryevents@gmail.com or call 508-532-5570.
2  For more information please visit our website: [URL: "https://framinghamlibrary.org/"] www.framinghamlibrary.org
Page 21
Archduke.”  Monday March 30, 2
What’s on Your TBR
(To Be Read) Pile? 
with Author Jayne
Ann Krentz
Wednesday
January 12, 7pm 
The series is
sponsored in part by Middlesex Savings Bank, Metro
Credit Union, Brookdale Cushing Park, Law Office
of Framingham Attorney Jeffrey M. Steinberg, 
St. Mary’s Credit Union, and Friends of the
Framingham Library. 
MAIN LIBRARY
Club de Lectores:
por Mario Vargas Llosa
Lunes 3 de enero, 8pm
BOOK CLUBS 
Los Jefes y Los 
– Zoom 
Based on the true story o
and journalist Lloyd Vog
CachorrosMCAULIFFE MAT 
The Sound of My V
– on Zoom  Se requiere [URL: "https://forms.gle/8CrvPVDJf9dP3Tp98"] REGISTRACIÓN.
We’ll spend some  Discusión del libro 02/07: Cuentos completos por Jorge Luis Borges.
time with Jayne hearing
all about her favorite books and authors. 
Then, we’ll have a few minutes to hear 
Adult Book Club: The Hare With Amber Eyes: A
Hidden Inheritance by Edmund DeWaal 
Inspired [URL: "https://find.minlib.net/iii/encore/record/C__Rb2780471__Sthe%20hare%20with%20amber%20eyes__Orightresult__U__X7?lang=eng&suite=cobalt"] for Ch
all about her new, upcoming book
Lightning in a Mirror which comes out on 
Tuesday March 31,
January 18. Please [URL: "http://bit.ly/FPL-Events"] REGISTER
Learn to Crochet: by 5pm on  Flowers
January 12. In partnership with Ashland 
Room
Public Library. 
Tuesday March 10, 11:30am-
Tuesday January 4, 7-8pm – on Zoom
Please [URL: "http://bit.ly/FPL-Events"] REGISTER by noon on January 4.
The title for our February 1 discussion is The Giver of Stars by JoJo MoyesTeam Framingham
Sci-Fi Book Club: Project
Wednesday January 12, 7pm – 
Hail Mary
on Zoom 
by Andy Weirfirst Boston Marathon and
12:30pm – McAuliffe Branch, Please [URL: "http://bit.ly/FPL-Events"] REGISTER for the Zoom link or email [URL: "mailto:lloveridge%40minlib.net%20%20?subject="] lloveridge@minlib.net.Framingham [URL: "https://find.minlib.net/iii/encore/search/C__Shail%20mary%20andy%20weir__Orightresult__U?lang=eng&suite=cobalt&fromMain=yes"] Library. Come 
McAuliffe Craft Ladies 
Gratitude Box
Wednesday 
Community Room
Learn the basics of crocheting while
The title for our February 9 discussion is
MCAULIFFE BRANCH 
We Are Satellites by Sarah Pinsker. story, from losing 45 lbs
in the Boston Marathon. 
to
Le
January 12, 7pm –
McAuliffe Branch, 
Community Room
making a flower! We are partnering with
the Framingham Makerspace who will
Evening Book Club: 
Tuesday January 11, 7-8pm
Room and on Zoom. 
Sea of Rust 
– McAuliffe 
by C. Robert Cargillmotivated and achieve you
Branch, Communityand eat healthier. Whateve 
Join us to make a gratitude box. Use it to
keep notes about things that make you
happy or grateful throughout the year, 
and take one out when you need some
inspiration. 
Supplies and space are limited.
Tea & Talk Tues
 REGISTRATION
be installing a Yarn Flower Community
Art Project in the Arlington Street
Park during ArtWeekMA in May. All
materials provided, but if you have your
own crochet hooks please bring them. 
required. 
days 
Please
The title for our February 8 discussion is
by Rumaan Alam
Morning Book Club:
by Sophie Cousens
Thursday January 20, 10-11am
Room and on Zoom. 
Please
The title for our February 17 discussion is
 REGISTER
 REGISTER. 
for the Zoom link. No registration needed for in-person. 
for the Zoom link. No registration needed for in-person. 
This Time Next Year 
– McAuliffe Branch, Community
Leave the World Behind
The Midnight Library 
year, start here [URL: "https://find.minlib.net/iii/encore/search/C__Ssea%20of%20rust__Orightresult__U?lang=eng&suite=cobalt&fromMain=yes"] and be insp
To support Anatoly and the F
ToBe Fit, the Jugglin
Saturday March 14, 2
(Please see [URL: "https://find.minlib.net/iii/encore/search/C__Sthis%20time%20next%20year__Orightresult__U?lang=eng&suite=cobalt&fromMain=yes"] Children’s Insert) 
by Matt Haig.
Cultivating Openness 
When Things Fall Apart
Stretch and Relax Please click on book images to borrow these titles. 
Tuesday January 25, 
3-4pm – on Zoom
with Laila Vehvilainen Poetry Worksho
Pema Chodron and bell
hooks talk about facing 
Thursdays March 5, 12
life’s challenges, in this 
Craft Room
1997 conversation from 
the Lion’s Roar archives. 
Wednesdays, 2:30-3:15pm Exercise Classes via Zoom
Please note
March 18 –
Community
locations!If you have not
the link to join 
registered before, please
either or both classes. 
McAuliffe Branch Library, 
RoomWednesdays January 5, 12, 19, 
STRETCH AND RELAX 
 REGISTER by noon on the day of the class for
Please note
Mondays January 3, 10, 24 and
TONE AND STRETCHLed by Alan Feldman, P
Before you join us for the discussion, please March 25 – Main Library, Costin Room and 26, 2-2:45pm
read the conversation [URL: "https://www.lionsroar.com/cultivating-openness-when-things-fall-apart/"] HERE, and register
 HERE by 9am on January 25 to receive Join Laila for this class to
Join Laila for this
to maintain body 
class 
Zoom invitation. maintain body flexibility, improve
balance and reduce stress. 
flexibility, improve
balance and
reduce stress. 
NoveList 
31, 4:30-5:15pm
A variety of functional fitness exercises to
This drop-in class welcom (no class Jan. 17) 
tone core, upper and lower body muscles
followed by stretches. This is a low
impact class designed to be adaptable to
would like to participate fo
in poetry leading to a brief
participants’ different levels.  discussed should bring cop
Not sure what to
read next? Find
read-a-likes, 
recommendations, and more, all curated
by librarians and publishing insiders. 
 Click HERE and log in with your
Minuteman library card. 
Release, Relax, and Reinvigorate with Meditation 
Thursday January 20, 11am – on Zoom
Join Leslie Gabriele of [URL: "http://www.withloveandgratitude.com"] With Love and Gratitude on the third Thursday of
each month for a half hour of guided meditation and other opportunities
for carefree relaxation. If you have not registered before, please
 REGISTER by 9am on January 20. 
Registration or program questions: email [URL: "mailto:framinghamlibraryevents%40gmail.com?subject="] framinghamlibraryevents@gmail.com or call 508-532-5570.
3  For more information please visit our website: [URL: "http://www.framinghamlibrary.org"] www.framinghamlibrary.org
Page 22
ur own
etc!  Kick off your weekend with some D&D. 
Dungeon masters are especially welcome! 
m, McAuliffe
Morning!
ce
Grades 4-8.
chool
mily fun!
Charter 
Looking for a job? Need
to create or update a
resume? 
One-on-one
Spark Lab: 
Thursday March 26, 3-4:30pm – Main
Library, Spark Lab
It’s spring, so let’s create
really cool planters using
old books. Plant a succulent or
small cactus in it to take home with you. 
Book Planters 
me stickers
Stickers
iendship
0pm – 
Resume Building
Thursdays January 
6, 13, 20, and 27, 
9am-1:30pm – via
Zoom*
AniManga Club
Saturday March 28, 1:30-3:30pm –
Main Library, Costin Room
AniManga club is for everyone who
enjoys all things Anime and Manga. 
One-on-one Mock Interviews 
UPS Thursday January 6, 2-3:30pm –
via Zoom*
Please note location [URL: "http://bit.ly/Downtown-U"] this month) Please REGISTER HERE for your 
Monday March 16, 
Advanced Poetry
Tuesdays January 4, 11, 18, and 25, 7:30-9:30pm – on Zoom
Led by Alan Feldman, Professor Emeritus, Framingham State Univ.
Community 
Puzzle Swap! 
7-8:30pm –
McAuliffe Branch, 
Craft Room 
What to do with jigsaw
puzzles you’ve completed? 
Workshop
This class welcomes serious poets with experience who would like to participate for one
or more sessions. We begin with a discussion of a topic in poetry. Poets may discuss
their work. If you are new to the group and would like to participate, please email
 FPLpoetryworkshop@gmail.com
Swap them! Bring your puzzles to
exchange with others. No puzzle to swap? 
Come anyway; there are always extras for
you to take. All ages and levels welcome. 
by noon on the day of the workshop.
Join the Main Library Knitters 
Yarn Social Clubs every Wednesday and the 
2nd & 4th Saturday of every 
Main Librarymonth, 10-11am! 
Join the Main Library Knitters Beginners welcome. 
every Wednesday and the 2nd 
& 4th Saturday of every month, 10-11am! 
LVM Literacy Unlimited
Call for volunteer tutors! We
need you to join our community
and help students achieve their
appointment.  Main Floor. Beginners welcome.  Veterans Coffee Hour  English learning goals. 
ss’s story.”
g novel the
– McAuliffe Branch, Community Room
New York Times
*
us at
Library at
If you need access to a computer, please email
fplmail6@minlib.net
508-532-5570 
calls “A bold and 
and speak with one of
or call the Main
the staff.
derman These programs are part of our new
pm – Main Library, Spark Lab Downtown U, an exciting partnership
irls have acquired immense physical power: they with Framingham State University! 
en death. And, with this small twist of nature, the Please see page 2 for more information.
en be kinder, gentler rulers, or would they be just as 
McAuliffe Branch Library
Join us for a knitting, crochet, and yarn
crafting social hour, Wednesdays 6-7pm
and the 1st and 3rd Monday of every
month, 11am-12pm. This is not a
learn to knit or crochet program. 
Friday March 13, 9:30-10:30am
– McAuliffe Branch, Community
Room
All Vets are welcome to join
us for free coffee and light
refreshments. 
Monthly Event 
 REGISTER
by in person at the McAuliffe Branch. Ongoing Food Drive  for the Zoom link or drop 
The next virtual Tutor Training will be
Tuesdays January 4-February 8, 1-3pm. 
Click [URL: "https://www.emailmeform.com/builder/form/A2w2qb4dG8cFb"] HERE to register, space is limited!
We help adult learners who are interested
in improving their spoken English or reading
ability. We are open for in-person and online
tutoring and English conversation classes.
s? Led by Marcy Maiorana.  at the Main Library To learn more about us click [URL: "https://framinghamlibrary.org/literacy/our-program/"] HERE, or contact
ANCH
ar Hill by Sujata Massey Framingham
– McAuliffe Branch, Community Room
IDEAS
r this richly detailed historical mystery. Perveen Mistry,  HAPPENING 
Business
is the only person that can help three women living in HERE
Goldberg. 
Resource
Center 
m – McAuliffe Branch, Craft Room at Framingham Public Library
facial deformity that had prevented him from going to
h grade, he wants nothing more than to be treated
The FBRC is your one stop shop for: 
lassmates can’t get past Auggie’s extraordinary Expert guidance for City business
community’s
olmberg. 
resources, struggle with forms, and procedures, empathy, compassion, small 
Please consider donating to our
PUZZLES!
food drive to support the Hope Worldwide
Framingham Food Pantry! If you prefer
to write a check, you can mail it to: Hope
Worldwide Food Pantry, 214 Concord St.,
Framingham, MA 01702. THANK YOU!
Wednesday
Circulation
January 12, 7pm
– Main Library, 
Stop by our table and grab 
a free puzzle to keep!Please see
Monday January 24, pages 5 7pm –
McAuliffe Branch, Community Room and 6 for 
What to do with jigsaw puzzles you’ve Children’s
completed? Swap them! Bring your Events! 
us at 508-532-5574, [URL: "mailto:fplmail4%40minlib.net?subject="] fplmail4@minlib.net.
Citizenship Corner
Applying for U.S. Citizenship? 
Literacy Unlimited has tutors who will work
with you one-on-one to help prepare you
for the Naturalization test and interview. You
must be at least an intermediate-level English
business and entrepreneurship support, puzzles to exchange with others. No  speaker to benefit from the sessions. Tutors
LinkedIn Learning’s 16,000 video courses, puzzle to swap? Come anyway; there are  continue to work remotely; a device (laptop
resources and databases, plus our state of For more information please visit our website: www.framinghamlibrary.org always extras for you to take. All ages and or smartphone) and good internet is strongly
the art Business Center PC is equipped levels welcome.  recommended.
with Adobe Creative Cloud. Come visit
us on the 3rd floor of the Main Library. 
Check out our 
YouTube Channel 
Your 
Thing
Find 
. 
The Library
of Things is a
collection of
games, tools, 
consumer 
For more information, please contact Literacy
Unlimited at [URL: "mailto:fplmail4@minlib.net"] fplmail4@minlib.net or 
508-532-5574.
MULTILINGUAL RESOURCES
Have you tried our World
 CLICK HERE for video tutorials, 
lectures, concerts, author talks, 
stories for kids and grownups, recipes, 
crafts, guitar lessons and more. 
PLEASE SUBSCRIBE! 
electronics and
more that you can check out with your
library card. [URL: "http://framinghamlibrary.org/browse/libraryofthings/"] framinghamlibrary.org/
 browse/libraryofthings
Library of Things
BE AMAZED ~ Books are just the beginning. 
Languages Collection 
in Libby/Overdrive? 
 CLICK HERE to see all
that’s offered.Multilingual Resources
Libby allows users to browse, search, and
enjoy the app in nine additional languages. 
The supported languages include: Spanish, 
Simplified Chinese, Traditional Chinese, French, 
Anti-Racism Resources  German, Russian, Italian, Japanese and Swedish.
Visit our [URL: "https://framinghamlibrary.org/antiracism/"] WEBSITE for resources for
learning and taking action. 
Registration or program questions: email [URL: "mailto:framinghamlibraryevents%40gmail.com?subject="] framinghamlibraryevents@gmail.com or call 508-532-5570.
4  For more information please visit our website: [URL: "https://framinghamlibrary.org/"] www.framinghamlibrary.org
Page 23
YOUNG ADULTS
JANUARY PROGRAMS
Minecraft Server Grades 4-12
Sign up now!
The Framingham Public Library (with
support from the Framingham Cultural
Council) has created a private Minecraft
server for any Framingham residents
in 4-12th grades to join! Whether you
like crafting and fighting Creepers in
survival mode, or building cities in
Creative mode, this server is right for
you. For more info, and to download
the registration form, visit www.
framinghamlibrary.org/minecraft. 
Pixel Art 
Grades 4-12
Tuesday January 11, 
3-4:30pm –
McAuliffe Branch, 
Community Room
Create your own Pixel Art using fuse
beads. Then turn it into a magnet/
keychain/jewelry if you’d like! 
Learn Arduino Grades 5-12
Wednesday January 19, 6-8pm –
Main Library, Spark Lab
Learn how to use Arduino to
do lots of different projects
in the next installment of our ongoing
series. If you can, please bring your own
laptop. [URL: "https://framinghamlibrary.org/calendar/31"] REGISTRATION is required. 
Galaxy Cookies Grades 4-12
Tuesday January 25, 3-4pm –
McAuliffe Branch, 
Community Room
In honor of Christa 
SPACE &
EXPLORATION
WEEK
McAuliffe Week, join
us in decorating galaxy
cookies. They’re 
beautiful and delicious!
Borax Crystals (Take &
Make kit) Grades 6-12
Pick up in the second half of January
LIMITED SUPPLIES – Register to
reserve your kit
Do science! Make art! It only takes a
few ingredients to make your very own
crystals in whatever shape you’d like. 
 REGISTRATION is required. 
Framingham Public Library Foundation News
Help create a Technology & Learning Center (TLC) at the Main Library.
The TLC will be a state-of-the-art classroom where citizens of 
all ages can learn how to conduct research for job searches, 
school assignments, or genealogy searches. People can also learn 
how to create graphics, edit digital photographs, or master 
software programs for PCs and Macs.
Please make a donation [URL: "http://www.framlibfoundation.org/donate/
"] HERE. Or, send a
check to FPLF, 49 Lexington Street, 
Framingham, MA 01702. For more 
information email Ruth Winett 
at rwinett@rcn.com. 
Homework Center News
The Homework Center provides in- 
person and virtual tutoring in all subjects
to students K-12, Monday through
Another Way To Help
the Framingham Public
Library Foundation and
the FPL
Order ALL your Amazon 
items, not just books, through Amazon
Smile and support your Library for free! 
Thursday, 2:30-5:30pm.
We also facilitate Academic Enrichment
Book Groups reading 
Framingham Public School
recommended books for all 
grade levels, K-12. 
To sign up for tutoring sessions or
participate in a book group, contact 
 CLICK HERE for details.  [URL: "mailto:jgatlin%40minlib.net?subject="] jgatlin@minlib.net. 
Want to
Decompress
After the
Holidays with
a Good Book?
The Friends Book Sale can help. Check it
out. Our next sale is January 15 and all
four book sale areas at the Main Library
will be open from 10am to 3pm. Friends
can have early access to the Bag Room
and Book Sale Room at 9:30am. Books in
the Friends Bookstore and Lobby can be
purchased from 9am onward. 
Think Fudge
It’s never too soon to think about fudge. 
Ensure your February is even sweeter
with fudge from The Fudge Lady. We are
repeating our popular Valentine’s Day
fundraiser which offers for sale this delish
treat. Flavors and ordering details will be
available on the Friends [URL: "https://framinghamlibrary.org/support-the-library/friends-of-the-library/"] WEBSITE.
It’s a Bargain…
Joining the Friends, that is. Click [URL: "https://framinghamlibrary.org/support-the-library/friends-of-the-library/membership/"] HERE to
join or renew.
COMMUNITY LINKS
Framingham State
University
Arts & Ideas 2021-2022
Look [URL: "https://www.framingham.edu/the-fsu-difference/arts-and-ideas/index"] HERE for information about this series of
speakers, exhibitions, and films—exploring the
theme of GOOD TROUBLE, in honor of the late
congressman and civil rights icon, John Lewis.
Council on Aging/
Callahan Center
The Raymond J. Callahan Center, known 
as the Callahan Center, welcomes older adults
from all backgrounds to learn about the services
we offer, participate in our programs and make
new friends. For more info, [URL: "https://www.framinghamma.gov/360/Council-on-Aging"] CLICK HERE.
Flyers by Night
Flyers By Night aims to increase access to
affordable educational opportunities for families
and residents of Framingham. Conveniently
located within Framingham High School, 
FBN offers continuing education courses in
the following areas: Arts, Language, Health
& Wellness, Culinary, Finance, Trades. Look
 HERE for more information
Registration or program questions: email [URL: "mailto:framinghamlibraryevents%40gmail.com?subject="] framinghamlibraryevents@gmail.com or call 508-532-5570.
5  For more information please visit our website: [URL: "http://www.framinghamlibrary.org"] www.framinghamlibrary.org
Page 24
DISCOVER GROW CREATE!
CHILDREN’S JANUARY 2022
SPECIAL EVENTS Space and Exploration Week 
Handprint Penguins
Thursday January 13, 11am-12pm – McAuliffe
Branch, Craft Room. Ages 2-5.
Drop in and make a cute penguin out of your handprint.
Snowflake Tinker Craft
Thursday January 13, 6-7:30pm –
Main Library, Spark Lab. Grades K+.
Drop in to make your own snowflake creation using
a variety of objects from toothpicks to glitter! Like
snowflakes, each creation will be unique. 
at the McAuliffe Branch 
Christa McAuliffe 36th Anniversary
Commemoration: January 24-28
January 28, 1986, Space Shuttle Challenger 
exploded, traumatizing the nation and taking 
the lives of the NASA crew, including Christa 
McAuliffe, the first Teacher in Space. Her life 
and death have inspired millions around the world. SPACE &
The Christa McAuliffe Branch Library is hosting a
series of events during this week to honor and celebrate 
EXPLORATION
WEEK
McAuliffe’s legacy. (See more all ages events on PAGE 1.)
Winnie the Pooh Craft
Tuesday January 18, 11am–12pm – McAuliffe
Branch, Craft Room. Ages 2-5.
Celebrate National Winnie the Pooh Day with a special
themed craft.
Arduino for Kids
Saturday January 22, 10am-12pm –
Main Library, Spark Lab. Ages 7-10 WITH the 
Green Screen Space Photos
January 24-28, 3-6pm – Lobby (other hours upon request)
Stop by and take a space-themed photo using our Spark Lab Green
Screen. Photos will be on our Facebook page at the end of the week. 
LEGO Space Build
Monday January 24, 3-4:30pm – Craft Room. Grades K-12.
Whether you’re a toddler or teen, drop in and make something out
of this world with Legos! We’ll display your space themed builds
throughout the library during the week.
assistance of a parent or guardian. [URL: "https://forms.gle/qcg4jTE4BrkS619p6"] REGISTRATION 
required as supplies are limited.
Learn the basics of Arduino, and how you can use these
microcontrollers in all sorts of projects. If you can, please
bring your own laptop. 
Solar System Paper Wreath
Thursday January 27, 11am-12pm – Craft Room. Ages 2-5.
Drop in and paint your own solar system paper wreath to inspire
you to never stop exploring!
From Mission Control to the Moon
Open Winter Coloring
Saturday January 22, 11am-1pm – McAuliffe
Branch, Craft Room. All Ages.
Drop in to color winter themed pictures and do fun mazes
and word activity sheets! 
Friday January 28, 3:30-5pm – Community 
Room. Grades 4-7. [URL: "https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScHxNzzRi8Y4PKSdpf_NbqMLe3NKn2Zmk1lpjyqZzs1nIjGuQ/closedform"] REGISTRATION required. 
Complete physical challenges with fellow Mission Controllers to
develop your communication, teamwork, and problem-solving
skills. Put your skills to the test during a mission simulation to
establish a habitat for astronauts to live and work on the Moon. 
Open LEGO  This program is partnered with the Christa Corrigan McAuliffe 
Saturday January 22, 2-4pm –  Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State.
Main Library, Spark Lab. Ages 5+.
Drop in and play with our buckets of Legos. Leave your name, and we will display 
your amazing creation for a month. There is a limit on room occupancy so you may
have to wait a few minutes until you can drop in, but we have some books to browse in
the meantime! 
Dads Donuts and 
Discoveries
Drop in Craft: Cardboard Creations
Wednesday January 26, 6-7:30pm – Main Library, SparkLab. Grades K+.
Drop in and create your own puzzle using recycled cardboard. Cut and design your
puzzle using markers, paint, crayons, or colored pencils. You can take it home or leave 
it in the Spark Lab for others to enjoy. 
Saturday January 8, 
10-11am – Main Library, Costin
Room. Ages 2-6.
See ECAF* [URL: "https://www.framingham.k12.ma.us/Page/2587"] WEBSITE for more
information. 
*Early Childhood Alliance of Framingham.
Kids’ Adventure Club 2.0
Saturday January 29, 3-4pm – Main Library, J Program Room. Grades 3-5.
Attention True Believers! Let's kick off 2022 in spectacular style with our first sensational superhero session featuring none other
than the Amazing Spider-Man! We'll talk about his powers, his toughest opponents, and what else makes Spidey one of the world's
most popular colorful costumed characters.
6  For more information please visit our website: [URL: "http://www.framinghamlibrary.org"] www.framinghamlibrary.org
Page 25
ONGOING EVENTS
Zoom Stories for Scooters
Wednesdays January 5-26, 10:15-10:45am – on Zoom. Ages 0-3 accompanied by a caregiver.
Twenty fun-filled minutes of tiny tales and tunes in interactive fashion for little library-goers and their
adults! For Zoom invite, contact [URL: "mailto:Mcauliffechildrensroom%40gmail.com?subject="] Mcauliffechildrensroom@gmail.com.
Weekly Hybrid Storytimes (in person or on Zoom)
Join your familiar children’s librarians for some stories and a craft (in person only) and keep adding to
your 1000 Books before Kindergarten list. No registration for in person attendance; for Zoom invite, 
please contact [URL: "mailto:Mcauliffechildrensroom%40gmail.com?subject="] Mcauliffechildrensroom@gmail.com.
Thursdays 10:15-10:45am – Main Library, Children’s Program Room or on Zoom. Ages 2-5. 
Mondays 10-10:20am – McAuliffe Branch, Children’s Room or on Zoom. Ages 2-5.
Zoom Baby Lapsits
Tuesdays 10-10:20am, Fridays January 14 and 28, and Saturday January 22, 10:30-11am – on Zoom. 
Ages 0-2 and their caregivers.
Come sing and play with words, rhyme, and puppets at Baby Lapsit. Share some fun time with your little one as you lay the
foundations for literacy and later success in school! For Zoom invite, please contact [URL: "mailto:Mcauliffechildrensroom%40gmail.com?subject="] Mcauliffechildrensroom@gmail.com.
Book Buddy Reading to Dogs
Sundays January 9 and 23, 2-3pm – Main Library, Children’s Program Room. All Ages.
Registration required. Call 508-532-5570 x4 or drop by to sign up for a 15 minute slot. Improve your
reading skills the fun way by reading aloud to your new Book Buddy. Certified Reading/Therapy Dog Lilah
listens as children read aloud from a book of their choice. 
Bookworm Book Club with Max! Grades 3-6.
Sundays January 9 and 23, 2-3pm – McAuliffe Branch, Craft Room
Sunday January 9: Snowflake Bentley by Jacqueline Briggs Martin.
Sunday January 23: Boxcar Children: Snowbound Mystery by Gertrude Chandler Warner.
Join us for this book club led by 10th grader Max! Find these books in person at the Library 
or check on Overdrive/Libby, Hoopla, or request a copy from the Minuteman Catalog.
INTRODUCING: 
The SparkLab Library
of Things!
Check out and 
then check out 
one of our brand 
new Spark Lab Backpacks. We have
five backpacks, all with a unique
theme to take outside and explore your
environment with. 
Winter Trivia &
Guessing Jar
All January long, Main Library
and McAuliffe Branch Library
Children’s Rooms. Grades PreK-5.
Answer our winter trivia questions
and/or make your best guess on what
amount is in our guessing jar every
time you visit one of our libraries! We’ll
pick some winners who will be called
January 31. Your choice of a book prize. 
Introduction to Citizen
Science All Ages
Wednesday, January 26, 7-8pm
– Main Library, Costin Room
Framingham Public Library received a grant
from Arizona State University to fund the
creation of Citizen Science kits that will be
available for check out! Join this session to
learn what Citizen Science is all about, and
to get a peek at the kits we’ll be rolling out
over the first half of 2022.
Take & Make Craft: 
Wild Friends
Adventure Sewing
Ages 7+. Registration Required.
Sign-ups begin Monday January 3, 
pick-ups begin Monday January 10.
Stuck in the house by snow and bad
weather? Sign up to get a fun little
handsewing kit to make an exotic, non-
arctic animal friend. Supplies are limited. 
Please [URL: "https://forms.gle/7Sncy2Ay8tF9DeVT9"] REGISTER on or after January 3. 
Winter Session Schedule
For More Info look HERE.
Play, Learn & Grow Together w/ Gracie 
Tuesdays, 11am - 12pm (All ages)
Let’s Go To Kindergarten w/ Jeanette
Wednesdays, 12 - 1pm (Ages 3-5) 
PJ Family Story Time w/ Jane 
2nd Thursday of the month, 6 - 7pm 
(All ages)
Baby Talk w/ Jane
A special time to meet others with or without
your infant (birth-6 months old). Each
week we share information about common
hot topics, sing songs and read a story. 
Resources, support, and self care is the
intent, as well as having some fun. 
Contact us at the email below to discuss
interest and possible times.
CONTACT US:
Email: jdehaven@framingham.k12.ma.us 
Phone: 508-782-6932
7  For more information please visit our website: www.framinghamlibrary.org
Page 26
Page 27
LIFELONG LEARNING LECTURE SERIES
WINTER/SPRING 
2022
This free Thursday 7:00pm lecture series via Zoom is a partnership between 
Framingham State University (FSU) and Framingham Public Library.
If you have not registered before, go to bit.ly/FPL-Lifelong-Learning-Lectures 
to join our mailing list and to receive the Zoom link for lectures.
January 27 – Tina Turner
GUEST SPEAKER: Tim Riley, 
Associate Professor of Journalism, Emerson College
Tina Turner’s career harnesses rock’n’roll’s feminist energy through
a distinctive voice and a powerhouse stage act. As she fumed
and strutted her way across stages, Turner always played out a
magical twist on rock’s energies: a female empowering herself
through a boys’ club; a young person who sounded mature before
the age of 20; and an independent female whose alliances with
rock royalty never clouded her fierce female vantage. As a black
person, she remains the closest female analog to Elvis Presley, 
a presence who epitomizes everything subversive and exciting
about the music. Tim Riley shares his vision of Tina and how
getting constantly underrated only fueled her vast ambition.
This Lecture Series is sponsored by The Joseph L. and Ray L. Freund Foundation, courtesy of Elizabeth F. Fideler.
Framingham Public Library • 508-532-5570 • www.framinghamlibrary.org
Page 28
Page 29
Page 30
Page 31
Page 32
Page 33
Page 34
Page 35
