Page 1
Vince Kaminski
Enterprise – Wide Risk Management. 
Discussion notes for RAC/Research off-site
January 16, 2000
This document reviews the definition and implementation guidelines of Enterprise -
Wide Risk Management (EWRM) for Enron Corp. EWRM is a relatively poorly defined
concept, often abused by some consulting and software firms, which has different
meaning (if any) to different people. Our objective is to define this term from the point
of view of Enron Corp. and to discuss the implementation plan. The document is divided
into three sections:
I.  EWRM: Definition
II.  Enron Corp. EWRM System: Outline of different modules
III.  Implementation requirements
I.  EWRM: DEFINITION.
Enterprise – Wide Risk Management is currently a buzzword repeated constantly at
different conferences and financial press articles, but the truth is that neither any
company has truly implemented such a system so far, nor any vendor has offered a
satisfactory off-the-shelf software solution. In the most general sense, EWRM is defined
as a comprehensive management of different financial exposures that a company faces,
using a set of specialized information technology solutions. This definition is quite fuzzy,
but the trend is unmistakable, and the stock analysts, credit rating agencies, lenders, and
ultimately customers will penalize any company that does not move in the general
direction of defining and implementing such a system. 
At a lower level of abstraction, EWRM often means:
a. Extension of Value-at-Risk to the entire trading portfolio. This is the
least ambitious definition, applicable to companies that failed to
develop a risk management system for a trading operation with
sufficient coverage, and struggle to catch up.
b. Integration of Value-at-Risk with credit risk management. Enron has
accomplished this objective in our original design of the VaR system
for the trading operation, but most financial institutions have only
recently begun to address this issue.
c. Creation of a Data Warehouse. A data warehouse is defined as a
centralized database that allows aggregating information about
different company exposures. Although this is a sound concept in
itself (one cannot measure risk without data), an operational definition
of such a database is not a trivial matter. In a company that is evolving
very rapidly, creation of an inflexible, centralized database quickly
1
Page 2
becomes an obstacle to risk management. An over-centralized
database becomes very costly to maintain and is never in sync with the
company’s business. 
d. Integrated management of a company’s different financial exposures.
Traditionally, companies had a tendency to pigeonhole different
exposures into homogeneous classes (market risk, credit risk,
sovereign risk, operational risk, legal risk), ignoring in the process
interactions between different types of risks and estimation of
economic capital required to support different exposures (individually
and jointly). In most cases, separate teams manage different exposures,
without sufficient communication flows between them.
Our definition of Enron’s EWRM will be provided by stating what it is, and, often more
importantly, what it is not:
a. EWRM System is a process for systematic identification, measurement,
reporting and monitoring of different exposures Enron faces, across all
its operations and business units. As the list of potential exposures is
practically infinite; judgment and understanding of the company’s
business will be required to define the list of risk factors that will be
captured within the system.
b. A family of related IT modules capturing, aggregating and measuring
the exposures will support the system. This means that our objective is
not to develop a holistic model of the entire company that will serve as a
platform for risk measurement. Such models require too much time to
build and in the case of a company as dynamic as Enron would be
always obsolete.
c. The objective of each module will be measurement of the order of
magnitude of an exposure to a specific risk. This means that we are not
tying to reproduce in each case for the precision of the VaR system for
every case. Rather, we are interested in capturing the directional impact
of a change in external conditions on Enron. This approach is dictated
by the imprecise and incomplete nature of the data: the information is
dispersed through the organization and, in many cases, it resides in so
many different locations (spreadsheets, data bases, hard copy
documents. Accessing and aggregating all the information is difficult,
without incurring a prohibitive cost. Of course, judgment should be used
in each case and the degree of precision of each module will depend on
the circumstances. 
d. Each module should use to the maximum extent possible the
information about the magnitude of different risks available from
different units of Enron. The expertise contained in different units of
2
