Page 1
DRAFT 4 FOR REVIEW
Contact for Enron:
Shelly Mansfield
Enron Broadband Services
(713) 853-4589
 shelly_mansfield@enron.net 
Contact for SAVVIS:
Janice Conklin
TSI Communications
(212) 320-2314
jconklin@tsicomm.com
ENRON AND SAVVIS COMMUNICATIONS JOIN FORCES TO PROVIDE
BROADBAND CONTENT DELIVERY PLATFORM
Combined Excellence in Streaming Media Services and Delivery of Mission-Critical
Information Brings Content to Customers’ Doorsteps Worldwide
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: Tuesday, June 20, 2000
HOUSTON, TX & RESTON, VA -- Enron Broadband Services, a wholly
owned subsidiary of Enron Corp., and SAVVIS Communications Corp. (NASDAQ: 
SVVS), a global Intelligent IP network services provider, today announced an agreement
to form an optimal broadband distribution channel for streaming media content and
services. Together, the companies will create an integrated platform to provide end-users
with superior speed and quality in the delivery of rich media content, bypassing Internet
congestion. 
Enron’s long-haul fiber optic network combines content management software
with a distributed server architecture to distribute high quality audio and video. Enron
servers will be hosted by SAVVIS at its Private Network Access Points (PrivateNAPsSM),
providing the highest performing connectivity to the doorstep of multiple enterprise
customers through 104 global Points of Presence (POPs). The SAVVIS PrivateNAPsSM 
offer the fastest download times and the lowest packet loss for Internet service in the
industry and its POPs ensure cost-effective global access to its high performance
network.
SAVVIS will use the platform to deliver Enron-distributed content to its
customers in information-intensive industries, including the financial service industry. 
Today, 4,700 financial services companies are on the SAVVIS network, including 75 of
the top 100 worldwide banks and 45 of the top 50 brokerage firms. In addition, Enron
Page 2
has agreed to purchase additional bandwidth from SAVVIS to enhance the domestic and
global reach of its existing network.
“Joining forces with SAVVIS allows Enron to extend its content delivery services
to reach more broadband-enabled enterprise desktops,” said Joe Hirko, chief executive
officer of Enron Broadband Services. “Both companies are known for having top tier
capabilities in delivering mission-critical, high-bandwidth information, and this
agreement adds to our quality of service.”
“Information is our customers’ lifeblood and Enron has developed exceptional
technology for delivering the most current forms of streaming media content,” said Rob
McCormick, chief executive officer of SAVVIS Communications Corp. “Enron is
providing a content distribution capability that our customers demand to remain
competitive in today’s market, and SAVVIS enhances the platform at the 'last mile' to the
customer.”
In a separate announcement earlier this week, WebFN, a partnership between
Bridge Information Systems and Weigel Broadcasting, announced that is has chosen
Enron and SAVVIS as the delivery platform for its news service. WebFN is a new, on-
line worldwide financial news and information network that will create original news
programming, and provide live coverage around the clock.
SAVVIS Communications (NASDAQ: SVVS) is the premier service provider of
Intelligent IP solutions, and the first to deliver Internet economics to private IP networks. 
As a result, the benefits of high-end private networks are now accessible to small and
medium-sized businesses, while the Fortune 1000 can be more nimble in the execution of
their e-commerce strategies. SAVVIS’ state-of-the-art global IP platform provides a full
range of customer-specified Internet, Intranet and Extranet networks, combining the
flexibility and fast time-to-market of the Internet, with the QoS, security and reliability of
Private IP networks. 
The SAVVIS extensive infrastructure has made it the industry leader in fastest
download times with the lowest packet loss for Internet access.* Around the globe, the
network employs over 250 Lucent backbone switches, more than 200 backbone routers
and 14,000 Cisco and Nortel Networks edge routers, 104 POPs, 10 PrivateNAPSSM and
ATM switching architecture, and is also deploying 10,000 Lucent ATM edge devices. 
The company is also rolling out Nortel Network's Shasta 5000 BSNs throughout its
