Page 1
KPMG Innovative Strategies Group
Overview of the Innovative Strategies Group
The Innovative Strategies group is a team of specialized Personal Financial Planning
professionals that deliver integrated income and transfer tax strategies for individuals with
significant ordinary income and/or highly appreciated property.
Innovative Strategies Group Objectives
  Understanding and meeting the unique financial planning needs of our high net worth clients
  Creating a “portfolio” of tax strategies that links the tax “risk” of individual strategies with
the potential “return”
Innovative Strategies “Portfolio”
  Stock Option and Restricted Stock Strategies
  Concentrated Equity Position Monetization Strategies
  Capital Transaction Strategies
  Estate Planning Strategies
Innovative Strategies Group Services
  Develop cutting-edge income and transfer tax strategies
  Assist clients to determine whether particular strategies are compatible with their objectives
  Coordinate implementation of strategies 
KPMG LLP INNOVATIVE STRATEGIES
Page 2
KPMG’s “Option Diversification Vehicle
Overview of the Option Diversification Vehicle
The Option Diversification Vehicle (“ODV”) has the following benefits:
  Allows executives and/or directors to monetize some or all of their nonqualified stock
options without current income recognition;
  Allows diversification of a concentrated portfolio holding on a tax-deferred basis; and
  Provides annual payments to executives/directors based on the options’ pre-tax value.
Structure
To implement ODV, the nonqualified stock option plan may need to be amended to allow limited
transfers of options. The executive/director sells his options to a family partnership with the
purchase price due in 10 years. Annual interest payments would be made in the interim. It is
anticipated the family partnership will exercise the options, sell the stock, and use the proceeds
of the sale to diversify its investments on a tax-deferred basis.
Tax Implications
This strategy defers recognition of ordinary income until the sale price is received by the
executive/director (i.e., 10 years). In addition, it avoids the recognition of additional ordinary
income as a consequence of the family partnership’s exercise of the options. Finally, investment
of the proceeds from the sale of company stock, based on the partnership’s investment approach, 
may generate long-term capital gain income.
Advantage of ODV
ODV delays the taxable event for 10 years and allows the executive/director to diversify their
investments on a tax-deferred basis. The strategy is ideal for executives and directors with
expiring options or those that want to diversify while the stock price is high.
The above discussion is general in nature and does not constitute an opinion. Thus, no action
should be taken based on the contents of this memorandum without specific consultation with a
competent advisor. 
KPMG LLP INNOVATIVE STRATEGIES
