Page 1
Investment Policy Statement
Statement of Investment Policy, Objectives, and Guidelines
The Greater Houston Community Foundation
September 22, 1999
GENERAL INFORMATION
The Greater Houston Community Foundation
SCOPE OF THIS INVESTMENT POLICY
This statement of investment policy reflects the investment policy, objectives, and constraints of the Greater
Houston Community Foundation.
PURPOSE OF THIS INVESTMENT POLICY STATEMENT
This statement of investment policy is set forth by the Investment Committee of The Greater Houston
Community Foundation in order to:
1. Define and assign the responsibilities of all involved parties.
2. Establish a clear understanding for all involved parties of the investment goals and objectives of the
Foundation assets. The primary investment objective is to earn an average annual total return of at
least 5% above the inflation rate and administrative and investment fees. 
3. Offer guidance and limitations to all Investment Managers regarding the investment of the
Foundation assets.
Page 2
4. Establish a basis for monitoring and evaluating investment results.
5. Manage Foundation assets according to prudent standards as established in common trust law.
6. Establish the relevant investment horizon for which the Foundation assets will be managed.
In general, the purpose of this statement is to outline a philosophy and attitude, which will guide the
investment management of the assets toward the desired results. It is intended to be sufficiently specific to be
meaningful, yet flexible enough to be practical.
ASSIGNMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY
Investment Committee
The Board of Directors of the Greater Houston Community Foundation has the responsibility for the
management of the assets of the Greater Houston Community Foundation. The specific responsibilities of the
Investment Committee relating to the investment management of the Foundation assets include:
1.  Establishing and communicating reasonable and consistent investment objectives, policies and
guidelines, which will provide guidance in the investment of the Foundations assets.
2.  Determining the Foundation's risk tolerance, investment horizon and communicating these to the
investment managers.
3.  Prudently and diligently selecting qualified investment professionals, including Investment
Manager(s), Investment Consultant(s), and Custodian(s). 
2
