Page 1
GLOBAL MARKETS MONITOR
Published on: 8 December 2000 
ENA Research Group
Country Risk and Foreign
Exchange
Maureen Raymond-Castañeda
Economic and Central Bank Monitor
North America
 
Fed Chairman Greenspan Speaks: The interest rate hikes of the last year and a half have done their job to align
supply and demand along a more sustainable path. Such was the message from Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan, 
who cited declines in homebuilding, slipping motor vehicle sales, and a downshift in demand for consumer
durables as evidence of the appreciable moderation in economic activity. Markets rallied early in the week as the
Fed chairman acknowledged the economic slowdown and a possible shift in risks from overheating to
moderation. “In an economy that already has lost some momentum, one must remain alert to the possibility
that greater caution and weakening asset values in financial markets could signal or precipitate an
excessive softening in household and business spending,” Greenspan said. This appears to be the overriding
statement that led equity markets to rally on beliefs the Fed would not only change its inflationary bias but also
lower rates imminently. 
 
However, oil is eroding corporate profit margins and the Fed estimates that rising gas, power and oil have caused
energy costs at manufacturing firms to increase 40 percent annually since the spring of 1999. “The sharp rise in
energy prices, if sustained, is worrisome…rising energy prices could engender risks to both inflation and
economic activity. If accommodated by monetary policy, the jump in energy prices could spill over into
general inflation and inflationary expectations, as was so evident in the 1970s,” he said. On the one hand, the
economy is moderating and there is a risk that it may be moderating too much. But, the Fed chairman is very
concerned about oil feeding into inflation, as it did during the oil shocks of the 1970s. Although oil prices have
declined recently, the Fed chairman will likely need another quarter’s worth of soft GDP results (below 3 percent)
or rising unemployment to justify that the economy needs a rate cut. 
 
U.S. Stock Markets Post Gains: Both the Dow (up 3 percent) and NASDAQ (up 10 percent) recovered from a
rough previous week. Comments on Tuesday by Alan Greenspan led to a rally in stocks on market assumptions
that a rate cut is imminent. However, the Fed will be wary to alter its inflationary bias after witnessing the
market’s overreaction to his statements acknowledging the moderation of economic activity. Although weak
stock prices are eroding the wealth effect that encourages consumers to spend, the Fed wants to avoid the
perception of moral hazard, which uses accommodative monetary policy to influence stock prices. At week’s
end, the markets surrendered some gains on concerns that included slowing profits at technology companies. 
Apple Computer reported that its fiscal first-quarter losses could reach $250 million while warning that 2001 sales
will slow, news that pulled down shares of IBM, HP and Intel. Microsoft’s earnings forecasts were lowered by
Goldman, Sachs and Motorola stated its profits and sales in 4Q00 and in 2001 would disappoint investors on
“slowing market conditions” in the semiconductor industry. Bank of America announced that bad loans would
hurt profits. The rally at week’s end reflected in large part the hope that stocks had fallen sufficiently enough to
reflect slowing growth in profits, which the market has begun to price into the value of equities. Also, data that
point to a slowing economy will boost stocks because it bolsters hopes that the Fed will trim interest rates soon. 
 
Amid Market Volatility, what is the Outlook for Profits? There seems to be a what some have termed a
”fundamental deterioration” in profits taking place as news of declining earnings forecasts and disappointing sales
growth become more frequent. Profit growth for S&P 500 companies slowed to 18.3 percent in 3Q00 from 21.6
percent in 2Q00 and 23.6 percent in 1Q00, according to First Call. Yet, as Chairman Greenspan points out, the
three-to-five year average earnings projections of more than a thousand analysts, according to a Wall Street firm, 
though flattening in recent months, have generally held firm. 
 
Cloudy Conditions in the U.S. Economy: While Richmond Fed President Alfred Broaddus (voting) considers
signs of moderation in demand a “healthy development”, inflation, his main concern, is moving in the “wrong
direction.” Amongst the broad range of possible outcomes for the economy in what he calls the cloudiest
conditions in recent memory, he believes a soft landing is still the most likely scenario. Chicago Fed’s Moskow
(non-voting) also sees risks of inflation and urging caution that high oil prices could spill over into core inflation. 
Enron – For Internal Use Only Page 1 of 7
Page 2
GLOBAL MARKETS MONITOR (8 DECEMBER 2000)
ENA RESEARCH GROUP, CONTINUED
Broaddus doesn’t appear deeply concerned about recent the stock market slide, which combined with higher
interest rates and tight credit conditions, may be helping to achieve the desired balance between demand growth
and supply in the economy. And, although consumer spending is showing signs of softening, the monthly
numbers are volatile, he says. He reiterated the tightness of U.S. labor markets and upward pressure on wages. 
The U.S. unemployment rate stands at 4.0 percent as of November and workers’ wages were 4.0 percent higher
last month than a year ago, the largest annual increase since January 1999. Boston Fed President Cathy Minehan
(voting, 2001) echoed these comments this week by saying that labor shortage stories persist in her region. San
Francisco Fed President Robert Parry (voting) said the economy, while still strong, is moving to a more
sustainable track, and that the “reassessment” of risks from falling equity prices will help temper the thrust to
wealth and spending. These comments help to support our position that the Fed will hold rates constant
and retain its inflationary bias on December 19th.
 
Cloudier: Besides the evidence cited by Alan Greenspan this week, more economic data reinforce the Fed-speak
this week that the economy is slowing and that labor markets remain tight. Many regions of the country reported
some slowing in the pace of economic growth as well as persistent labor shortages and cost pressures, according
beige book results published this week. The closely watched index of leading economic indicators, a monitor of
growth over the next six months, declined in October after remaining flat in September. U.S. productivity in
3Q00 rose at a slower pace than previous estimates (3.3 percent revised down from 3.8 percent) and more slowly
than the 6.1 percent increase in 2Q00, but is still a solid result as it exceeds the rate of economic growth at 2.7
percent in 3Q00. The decline was probably due to a drop in overall economic output as the economy cooled
during the third quarter. Unit labor costs rose more than originally estimated, up 2.9 percent from 2.5 percent. 
 
New York Fed Analyzes Impact of Deregulation on U.S. Electricity Industry: In its study published this
month called “Lowering Electricity Prices through Deregulation,” the New York Fed argues that despite the
structural challenges posed by deregulation, the introduction of competitive pressures in the wholesale and retail
markets should ultimately lead to efficiency gains for the industry and cost savings for businesses and consumers. 
In this paper, the Fed examines the events leading to power deregulation, the reasons why restructuring should
improve efficiency, and why industrial and household users should see lower energy prices if and when
deregulation takes place and these efficiency improvements materialize. The study concludes that profits will
flow to those firms that build and operate efficient power plants and that state authorities are turning up the
competitive pressure by opening up the retail electricity market, giving consumers the power to choose their
energy suppliers directly. Prices should drop once the operational challenges such as meeting peak-load demands
and coordinating output from independent producers are addressed. Lower electricity rates should free up
consumer disposable income that can be spent to boost U.S. economic activity. For publication, refer to
http://www.ny.frb.org/pihome/news/rsch_pap/rp001204.html
 
Bank of Canada (BOC) Holds: Canada’s central bank left interest rates unchanged at 6.0 percent this week at its
first fixed-date interest rate decision-making meeting. In a somewhat hawkish statement, the BOC reports that
economic expansion is above Canada’s long-run growth potential and that monetary conditions have supported
the growth of aggregate demand. Growth in domestic demand remains robust amid moderating external demand, 
namely from the U.S. An interest rate hike would not be expected if the slowdown in US demand is sufficient to
temper Canada’s growth rate. During third quarter, the Canadian economy grew 4.8 percent and inventories
jumped at both the manufacturing and retail levels. Auto production was strong which caused inventories to
build, which may lead to production cuts in 4Q00. 
Europe
 
Economic Projections by the ECB: The ECB will announce for the first time its economic projections for the
euro-zone on December 21. These are not forecasts but rather general estimates of the direction the central bank
believes economic activity is headed. The ECB’s behavior will be largely influenced by the actual euro-zone
growth and its estimates will be closely scrutinized, especially considering the recent rally in the euro due to the
perception of stronger growth in Europe than in the U.S. High oil prices and the euro’s weakness are still
Enron - For Internal Use Only Page 2 of 7
