Page 1
EventAmerica Timeline for Phase I-III  March 1, 2001
After a thorough evaluation of market conditions, the current prevailing attitude of the Venture Capital
community toward Start-up companies, and the need to establish EventAmerica as an ongoing business
that generates revenues, the management team of EventAmerica has decided to rollout our business
model in three phases. We will seek funding separately for each phase. These will be:
Phase I: We will seek upwards of $5 million in funding from Angel investors, corporate investors, and
Venture Capital firms (VCs) to develop and launch the EventAmerica Web site, including our VIP
Sports Tours business by September 1, 2001. We will be able to launch this site for under $250K and
use the balance of the funding for infrastructure development, marketing, sponsorship and strategic
alliance relationships. It is our intention to invite the top VCs to one of our premiere VIP events where
we will have an ideal setting to pitch them on our Phase II and Phase III models.
Phase II: Create an EventAmerica “event” portal with all the event listings, e-commerce opportunities,
streaming video for each listing, and various topical communities, etc. that our "overall" plan contains.
This site will launch the summer of 2002. With the "proof of concept" of Phase I, EventAmerica will
have attained significant cash flow and brand recognition. This will create the necessary increase in
corporate valuation and visibility that will allow EventAmerica the capability to raise additional capital
to continue the ongoing development of our business model.
Phase III: Design and develop significant B2B opportunities in the Event and Entertainment
marketplace, as well as create ASP applications that will bring the highly fragmented event suppliers
together into one marketplace. This site will launch in 2003.
All these phases will be worked on behind the scenes while the first phase is created and brought to
market. By bringing Phase I to market first, we will utilize less manpower, need significantly less
funding and be able to build our brand quicker. We will have the necessary “proof of concept” in
order to convince the financial community that we can be successful. EventAmerica’s Phase II portal
segment of our business model will be dramatically enhanced through the marketing and high visibility
of our VIP Sports Tours business.
We look forward to sending you our business plan, executive summary, and PowerPoint presentation.
Our overall presentation for EventAmerica is being coordinated with the help of our friends at Ernst &
Young and Chris Walsh, formerly VP of Business Development for Angel Engineers. We have
financial projections available for the racing segment of this VIP Sports Tours model. Revenues
approach $30 million in auto racing and up to $82 million in college football alone. We will also be
able to provide e-commerce opportunities to all the vendors at the VIP events we will market. We will
need to develop more projections for all the sports in which we will offer VIP Sports Tours. 
For more information please contact us at: 831-763-9443 or info@eventamerica.com
