Page 1
Comprehensive Solution for California
The key components:
  Increase supply—California must build more power plants
  Decrease demand—California must get prices right so consumers have financial incentives to conserve
  Make the utilities creditworthy—California’s electric rates must cover utility costs, past and future
  Get government out of the power-buying business—California has no expertise, the private sector does
  Get deregulation right this time—California needs a real electricity market, not government takeovers
1.  Increase Supply
The Problem—Not enough supply to meet demand
  Unless new generation is built in California, there is no solution.
  Over the past decade, additions to California’s stock of power plants have been negligible
Growth in California for the period 1990-1999
Employment
Population
State economy
Electronics and instruments
industry
Communications industry
Natural gas use
Electricity use
Peak electric demand
Peak demand in Silicon
Valley (1996-2000)
Power Generation Capacity 
12%
16%
45%
62%
80%
6%
9%
15%
33%
2%
The Solution—Build more power plants
  The Governor has taken some important first steps by using his executive powers to streamline plant siting
  According to the California Energy Commission, California has approved 13 power plants totaling 8,512 MWs
  California will need every one of those plants—and more—to dig itself out of its energy hole
  The Governor has also appointed a “supply czar” who’s sole mission is to ensure that the plants that receive
permits don’t face unnecessary impediments during the construction phase
  If those plants don’t get built on, or ahead of, schedule, California’s energy crisis will persist
Don’t make matters worse
  Unfortunately, other actions taken by the California’s political leaders threaten to seriously discourage power
plant investment in California. These actions include:
 Legislation that would 1) impose a “windfall profits” tax on power sold in California and 2) make it a
felony to sell power at a price that California finds “unreasonable.”
 Continued calls for price controls in wholesale power markets—as every experience with price controls
shows, price caps won’t lower electricity prices, they will only create shortages (“black outs”)
 Countless investigations into allegations that suppliers manipulated power prices, and proposals to have the
State confiscate privately-held power plants
 Endless statements by California’s political leaders accusing power suppliers of criminal activity—and
worse
  In this environment, it may not matter how many power plant approvals California rushes through the process, 
capital markets may simply refuse to invest
  The problem is exacerbated by short-term constraints on the supply of turbines. The need for increased
generation capacity is a global trend. And in the competition for scarce turbines, the actions and strong rhetoric
of California’s political leaders have created a “anywhere but California” attitude among those who possess the
turbines
  To get new power plants built, California must do everything it can to attract capital to the state
  The rhetoric and bad legislation—and the signal they both send to the capital markets—must end
Page 2
Likely retort from advocates of investigations and high-pitched rhetoric
  “These bills (and the rhetoric) aren’t serious and likely won’t pass. They are merely a tactic to bring the
suppliers to the bargaining table and get them to forgive a portion of the utilities’ debt.”
Response
  We have a legal system and a set of laws to address allegations of price manipulation.
  Allegations of manipulation should be addressed using the means available.
  Every rhetorical statement and piece of bad legislation has two effects: 1) they create uncertainty in the
markets, and uncertainty makes electricity prices go up; and 2) they incent capital markets to look outside of
California to invest
  Both outcomes are hurting California—time and resources are better spent achieving a solution
2.  Decrease Demand
The Problem—Not enough supply to meet demand
  California’s 1998 electricity restructuring law (“AB 1890”) froze rates at 1998 levels.
  This aspect of the law artificially stimulated demand since consumers weren’t paying a price for electricity that
reflected the true cost of making the electricity
  California has also kept electricity prices low by its refusal to invest in power plants and transmission lines—if
there’s no investment, there’s no need to raise rates
  California’s desire to subsidize power prices and put off investments in power plants and transmission has
caused a shortage, which has increased wholesale prices—the principles of supply and demand
The Solution—use prices to give consumers financial incentives to conserve
  California has finally recognized that rates must rise in order to 1) cover the costs of producing power and 2) 
give consumers correct market signals and stop artificially stimulating demand (that California doesn’t have the
supply to meet)
  Because electricity cannot be stored, the cost of producing it varies by season and by time of day (prices are
highest when demand is highest, and vice-versa).
  Thus, to ensure that electricity is directed to its most valued use, prices should vary throughout the day to reflect
the fact that the cost of producing it varies throughout the day—this form of pricing is called “real-time pricing”
and requires a sophisticated meter that most businesses customers already possess.
  By charging a price for electricity that equals the cost of producing it, customers will have a strong incentive to
conserve.
  California should take an additional step beyond real-time pricing in the attempt to avoid blackouts this
summer.
  California should provide additional financial incentives to get consumers and businesses to conserve.
  Set a “baseline quantity of consumption” (e.g., the customer’s monthly consumption for the
previous year)
  If the customer consumes less than the baseline, the customer is compensated for every kilowatt-
hour saved at the market price for power (e.g., if the customer saves 100 kilowatt-hours, and the market
price for power is 10 cents, then the customer is compensated $10.)
  If the customer consumers more than the baseline, the customer is penalized for every kilowatt-
hour above the baseline at the market price for power (e.g., if the customer uses 100 kilowatt-hours over the
baseline, and the market price for power is 20 cents, then the customer is “penalized” $20.)
Possible response from detractors
  “Why should we pay customers for conserving? After all, it’s the right thing to do.”
Response
  California faces the severe threat of frequent blackouts this summer. McKinsey & Co. has estimated that the
rate increases proposed for Bay Area businesses will impose an estimated economic cost of $500 million on the
Bay Area economy. The same report estimates that the cost of blackouts on the Bay Area economy could range
from $2-16 billion.
  The financial incentive paid per kilowatt of savings is likely to cost less per kilowatt-hour than buying
electricity in the wholesale market.
