Page 1
EventAmerica, Inc.  May 25, 2001
EventAmerica’s mission is to be the global leader in event entertainment. The Company will
create an event entertainment marketplace by rolling out its business model in three distinct
phases. The first phase is a VIP Sports Tour business that will produce tremendous brand
recognition and a strong global presence. Future phases will include an Event Directory portal
with e-commerce capabilities for all event vendors, an ASP service for the event planning market
and a B2B marketplace for the extremely fragmented event market industry. The $145 billion
global event entertainment market currently has no single dominant player. The Company plans
an aggressive global expansion over the next decade.
Within the VIP Sports Tour Hospitality industry there exists a tremendous void whereby
affluent individuals, corporate executives and sports fans are precluded from attending major
sporting events from an “inside” or backstage perspective. Most often these VIP Sports Tour
companies only offer group or “corporate” packages, which range from 10-25 people. The
standard tour package offers some travel opportunities, some accommodation opportunities, a
seat in the stands, and limited VIP hospitality services. EventAmerica believes that it will be able
to sell 200-400 packages to each of its 50 annual race events it plans on marketing, once funding
has been achieved. These VIP packages will cost $2500 and up, and will be exclusive of airfare
and accommodations. EventAmerica will also offer air travel, hotel accommodations and extra
luxury perks, such as private jets and helicopters. EventAmerica will provide a new, exciting
and unique way to experience major sporting and entertainment events. In essence, a one-stop
shop designed for all of your sports and entertainment needs. 
The Company plans to create barriers to its competition by creating strategic sponsorship
relationships with all of the major sporting entities in order to provide this type of VIP sports
experience. EventAmerica will offer VIP sports tour packages on its site by scaling into each and
every major sport, including global sports such as the Olympics, World Cup soccer, Formula
One racing and the America’s Cup sailing championships. The Company believes that it can
build tremendous brand recognition and loyalty with these exclusive sponsorship relationships. 
The Founder and CEO of EventAmerica, has 20 years of experience in event management,
marketing and sponsorship sales, principally in professional motorsports. Other management
team experience includes sports management, hospitality service and business development.
EventAmerica is uniquely positioned, through management’s experience and contacts, to capture
exclusive or protected relationships with most major professional sports entities in the U.S.
Based on a first round investment of $5 million, EventAmerica believes it will reach profitability
by its second year of business. The Company projects revenues of $7,000,000 its first year in
business and $107 million by 2004. Net income before taxes will approach $49 million in 2004.
EventAmerica is uniquely positioned to become the dominant player in this space.
