Page 1
Executive Summary Phase I  August 1, 2001
EventAmerica’s mission is to be the global leader in event entertainment. The Company will
create an event entertainment marketplace by rolling out its business model in three distinct
phases. The first phase is a VIP Sports Tour business that will produce in excess of $30
million in revenues our first year. Future phases will include an Event Directory portal with e-
commerce capabilities for all event vendors, an ASP service for the event planning market
and a B2B marketplace for the extremely fragmented event market industry. The $145 billion
global event entertainment market currently has no single dominant player.
Within the VIP Sports Tour Hospitality industry there exists a tremendous void whereby
affluent individuals, corporate executives and sports fans are precluded from attending major
sporting events from an “inside” or backstage perspective. Most often these VIP Sports Tour
companies only offer group or “corporate” packages, which range from 10-25 people. The
standard tour package offers some travel opportunities, some accommodation opportunities,
a seat in the stands, and limited VIP hospitality services. 
For example, if one was interested in attending the Daytona 500 NASCAR race in February,
there are several sports and entertainment tour companies that offer relatively nice tour
packages. These packages typically offer a nice hotel room of moderate pricing, seating
within the preferred sections of the sporting venue, some hospitality functions back at the
hotel and occasionally a travel option, or source, for airline travel. What these VIP tour
companies do not offer is what sets EventAmerica apart from its competition. EventAmerica
will set the standard in “one-stop” shopping for VIP event services, information and
merchandise.
EventAmerica plans to offer a myriad of VIP sports and entertainment tours that will allow the
customer to experience an event in a fashion that is currently not available to the general
public. In our Daytona 500 scenario, the following would be available upon purchasing an
EventAmerica VIP package. On Friday evening of the race weekend, our customers will get
to meet and interact with a driver, his team, or a former driver at a cocktail reception.
Imagine being able to speak directly with a driver and his team and being able to learn more
about that particular race, racing in general or any other question a fan may ask!
Participating race drivers prefer to interact and stay connected with the public in just this type
of controlled environment. 
Saturday would be spent at the track for qualifying and other races, touring the garage and pit
areas, and relaxing in the EventAmerica VIP hospitality area situated within the inside of the
track. All meals would be of gourmet quality and will be prepared by our executive hospitality
partner, Executive Tours of Phoenix, AZ. Executive Tours has been in the VIP hospitality
business for over ten years and provides hospitality to many Fortune 500 companies
including, Penske Corporation, GE Capital, and many others. 
Page 2
Relaxing in air-conditioned tents with all the personal concierge touches of a five-star hotel is
the key to providing our customers the very best service, in addition to the very best in sports
entertainment. That evening, our guests will be entertained at a gala dinner and reception
that would include a former star of the NASCAR racing circuit, possibly a Richard Petty, Ned
Jarrett, or Cale Yarbrough. This would be another opportunity to hear stories of past glories
in the racing history of the Daytona 500 and to interact with the former heroes of the sport.
During the evening, EventAmerica plans to host a silent auction of sports racing memorabilia.
The evening’s activities will be tied to the EventAmerica Foundation and national and regional
charities that will benefit from the proceeds. These types of celebrity offerings will add to the
excitement of the evening. Can you imagine what the actual race day will be like after this
experience?
On the Sunday race day, our guests will sit in the very best track seats. This can include
Suite access and again the opportunity to visit the garage and pit areas. Breakfast and lunch
will be offered prior to the race, as will the opportunity to relax during and after the race in our
private VIP area. At some races, we will be able to provide a thrilling extra perk in the form
of an actual track ride with a professional driver with speeds up to 150 miles per hour, on the
day after the race. We will offer our guests the very best sports and entertainment
experience, along with the highest degree of personal concierge service. 
EventAmerica believes that it will be able to sell 200-400 packages to each of the 50 annual
race events it plans on marketing, once funding has been achieved. These VIP packages will
cost $2500 and up, and will be exclusive of airfare and accommodations. The EventAmerica
website will offer travel and first-class hotel options with each package. If a customer wishes
limousine service, helicopter service or a private jet, these options will be available.
Computer and Internet access, faxing capability and many other business and personal
perks, that are not available from other VIP tour companies, will be available to EventAmerica
customers within the hospitality area.
The Company plans to create barriers to its competition by creating strategic sponsorship
relationships with all of the major sporting entities in order to provide this type of VIP sports
experience. EventAmerica will offer VIP sports tour packages on its site by scaling into each
and every major sport, including global sports such as the Olympics, World Cup soccer,
Formula One racing and the America’s Cup sailing championships. The Company believes
that it can build tremendous brand recognition and loyalty with these exclusive sponsorship
relationships. The Company plans to expand globally over the next few years.
It is the intent of EventAmerica to create these exclusive, official or binding relationships with
each event organization. An example of this type of relationship is with International
Speedway Corporation (ISC).  ISC is the owner of the Daytona Motor Speedway and thirteen
other major racing facilities and hosts over 100 major NASCAR, CART, and IRL events
annually. EventAmerica is working on a strategic alliance relationship whereby EventAmerica
would be given an official or exclusive status with ISC as the official entertainment company
of ISC. EventAmerica will develop similar packages with other organizations in motorsports,
the NFL, NCAA, NBA, NHL, MLB and many other entertainment events as it expands its
marketing reach.
