Page 1
Chairman and CEO Statement:
We are pleased to present Enron’s 2000 corporate responsibility report. This report reflects our
approach and progress toward fulfilling our social, environmental, health and safety
commitments around the world.
In 2000, Enron experienced tremendous success – with net income reaching a record $1.3
billion, recurring earnings per share up 25 percent, and the company’s total return to
shareholders reaching 89 percent, compared with a negative nine percent returned by the S&P
500. Based on this success, our vision has shifted from becoming the World's Leading Energy
Company to becoming the World's Leading Company. 
Realizing this vision requires that we produce strong returns for our shareholders by leveraging
our intellectual capital, creating open and new markets, and maximizing efficiencies in both the
energy and non-energy sectors. However, it also requires a commitment to corporate
responsibility - ensuring that our behavior and impacts produce positive returns for all our
stakeholders including customers, employees and communities where we operate. 
The principles that guide our behavior are based on our vision and values and include the
following:
  Respect: We will work to foster mutual respect with communities and stakeholders who are
affected by our operations; we will strive to ensure that our activities, products and services
yield a positive impact on the environment, communities and stakeholders where we operate.
  Integrity: We will examine the impacts, positive and negative, of our business on the
environment and on society, and will integrate human health, social and environmental
considerations into our internal management and value system. 
  Communication: We will strive to foster understanding and support with our stakeholders
and communities, as well as measure and communicate our performance. 
  Excellence: We will continue to improve our performance and will encourage our business
partners and suppliers to adhere to the same standards. 
Since establishing our corporate responsibility function last year, we have focused on
strengthening internal awareness and governance of social and environmental issues facing our
business. As a first step, we expanded the responsibilities of the Nominating and Corporate
Governance Committee of the board of directors to include oversight over these issues. In
October 2000, we established a corporate responsibility task force, comprised of senior
management and business unit representatives, to further explore social and environmental
issues, challenges and priorities. This year, we have merged the corporate responsibility task
force with our vision and values and diversity task forces to become one committee – the
Corporate Culture Committee.
Page 2
Additionally, we enhanced our efforts to engage external stakeholders on issues and risk
management practices related to human rights, biodiversity, indigenous rights, transparency and
performance measurement. Both the internal and external dialogue have been a key part of
informing and defining our strategy for improving our social and environmental performance.
In 2001, we will continue to develop a systematic approach toward corporate responsibility, 
refine our implementation strategy, formalize stakeholder engagement, and strengthen our risk
management practices.
We believe that fulfilling these commitments translates into added value for our business -
ensuring fluidity of assets, protecting and securing access to capital, attracting and retaining top
talent, strengthening our risk management mechanisms, and preserving and enhancing our
reputation.
