Page 1
PREFACE
The expectations investing process represents a fundamental shift from
the way professional money managers and individual investors select stocks
today. This book presents the compelling benefits of expectations investing as
well as the tools investors need to implement it for all publicly traded stocks—old
and new economy, value and growth, as well as start-ups. 
Stock prices are the clearest and most reliable signal of the market’s
expectations about a company’s future performance. The key to successful
investing is to estimate the level of expected performance embedded in the
current stock price and then assess the likelihood of a revision in expectations. 
Investors that properly read market expectations and anticipate revisions
increase their odds of achieving superior investment results. The expectations
investing process allows you to identify the right expectations and effectively
anticipate revisions in a company’s prospects.
This book brings the power of expectations investing to portfolio
managers, security analysts, investment advisors, individual investors, and
business students. We expect expectations investing to generate substantial
interest in the corporate community as well. After all, both investors and
managers accept stock price as the “scorecard” for corporate performance. 
Companies seeking to outperform the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index or an index
of their peers can use expectations investing to establish the reasonableness of
the goal. 
1
Page 2
Overview of the Book
The first four chapters (Part I) introduce all the tools you need to
implement expectations investing. Chapter 1 makes the case for expectations
investing and explains why traditional analysis, with its focus on short-term
earnings and price-earnings ratios, chases the wrong expectations. Chapter 2
shows that stock market expectations are based on a company’s long-term cash
flows and demonstrates how to use this model to estimate shareholder value. 
Chapter 3 introduces the expectations infrastructure, a powerful new tool to help
investors understand the underlying sources of expectations revisions. Chapter 4
provides competitive strategy frameworks that you can apply to improve your
odds of correctly anticipating expectations shifts.
Chapters 5 through 9 (Part II) address implementation issues. Chapters 5,
6, and 7 are the core of the book, the three-step expectations investing process. 
Chapter 5 outlines the first step, estimating the market expectations that justify a
company’s stock price. This step allows investors to harness the power of the
discounted cash flow model without bearing the burden of making speculative
long-term forecasts. Chapter 6 integrates the tools from the first four chapters to
identify potential expectations opportunities—that is, meaningful revisions from
current expectations. Chapter 7, the final step of the process, establishes well-
defined standards for buy, sell, and hold decisions. The three-step expectations
investing process is all you need to conduct analysis for most companies. Certain
start-up companies and established companies undergoing dramatic change and
uncertainty require additional analysis because the cash flows from existing
2
