Page 1
With lot of disheartening things those are taking place in last few months are
really making us frustrated. We are working for more than three years and no
one is there to take care of us. 
Present HR section is most corrupt and are filled with unqualified people. And
there is no secrecy; you can get all the confidential information from anyone at
site.
Our Big Boss Ken Lambert is most callous and go easy type and HR person
Arvind and Nitin is fully enchasing the thing. 
Nitin Singh don’t possess any HR qualification was an attendant in Radhakrishna
Services when we joined and slowly he entered in OPO and started all
malpractice with RK. Using all the services illegally and use to take food at home.
Even he was unable to do simple negotiation with RK, which has been completed
within a fortnight he has been replaced by someone else. He doesn’t carry a high
profile except buttering Ken Lambert all day long. Even in an open public meeting
Ken Lambert made announcement Nitin as Assistant Manager but Arvind and
Ken made him Manager on paper.
Arvind is another corrupt person and mis-utilising his power to dissatisfy all the
persons. On his whims he made sick leave non-encashable, which is violating
Enron Policy. This he did, as he will be missing these facilities as a new joinee to
this organization. He and Nitin also violating Furniture Policy of Enron as we
have completed three years but they didn’t hence they don’t want to give this
facility to others.
If Nitin can get a position equivalent to Manager why Swapnil, Archana, Shenoy,
KVA, Moin are deprived off, who spent most of the time at plant to have better
plant availability. 
Arvind has used his power to make PEP system a bogus one and during ISO
auditing PEP system has faced the severe critic. You can enquire this with TUV
auditor Mr Mario Rodrigues, Phone 91 22 8213765(O), 91 22 9821056627(M)
and email: [URL: "mailto:mrodrigues@tuvindia.com"] mrodrigues@tuvindia.com
Bonus is distributed very irregularly and Arvind worked for only 8 months and
take a high Bonus, even he is drawing monthly bonus also. He made his tour to
Mumbai in name of School Registration at different occasion but School is still
Non-Registered one and we are the sufferers and he enjoyed lavishly by mis-
utalising Company’s money.
All the senior and qualified peoples were deprived and Vidyadhar More is given
at a Higher Position those many of us.
All these irregularities are in big way and you need to take proper action to fix
Arvind, Nitin and Ken Lambert. Atleast as good will of our service at Enron for
past four years we want you to remove these HR personals and want you to
review whole PEP system for last year by Houston HR person and keep HR
person from Houston at site.
Even if you really want to go for a good justice you can send HR from Houston to
take an Employees Opinion through Secret Feed back form please see the
result. You can go for feed back to these three independent people also.
Otherwise we are going to revel many facts happened at site to Govt of India,
world bank, Human Right commission and to many other NGOs
