Page 1
Jeffrey K. Skilling
President and COO, Enron Corp.
Jeffrey K. Skilling is president and chief operating officer of Enron and sits on its board
of directors. Jeff joined Enron in 1990 to further develop the company’s nonregulated
merchant business within Enron North America (ENA), formerly Enron Capital & Trade
Resources. Under Jeff’s leadership, Enron pioneered the use of risk management
products and long-term contracting structures in the natural gas industry and has since
applied similar concepts to the electricity industry. Today, Enron is the largest
independent buyer and seller of natural gas and electricity in North America and is
extending its capabilities to Internet broadband services.
Prior to joining Enron, Jeff was a senior partner at McKinsey & Company, where he
oversaw the firm’s worldwide energy and North American chemical consulting practices.
Jeff also served as a corporate planning officer with First City National Bank of Houston
and as an associate with MJH Nightingale and Company, Ltd., an investment banking
firm in London, England. Jeff received a bachelor’s degree from Southern Methodist
University, and an MBA degree from Harvard Business School.
In addition to his responsibilities at Enron, Jeff sits on the boards of directors for the
Greater Houston Community Foundation, the Houston Technology Center, and the
Houston Branch - Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. He is also a member of the Advisory
Board for the North American Electric Reliability Council. In 1997, Jeff was recognized
by the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) as the first recipient of its Director’s
Award for Global Vision in Energy.
Enron is one of the world’s leading electricity, natural gas and
communications companies. The company, which owns approximately
$46 billion in energy and communications assets, produces electricity
and natural gas, develops, constructs and operates energy facilities
worldwide, delivers physical commodities and financial and risk
management services to customers around the world, and is
developing an intelligent network platform to facilitate online
business. Fortune magazine has named Enron “America’s Most
07/20/20
Page 2
Innovative Company” for five consecutive years, the top company for
“Quality of Management” and the second best company for
“Employee Talent.” In addition, Enron ranks in the top quarter of
Fortune's "Best 100 Companies to Work For in America.” Enron’s
Internet address is www.enron.com.  The stock is traded under the
ticker symbol “ENE.”
07/20/20
