Page 1
Gina Taylor
(713) 853-7681
ENRON PIPELINES LAUNCH CAPACITY BIDDING OPEN SEASON
ON ENRONONLINE
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: Monday, June 12, 2000
HOUSTON – Enron announced today that its interstate natural gas pipelines
will begin offering capacity on EnronOnline.
Transwestern Pipeline Company will be the first of Enron’s pipelines to offer
capacity for bidding through an open season conducted on EnronOnline, the company’s
principal-based electronic transaction platform. Northern Natural Gas Company, 
Northern Border Pipeline Company and Florida Gas Transmission Company also plan
to offer services on the new e-commerce platform in the near future.
“The use of EnronOnline to market interstate transportation capacity represents a
major step forward as our pipelines look for new ways to use e-commerce to better
serve our customers,” stated Stan Horton, chairman and CEO of Enron Gas Pipeline
Group. “This innovative approach to marketing pipeline capacity clearly benefits both
interstate pipelines and customers. We now have expanded customer reach through the
industry’s leading e-commerce platform, EnronOnline, while customers receive more
information and greater flexibility in purchasing capacity.”
Transwestern will initially offer 20,000 Dekatherms per day of firm capacity for
the month of July 2000. An open season will be conducted through a sealed bid process
that will begin June 22 at 8 a.m. Central Time and close June 26 at 2 p.m. Central Time.
All bidders will be notified of acceptance or rejection of their bids by 4 p.m. Central
Time the same day. Transwestern will observe all underlying procedures for awarding
capacity as specified in its FERC Gas Tariff. 
EnronOnline offers real-time pricing for commodities including electricity, 
natural gas, coal pulp and paper, clean air credits, bandwidth, weather and credit
derivatives, petrochemicals and plastics, and oil and refined products. The site allows
Page 2
commodities consumers and producers from around the world to buy from or sell to
Enron with the click of a mouse. Since its debut last November, EnronOnline has
completed more than 140,000 transactions valued at more than $62 billion.
Customers who want information about Transwestern’s upcoming open season
on EnronOnline may contact Steve Harris, vice president of Transwestern Commercial
Group at (713) 853-1796.
Enron is one of the world’s leading electricity, natural gas and communications
companies. The company, which owns approximately $37 billion in energy and
communications assets, produces electricity and natural gas, develops, constructs and
operates energy facilities worldwide, delivers physical commodities and financial and
risk management services to customers around the world, and is developing an
intelligent network platform to facilitate online business. Enron’s Internet address is
www.enron.com and the stock is traded under the ticker symbol, “ENE.”
###
