Page 1
During the present California energy debacle its seems that a lot of finger pointing is going on to blame one
party or another for physical lack of electrical energy. 
One thing I found interesting is that there seems to be no cross check system in place to check the
legitimacy of the ISO saying that there isn’t enough power on one or another particular grid segment to
sustain reliable service. My personal experience here in Louisiana last summer is that Entergy was
reporting a lack of electricity in my area but we had no brown outs or loss of electrical service at all. 
I had a conversation with a man who works for a local utility and he stated that often a modeling program
is used to predict brownouts / overload scenario’s and these programs were often incorrect. 
I think ENRON should start a company that would use technology to check the legitimacy of overloading
as reported by a ISO. The company could be called ENRON Energy Evaluation Enterprise. It would work
as follows. A small fleet of mobile trailers that have buildings mounted on them could be set up at different
sites that have multiple high voltage lines coming together to form a portion of a grid. Some type of clamp
on amp meters and voltmeters could be hooked to different circuits and the electrical energy could be
monitored using rtu’s with power monitoring programs installed in them. These rtu’s could be installed in
the trailers along with a firewall computer which would then be connected to a Starband satellite system for
remote data collection. These trailers could be moved at times and the regional ISO should not be aware of
when or what circuit is being monitored. 
The regional generators may want to have access to such data to protect themselves from law suits, also the
FERC may need this data to grade a ISO or generator on its operational efficiency. 
The data that was received could be stored in the ENRON data warehouse system for future evaluation. 
This is just a brief synopsis of my idea I am sure that there are issues I’m not aware of and problems that
would be encountered that would have to be overcome. But with the prediction of power shortages across
the nation in the future this could possibly be sold as ENRON helping to alleviate the predicted energy
shortage. 
