Page 1
AT&T – Enron Broadband Services
Joint Venture
Principle
AT&T and Enron Broadband Services (“EBS”) agree to establish a joint venture to
pursue global intermediation of long haul bandwidth and related markets. 
Scope of Joint Venture
The scope of activities in which the JV will conduct business includes long haul dark
fiber, wave lengths, circuits, IP transport, IP transit, storage, voice and related activities
in finance, colocation, equipment, etc.
EBS Contributions to the JV
  Balance sheet and credit support necessary for the JV to pursue the agreed scope of
activities.
  All employees necessary to pursue the activities of the JV including those with
expertise in risk management, trading, back office, origination, finance, accounting, 
management, marketing, etc. 
  All office real estate, computers, systems, network proprietary software, furniture, 
etc. necessary to operate the JV. 
  Network interconnection facilities including pooling points and related colocation
facilities and equipment located in Seattle, Portland, San Francisco, San Jose, Los
Angeles, Las Vegas, Salt Lake City, Denver, Dallas, Houston, New Orleans, Chicago,
Atlanta, Miami, Washington DC, Philadelphia, New York, Boston, London, Paris, 
Brussels, Amsterdam, Frankfurt, Dusseldorf and Tokyo.
EBS Contributions to AT&T
  All EBS network assets not strategic to the JV including: a long haul dark fiber
network of approximately 17,000 route miles; additional long haul dark fiber
inventory; metro dark fiber; colocation along fiber routes; lit intercity fiber pairs and
related Ciena, Sycamore and Cisco equipment; and employees associated with
operation of these networks. 
AT&T Contributions to the JV
  Interconnection facilities in a minimum of 50 mutually agreed cities worldwide. 
Page 2
  A service agreement to provide local access for preferential rates in all markets where
AT&T operates.
  Guaranteed long haul capacity throughout the AT&T backbone for market
determined rates.
Right of Last Look
  Enron agrees that AT&T will have the right to supply from its long haul network to
the JV at market determined rates any future transaction of the JV with a third party
to purchase long haul bandwidth. 
  AT&T agrees that the JV will have the right to supply to AT&T at market rates any
future transaction of AT&T to purchase services or assets within the scope of
activities of the JV. 
Joint Venture Structure
  EBS will operate the JV.
  AT&T will receive X% of the net profits of the JV.
Proposed Next Steps
Should AT&T favorably receive this proposal, a follow-up meeting should be scheduled
which would include not only D. Dorman from AT&T but also his selected commercial
director(s).
