Page 1
Kevin Scott
PO Box 21074
Los Angeles, CA 90021 
(213) 926-2626
kevinscott@onlinemailbox.net
EXPERIENCE
1995 to Present SOLUTIONSCOPE,  Advisor  Los Angeles, CA
Founded consulting practice to provide advisory services for public and private sector
enterprises that face challenging policy issues. SolutionScope services are distinguished
by rigorous quantitative and qualitative research and analysis, clear and effective
communication of findings and options, and useful implementation plans. 
Recent projects:
  Led research and presented recommendations to Charter Reform Commission for
modernizing City of Los Angeles’ governance and management structure. Voters
approved first comprehensive reform of City’s “constitution” in 75 years.
  Developed framework for creating neighborhood councils, a more responsive form of
representation in Los Angeles called for by the new city Charter. Implementation of a
citywide system of neighborhood councils is now underway.
  Designed process for comprehensive strategic planning for Superintendent of Los
Angeles Unified School District and conducted groundbreaking research on factors
underlying student academic performance in the 720,000-student district. School
district is currently implementing multi-year strategic plan.
  Conducted in-depth assessment of fiscal practices of Los Angeles Unified School
District, for president of United Teachers Los Angeles, that assisted union in winning
School Board approval of new three-year contract for District’s 40,000 teachers.
1984 to 1991
1993 to 1995 
GOLDMAN, SACHS & CO.,  Vice President  New York, San Francisco
Los Angeles
As an investment banker, specialized in tax-favored financings for governmental, non-
profit and corporate entities. Managed complex work-teams formed from representatives
of organizations needed to successfully complete the transactions. Securities required
innovative and attentive design to comply with government regulations and credit market
conditions. Work was often carried out under significant public and media scrutiny.
Experience with more than $3 billion of financings including  Redevelopment in San
Francisco and Los Angeles  Capital cost reduction for Puerto Rico, Chicago and
Southern California Metropolitan Water District  Water systems in Cleveland and New
Orleans  Airport improvements in Sacramento and San Jose  Arbitrage for Oakland and
South Dakota pension systems. Conducted advisory studies including  Privatizing
electric utility assets of Los Angeles  Funding construction of Alameda Corridor rail
project  Developing financing strategy to fund stadium improvements and return Raiders
football team to Oakland.
(Took civic leave from 1991 to 1993)
1993  HARVARD UNIVERSITY  Cambridge, MA
John F. Kennedy School of Government, Lecturer
Taught masters level corporate finance. Redesigned and refocused the course to make it
more relevant to students with public sector and international backgrounds. 
Page 2
Kevin Scott  continued
EXPERIENCE
1991 to 1993
1982 to 1983
1979 to 1981
EDUCATION
1981 to 1984 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  Sacramento, CA
Commission on State Finance, Executive Director
Led bipartisan “fiscal watchdog” commission. Transformed Commission into a key
source of budget and economic information by offering credible, insightful and timely
forecasts. Presented findings in easy-to-understand formats to top state officials, the
press, private-sector analysts, and the public.
UNC VENTURES,  Associate  Boston, MA
During graduate school, worked for a venture capital firm that focused on investing in
minority-owned businesses. Developed firm’s first personal computer based model for
tracking performance of portfolio companies and forecasting venture fund’s long-term
rate of return. Evaluated the credit worthiness, management strength, and market
potential of proposed investments. 
MCKINSEY & COMPANY,  Analyst  Texas, Mexico, and Venezuela
Working in English and Spanish, analyzed financial condition and operating efficiency of
client companies. Conducted market research, evaluated industry trends and assessed
competitive business opportunities for clients seeking acquisition candidates. Carried out
research used for the start-up of McKinsey’s energy practice.
HARVARD UNIVERSITY
Graduate School of Business Administration
John F. Kennedy School of Government 
Boston, MA
Cambridge, MA
Structured joint degree program to earn Master in Business Administration and Master of
Public Policy. Concentrated in finance and management with a focus on business-
government interdependencies and joint partnerships. 
1974 to 1979
1977
SERVICE
Past and
Present 
CLAREMONT MCKENNA COLLEGE
UNIVERSIDAD DE CHILE 
Claremont, CA
Santiago, Chile
Earned Bachelor of Arts degree with honors in Economics and Latin American Studies.
Developed fluency in Spanish. Studied developmental economics for two semesters at
the University of Chile as a Rotary Foundation scholar.
Have served Los Angeles community as: Co-Chair of the California Citizens Budget
Commission  Board President of Moving Arts Theatre  Trustee of Scripps College 
Board member of California Budget Project  Member of State Assembly Speaker
Villaraigosa’s Commission on State and Local Government Finance  Mayor Riordan’s
Progress LA advisory council  Mayor Bradley’s Finance Task Force.
