Page 1
May 9, 2001
Memorandum to:
Mr. Jeffrey K. Skilling
President & CEO
Mr. Kenneth D. Rice
Chairman & CEO, BBS
Securing Significant Productivity Gains on Indirect
Expenses Through Strategic Sourcing
(Outlined Proposal)
Enron Corporation
This memorandum outlines how ADVENTIS could assist Enron Corporation secure double-
digit (%) savings in in-direct expenses (e.g. Information Technologies, Facilities, Outsourced
services, Office supplies) through initiation of strategic sourcing exercise. It builds on the
experience of our consultants who have realized significant savings in multiple industries, 
particularly in financial institutions, Telcos where back-room operations are Information
Technology intensive, often heavy users of out-sourced services, and have office space in
prime locations in different regions of the world.
We have organized this memorandum in five sections:
1. Background
2. The basic principles of strategic sourcing
3. Objective of the proposed exercise
4. Approach
5. Working arrangement
1 Background
Over the last decade Enron with its increasing involvement in trading of various utility services
(e.g. electricity, and natural gas) and commodities (such as pulp and paper) and with the
deepening penetration of on-line trading/market exchanges, has become highly dependent on
the productivity and economics of in-direct sourced expenses particularly Information
Technology, Facilities and Logistics related resource commitments.
We have observed when organizations fundamentally shift their business models (under the
influence of new technologies and/or expanded solution space enabled through deregulation),
sourcing and usage habits of the critical inputs do not go through a disciplined process of
rigorous scrutiny ting both to manage internal demand (e.g. Quantity, Specifications) and to
negotiate intelligent sourcing arrangements in terms of rate (eg. $/units, rate/service(s) 
programs).
Page 2
Page 2
Jeffrey K. Skilling
Accordingly we believe, as Enron aggressively expands its trading operations, it will be well
served, if through a hard-nosed strategic sourcing exercise it could secure a double-digit (%)
savings in the most critical sourced in-direct expenses. In the process, Enron could establish
the rigor of setting demanding benchmarks, and the discipline of realizing the gains through
internal and supplier focused initiatives.
ADVENTIS welcomes the opportunity to propose how we could work with Enron in securing
the productivity gains in in-direct expenses, which we believe is very timely in the
development curve of Enron.
Basic Principles of Strategic Sourcing
In conduct of a sourcing exercise, it is important that certain basic principles are adhered to:
1. Embracing Free Market: A bias towards market based solutions and approaches for
defining specifications, bidding and negotiations, and the development and
implementation of innovation solutions. 
2. Leveraging scale effect: With increasing scale of operations buyers should
intermittently, review their degrees of freedom in negotiating price points with the
suppliers.
3. Reversing marketing skill effect: While sellers/providers will tend to package different
product/services into “one-stop” single offering, reversing the marketing process often
uncovers significant savings opportunities for savings.
4. Challenging supplier industry structure: Often buyers pay for significant hidden
inefficiencies (because of old habits), which large scale suppliers like Enron must
challenge.
5. Realizing Consolidation effect: In order to extend the scale effect, consolidation of
sourcing (e.g. Furniture, PCs, Laptops and standardization of sourcing) and
standardization of sourcing across divisions and even affiliates, could create volume
advantages which Enron should utilize, as it expands its depth and breadth of trading.
6. Monitoring Supply Performance through Metrics: Extreme rigor and precision in
measurement of purchasing (eg. Cost metrics, Quality definitions) and un-
compromising commitment to implementation are essential.
