'0 6 
<  7
MASSACHUSETTS
RESOLUTION
WHEREAS, the opioid epidemic is impacting our nation's citizens, with an estimated 64,000 people
losing their lives to overdoses each year; and
WHEREAS, communities including Framingham are overwhelmed by the opioid misuse epidemic and
are struggling to respond meaningfully to the challenge; and
WHEREAS, we believe that substance use disorder must be seen as a chronic and debilitating illness,
rather than a criminal act, opening the door for treatment and recovery; and
WHEREAS, the Framingham has already acknowledged this is a major problem for our community by
the Mayor joining in legal action to obtain compensation and mitigation for the City and the victims of
this epidemic,
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Framingham City Council supports and
encourages all City agencies, especially the School Department, the Police Department, the Fire
Department, the Health Department and the Mayor's office to continue to pursue ongoing efforts to assist
those impacted by this public health emergency, by considering and implementing some or all of the
following educational and assistance measures including:
3 Raise awareness of the crisis by holding a public demonstration such as the purple flag
demonstration or hosting the opioid art project or any other well- conceived public event.
3 Increase training in the administration of Narcan beyond first responders to include school
nurses, coaches and local businesses.
3 Work with Metrowest Medical Center to obtain licensing for the hospital to administer
suboxone for victims of opioid overdoses.
3 Look to develop economic incentives for local business who hire people in recovery from this
disease.
3 Consider advocating for bail reform to allow treatment instead of punishment.
3 Encourage residents to take the "Stop the Stigma" pledge.
3 Create atask force of stakeholders to consider and implement these and other initiatives so
Framingham can be a leader in this important effort.
September 6, 2018
Offered by the Framin8ham City Council whose signaturesfollow:
Page 2
~ ..'.,%~
Dennis L. Giombetti
Chair
~'~.
Cheryl Tully Stoll
At Large Councilor
Pam Richardson
District 2Councilor
MichaelP. Cannon
District 4 Councilor
~~M~rgareth Basilio S epard
District 7 Councilor 
-~  -  es J. Sisitsky
Vice Chair 
;,
` 
r 
~.~,,,
George King
At Large Councilor
;.~~~~~~
Ada S finer
District 3 ouncilor
r~
Michael Rossi
District 6 Councilor
Judith Grove
District 8 Councilor
Edgardo Torres
District 9 Councilor
