City of Framingham
License Administration
150 Concord Street – Memorial Building – Room 203
Framingham, MA 01702-8325
Telephone: 508-532-5402 FAX: 508-532-5769 
Diane Willoughby
Licensing Coordinator
Flammable License Process
1). Licensed by the City Council.
2). License is registered with the City Clerk’s office following City Council Hearing and approval.
3). Permitted by the Fire Department.
4). Annual inspection conducted by the Fire Department & Department of Environmental Protection as
of 7/1/09.
New License - Requires a Public Hearing $125
Applicant must file the following with the Licensing Office:
-  FP-2 Application (application available in the Licensing office or State Fire Marshal website)
-  Letter to City Council explaining the requirement for a new license
-  Corporate information.
-  Abutters Request Form (Submit to Assessor’s Office with payment)
FP-2A Application is forwarded to the Fire Department for approval.
Legal Notice published in newspaper not less than 7 days prior to hearing is required for a New license
(Licensing office publishes the notice - $125. Advertising Fee)
Applicant must notify all owners of real estate abutting land or directly opposite said land by registered
mail not less than 7 days prior to hearing.
If license is approved by the City Council, the license is registered with the City Clerk’s office – License is
a land-granted instrument. License is renewed by the City Clerk’s office each year (April)
Flammable Licenses also require “permits” from the Fire Department.
FuelStoragePermits/FlammableLicenseProcess2019
Page 2
Amended License
Change of land owner
-  Register change with City Clerk’s Office
Change of type of fuel or amount of fuel requires
-  Amended FP-2A application
-  Approval from the Fire Department
-  Legal Notice (not less than 7 days prior to hearing) by the City (not required if reducing amount
of fuel)
-  Applicant must notify all owners of real estate abutting land or directly opposite said land by
registered mail no less than 7 days prior to hearing. (not required if reducing amount of fuel)
-  Hearing – Vote of the City Council to amend license
Amended license is registered with the City Clerk’s office. Copy to Fire Department.
Removal of underground tank
-  Letter to the City Clerk surrendering the license.
-  Approval from the Fire Department
-  Hearing - Vote of the City Council to rescinded the license.
-  Copy of letter and Vote of the Council sent to Fire Department.
Letter and Vote of the Council sent to the City Clerk’s office. Copy to Fire Department.
Change of Business Owner ONLY—No change in land ownership-- No amendment to fuel storage license
needed. Must change business owner’s name on Registration with City Clerk.
Reconstruction of Flammable Licenses
Department of Environmental Protection requires that all Flammable License holders provide an original
copy of their license. Many of these licenses date back to the early 1900’s and have been misplaced, 
amended or transferred. In order to reconstruct a license the City Council/Licensing office must
determine the validity of the license through records kept in the Licensing office, City Clerk’s office and
Fire Department. 
Although a public hearing is not required the reconstructed license, should be reviewed by the City
Council and voted as an Order to create a record of approval of the reconstructed license.
Reconstructed License is registered with the City Clerk’s office. Copy is sent to Fire Department.
_______________________
527 CMR14 Increased gallonage for AST Combustible license.
Ch. 148, sec.13
UST -- (Underground Storage Tanks) - Underground Flammables Liquids
AST – (Aboveground Storage Tanks) - Combustible Liquids. No longer need a license under 10,000
gallons. 
FuelStoragePermits/FlammableLicenseProcess2019
