HIPAA PRIVACY NOTICE
CITY OF FRAMINGHAM
This notice describes how medical information about you may be used and disclosed and how
you can get access to this information. Please review it carefully. The Federal Government
requires that we send notice to you, informing you of your rights under the new HIPAA
Privacy Regulations. This notice provides you with that information only. There are no
changes to your health benefits as a result of the HIPAA Privacy Regulations. 
If you have any questions about this Notice, please contact our Privacy Contact: 
Ms. Dolores Hamilton
Director of Human Resources
Memorial Building
150 Concord Street, Room B-7
Framingham, MA 01702
(508) 532-5490
This Notice of Privacy Practices describes how we may use and disclose your protected health
information to carry out treatment, payment or health care operations and for other purposes that
are permitted or required by law. It also describes your rights to access and control your
protected health information. “Protected health information” is information about you, including
demographic information, that may identify you and that relates to your past, present or future
physical or mental health or condition and related health care services. 
Uses and Disclosures of Protected Health Information
We use health information about you for treatment, to obtain payment for treatment, for
administrative purposes, and to evaluate the quality of care that you receive. We may use or
disclose identifiable health information about you without your authorization for several other
reasons. Subject to certain requirements, we may give out health information without your
authorization for public health purposes, for auditing purposes, for research studies, and for
emergencies. We provide information when otherwise required by law, such as for law
enforcement in specific circumstances. In any other situation, we will ask for your written
authorization before using or disclosing any identifiable health information about you. If you
choose to sign an authorization to disclose information, you can later revoke that authorization to
stop any future uses and disclosures. 
Page 2
We may change our policies at any time. Before we make a significant change in our policies, 
we will change our notice and post the new notice. You can also request a copy of our notice at
any time. For more information about privacy practices, contact the person listed below. 
The Federal regulations that govern the use and disclosure of protected health information may
require us to disclose your health information in any of the following situations: 
•  Required by Law. We may use or disclose your protected health information to the extent
that law requires the use of disclosure. The use or disclosure will be made in compliance
with the law and will be limited to the relevant requirements of the law. You will be
notified, as required by law, of any such uses or disclosures. 
•  Public Health. We may disclose your protected health information for public health
activities and purposes to a public health authority that is permitted by law to collect or
receive the information. The disclosure will be made for the purpose of controlling
disease, injury or disability. We may also disclose your protected health information, if
directed by the public health authority, to a foreign government agency that is
collaborating with the public health authority. 
•  Communicable Diseases. We may disclose your protected health information, if
authorized by law, to a person who may have been exposed to a communicable disease or
may otherwise be at risk of contracting or spreading the disease or condition. 
•  Health Oversight. We may disclose protected health information to a health oversight
agency for activities authorized by law, such as audits, investigations, and inspections. 
Oversight agencies seeking this information include government agencies that oversee
the health care system, government benefit programs, other government regulatory
programs and civil rights laws. 
•  Abuse or Neglect. We may disclose your protected health information to a public health
authority that is authorized by law to receive reports of child abuse or neglect. In
addition, we may disclose your protected health information if we believe that you have
been a victim of abuse, neglect or domestic violence to the governmental entity or agency
authorized to receive such information. In this case, the disclosure will be made
consistent with the requirements of applicable federal and state laws. 
•  Food and Drug Administration. We may disclose your protected health information to a
person or company as directed or required by the Food and Drug Administration (i) To
report adverse events (or similar activities with respect to food of dietary supplements),
product defects or problems (including problems with the use or labeling of a product), or
biological product deviations, (ii) to track FDA-regulated products, (iii) to enable product
recalls, repairs or replacement, or lookback (including locating and notifying individuals
who have received products that have been recalled, withdrawn, or are the subject or
lookback), or (iv) to conduct post -marketing surveillance. 
Page 3
•  Legal Proceedings. We may disclose protected health information in the course of any
judicial or administrative proceeding, in response to an order of a court or administrative
tribunal (to the extent such disclosure is expressly authorized), in certain conditions in
response to a subpoena, discovery request or other lawful process. 
•  Law Enforcement. We may also disclose protected health information, so long as
applicable legal requirements re met, for law enforcement purposes. These law
enforcement purposes include (1) legal processes and otherwise required by law, (2) 
limited information requests for identification and location purposes, (3) pertaining to
victims of a crime, (4) suspicion that death has occurred as a result of criminal conduct, 
(5) in the event that a crime occurs on the premises of the practice, and (6) medical
emergency (not on the practice’s premises) and it is likely that a crime has occurred. 
•  Coroners, Funeral Directors, and Organ Donation. We may disclose protected health
information to a coroner or medical examiner for identification purposes, determining
cause of death or for the coroner or medical examiner to perform other duties authorized
by law. We may also disclose protected health information to a funeral director, as
authorized by law, in order to permit the funeral director to carry out their duties. We
may disclose such information in reasonable anticipation of death. Protected health
information may be used and disclosed for cadaveric organ, eye or tissue donation
purposes. 
•  Research. We may disclose your protected health information to researchers when their
research has been approved by an institutional review board that has reviewed the
research proposal and established protocols to ensure the privacy of your protected health
information. 
•  Criminal Activity. Consistent with applicable federal and state laws, we may disclose
your protected health information, if we believe that the use or disclosure is necessary to
prevent or lessen a serious and imminent threat to the health or safety of a person or the
public. We may also disclose protected health information if it is necessary for law
enforcement authorities to identify or apprehend an individual. 
Military Activity and National Security. When the appropriate conditions apply, we may sue of
disclose protected health information of individuals who are Armed Forces personnel (1) for
activities deemed necessary by appropriate military command authorities; (2) for the purpose of
a determination by the Department of Veterans Affairs of your eligibility for benefits, or (3) to
foreign military authority if you are a member of that foreign military services. We may also
disclose your protected health information to authorized federal officials for conducting national
security and intelligence activities, including for the provision of protective services to the
President or others legally authorized. 
•  Workers Compensation. Your protected health information may be disclosed by us as
authorized to comply with workers’ compensation laws and other similar legally-
established programs. 
Page 4
•  Inmates. We may use or disclose your protected health information if you are an inmate
of a correctional facility and your physician created or received your protected health
information in the course or providing care to you. 
•  Required Uses and Disclosures. Under the law, we must make disclosures to you and
when required by the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services to
investigate or determine our compliance with the requirements of Section 164.500 et. 
Seq. 
Your Rights
The following is a statement of your rights with respect to your protected health information and
a brief description of how you may exercise these rights. 
•  You have the right to inspect and copy your protected health information. This means
you may inspect and obtain a copy of protected health information about you that is
contained in a designated record set for as long as we maintain the protected health
information. A “designated record set” contains medical and billing records and any
other records that your physician and the practice uses for making decisions about you. 
Under federal law, however, you may not inspect or copy the following records; 
psychotherapy notes; information compiled in reasonable anticipation of, or use in, a
civil, criminal, or administrative action or proceeding, and protected health information
that is subject to law that prohibits access to protected health information. Depending on
the circumstances, a decision to deny access may be reviewable. In some circumstances, 
you may have a right to have this decision reviewed. Please contact our Privacy Contact
if you have questions about access to your medical record. 
•  You have the right to request a restriction of your protected health information. This
means you may ask us not to use or disclose any part of your protected health information
for the purposes of treatment, payment or healthcare operations. You may also request
that any part of your protected health information not be disclosed to family members or
friends who may be involved in your care or for notification purposes as described in this
Notice of Privacy Practices. Your request must state the specific restriction requested and
to whom you want the restriction to apply. We are not required to agree to a restriction
that you may request, but if we do agree to the requested restriction, we may not use or
disclose your protected health information in violation of that restriction unless it is
needed to provide emergency treatment. 
•  You have the right to request to receive confidential communications from us by
alternative means or at an alternative location. We will accommodate reasonable
requests. We may also condition this accommodation by asking you for information as to
how payment will be handled or specification of an alternative address or other method of
contact. We will not request an explanation from you as to the basis for the request. 
Please make this request in writing to our Privacy Contact. 
Page 5
•  You may have the right to have your physician amend your protected health information. 
This means you may request an amendment of protected health information about you in
a designated record set for as long as we maintain this information. In certain cases, we
may deny your request for an amendment. If we deny your request for amendment, you
have the right to file a statement of disagreement with us and we may prepare a rebuttal
to your statement and will provide you with a copy of any such rebuttal. Please contact
our Privacy Contact to determine if you have questions about amending your medical
record. 
•  You have the right to receive an accounting of certain disclosures we have made, if any, 
of your protected health information. This right applies to disclosures for purposes other
than treatment, payment or healthcare operations as described in this Notice of Privacy
Practices. It excludes disclosures we may have made to you, for a facility directory, to
family members or friends involved in your care, or for notification purposes. You have
the right to receive specific information shorter timeframe. The right to receive this
information is subject to certain exceptions, restrictions and limitations. 
•  You have the right to obtain a paper copy of this notice from us, upon request, even if
you have agreed to accept this notice electronically. 
Complaints
You may complain to us or to the Secretary of Health and Human Services if you believe your
privacy rights have been violated by us. You may file a complaint with us by notifying our
Privacy Contact of your complaint. We will not retaliate against you for filing a complaint. 
