Nui sanc e By-Law 
NUISANCE BY-LAW
City of Framin gham By-Law s, Article V. “Health and Saf ety”
Section 22 Nuisance
Bylaw [Adopted: Article 24 , Annual
Town Meeting, 2002 ] Approved by the
Attorney General on 7/1/02
Sectio n 22.  Nuisa nce Byla w
22.1  Autho rity and Purpo se
Pursuant to the general powers granted to cities and to wns by Article 89 of the Amendments to the
Massachusetts Co nstitutio n, and the sp ecific powers granted by M.G.L., Ch. 139, ss. 1-3A, this
bylaw is ad opted fo r the preventio n of future nuisances and the remo val of existing nuisances
within the Town, which nuisances co nstitute a hazard of blight, or ad versely affect pro perty values.
22.2  Definitio ns
22.2.1  Blig ht
Any co nd itio n that serio usly imp airs the value, co nd itio n, strength, durab ility, or
ap pearance of real pro perty, or is otherwise detrimental to pro perty values or neighb oring
pro perties includ ing real pro perty owned or occup ied by an Interested Party as defined in
Sectio n 22.2.5 belo w.
22.2.2  Building
A structure, whether portab le or fixed , with exterio r walls or firewalls and a ro of, built,
erected or framed , of a co mb inatio n of any materials, to fo rm shelter fo r perso ns, animals, or
pro perty. See “structure” belo w.
22.2.3  Dila pida ted
A co nd itio n of decay or partial ruin due to neglect, misuse, or deterio ratio n. The term
includ es, but is no t limited to :
a)  Pro perty having deterio rated or ineffective waterp ro ofing of exterio r  walls,
ro ofs, fo und atio ns, or flo ors, includ ing bro ken or inad eq uately secured wind ows
or doors;
b)  Pro perty having defective weather pro tectio n (such as paint, stain, sid ing or
tarp aulin) fo r exterio r wall co vering; deleterio us weathering due to lack of such
weather pro tectio n or other pro tective co vering.
c)  Perso nal pro perty that is bro ken, rusted , wo rn, partially or who lly dismantled or
otherwise due to deterio ratio n is unsuitab le fo r the purp ose fo r which designed .
d)  Pro perty having a paved parking lo t or a parking area in a deterio rated co nd itio n
causing hazard ous co nd itio ns to auto mo biles, bicycles, or ped estrians. Such
co nd itio ns may includ e but are no t limited to potho les, bro ken pavement, and /or
insufficient drainage so as to cause flo oding.
Page 2
Arti cl e V:  Hea lth and Sa fety 
22.2.4 Haza rd
A co nd itio n likely to exp ose perso ns to inj ury, or pro perty to damage, lo ss or destruction. 
22.2.5  Interested Pa rties
In co nnectio n with the no tificatio n req uirements of this bylaw Interested Parties are the Build ing
Co mmissio ner; owner(s) and /or occup ants of pro perty which is the sub ject of a hearing; owners
and /or occup ants of pro perty directly opposite the sub ject pro perty on any pub lic or private
street or way, owners and /or occup ants of pro perty ab utting the sub ject pro perty, and owners
and /or occup ants of ab utting pro perty that is within 300 feet of, the pro perty line of the sub ject
pro perty. Other perso ns who own or occup y pro perty and who demo nstrate to the satisfactio n of
the Build ing Co mmissio ner that they are affected by the co nd itio n of the pro perty or build ing
that is the sub ject of a hearing may be regard ed as Interested Parties by the Build ing Co mmissio ner.
22.2.6  Nuisa nce
Any sub stantial interference with the co mmo n interest of the general pub lic in maintaining safe and
sanitary structures and neighb orho ods that are no t dilap id ated when such interference results fro m
the hazard ous or blighted co nd itio n of private pro perty, land or build ings. The fact that a particular
structure or use may be permitted und er the zo ning bylaw does no t create an exemp tio n fro m the
ap plicatio n of this bylaw. The term includ es but is no t limited to :
a) burned structures no t otherwise lawfully hab itab le or usab le,
b) dilap id ated real or perso nal pro perty includ ing but no t limited to real or perso nal pro perty
co ntaining graffiti, tagging or similar markings,
c) dilap id ated real or perso nal pro perty includ ing parking lo ts or parking areas, dangero us or unsafe
structures or perso nal pro perty, (Attorney General approval of Article 11 of the October 21, 2014
Special Town Meeting)
d) overgro wn vegetatio n which may harb or rats and vermin, co nceal pools of stagnant water
or other nuisances, or which is otherwise detrimental to neighb oring pro perties or pro perty
values,
e) dead , decayed , diseased or hazard ous trees,
f) perso nal pro perty that is exp osed to the elements witho ut pro tectio n against deterio ratio n,
rust or  dilap id atio n,
g) vehicles, machinery or mechanical eq uip ment or parts thereo f that are lo cated on so il, grass or
other poro us surfaces that are likely to result in the destructio n of vegetatio n or co ntaminatio n
of so il,
h) in any Resid ence District, keep ing of mo re than one co mmercial vehicle, or of a tracto r that
exceed s a gro ss vehicle weight of three-quarters (3/4) of a to n fo r hauling a van or trailer as
defined by the Registry of Mo to r Vehicles,
i) trash, deb ris or perso nal pro perty, includ ing but no t limited to perso nal pro perty marked “free”
or “take” that has been placed fo r co llectio n as rub bish or refuse in vio latio n of Town of
Framingham policies as ap pro ved by the Directo r of Pub lic Works.
Page 3
Arti cl e V:  Hea lth and Sa fety 
22.2.7  Occupa nt
A perso n who occup ies real pro perty with the co nsent of the owner as a lessee, tenant at will,
licensee or otherwise. The singular use of the term includ es the plural when the co ntext so
indicates.
22.2.6  Owner
Every perso n who alo ne or jointly or severally with others:
a) has legal title to any build ing, structure or pro perty to
this Bylaw
b) has care, charge, or  co ntro l  of  any such build ing structure or
pro perty in any cap acity includ ing but no t limited to agent, executo r,
executrix, ad ministrato r, ad ministratrix, trustee or guard ian of the estate
of the ho ld er of legal title
c) is a lessee und er a written letter
agreement
d) has a mo rtgagee in
possession
e) is an agent, trustee or other perso n ap pointed by
the co urts.
22.2.9  Respo nsible Pa rty
The owner or occup ant (in the case of real pro perty) of pro perty that is the sub ject of
pro ceed ings und er this bylaw. The singular use of the term includ es the plural when the co ntext
so ind icates.
22.2.10 Structure
A co mb inatio n of materials, whether who lly or partially level with, ab ove or belo w the
surface of the gro und , whether permanent or temp orary, assemb led at a fixed lo catio n to give
sup port, shelter or enclo sure such as a build ing, (see ab ove),  framewo rk, retaining wall,
stand , platfo rm, bin, fence (having a height at any point of six feet or greater ab ove grad e),
parking area sign, flagp ole, or mast fo r an antenna or the like.
•  Enforcement
This Bylaw shall be enfo rced by the Build ing Co mmissio ner. If the Build ing Co mmissio ner shall
be info rmed or have reaso n to believe that any pro visio n of this Bylaw has been, is being, or is
likely to be vio lated , he shall make or cause to be mad e an investigatio n of the facts, includ ing an
investigatio n of the pro perty where the vio latio n may exist. If he find s any vio latio n he shall give
immed iate no tice in writing to the Owner and to the Occup ant of the premises to immed iately cease
such vio latio n. In making such insp ectio n, the Build ing Co mmissio ner shall have such right of access
to premises that may be lawfully exercised by him und er the laws and co nstitutio n of the
Co mmo nwealth or of the United States.
If, after such no tice and ord er, such vio latio n co ntinued , or if any Owner of Occup ant fails to obey any
lawful ord er of the Build ing Co mmissio ner with resp ect to any vio latio n of the pro visio ns of the
Bylaw, the Build ing Co mmissio ner may make co mp laint to the Sup erio r Co urt or any co urt of
co mp etent jurisd ictio n fo r any inj unctio n or ord er restraining any further use of the premises and the
co ntinuatio n of the vio latio n and shall take such other actio n as is necessary to enfo rce the pro visio ns of
this Bylaw.
Page 4
Arti cl e V:  Hea lth and Sa fety 
In ad ditio n to the fo rego ing remed y, who ever vio lates any pro visio n of this Bylaw or fails to obey any
lawful ord er issued by the Build ing Co mmissio ner in enfo rcing this Bylaw shall be liab le to a fine of
no t mo re than three hund red dollars ($300) fo r each vio latio n. Each vio latio n of this Bylaw shall
co nstitute a sep arate offense. Each day that any such vio latio n co ntinues shall co nstitute a sep arate
offense. Co nd itio n may warrant immed iate actio n, co nstitute a sub stantial vio latio n of this Bylaw, or
ad versely affect pro tected interests of others than the co mp lainant, the Build ing Co mmissio ner may
co mmence actio n und er this Bylaw witho ut req uiring the disclo sure of the id entity of the co mp lainant.
If the Build ing Co mmissio ner determines that the co nd itio n is sub ject to the jurisd ictio n of the Board
of Health or is a vio latio n of the State Sanitary Co de or any health regulatio n, in ad ditio n to enfo rcing
this Bylaw, he shall refer the matter to the Directo r of Pub lic Health of the to wn or other ap pro priate
state or to wn officials fo r actio n.
During his investigatio n of the matter, the Build ing Co mmissio ner may co nsult, but is no t req uired to
do so , with any Interested Party in an attemp t to obtain vo luntary co mp liance with this Bylaw witho ut
the need to issue a no tice of vio latio n.
22.3.2  No tice to Co mpla ina nt
In any matter in which a co mp laint has been mad e by a perso n other than the Build ing
Co mmissio ner, the Build ing Co mmissio ner, if req uested ,  shall pro mp tly no tify the
23.3.3 Remo val of Nuisa nce by Council
If the Resp onsib le Party fails to remed y the nuisance up on no tice fro m the Build ing
Co mmissio ner to do so , the Council may cause the nuisance to be remo ved as pro vid ed in
M.G.L., Ch. 139.
23.3.4 Rev iew by the Mayor
Any Interested Party who has filed a written co mp laint of a nuisance with the Build ing
Co mmissio ner up on which co mp laint the Build ing Co mmissio ner has determined that the
co nd itio n is no t a nuisance, or0 has taken other actio n that the Interested Party claims is
inad eq uate shall have a right to a review of the matter by the Mayor. At the req uest
of  such an Interested Party, the Town Manager shall co nfer with the Build ing
Co mmissio ner and shall reco mmend ap pro priate actio n to the Build ing Co mmissio ner and
to the Council
22.3.5 Repo rts by Building Co mmissio ner
The Build ing Co mmissio ner shall file with the Town Manager each mo nth a rep ort that
shall includ e all co mp laints of nuisance mad e to him during the prio r mo nth; all
pro ceed ings begun by him und er this Bylaw; all pend ing co mp laints and all investigatio ns
and enfo rcement actio ns taken by him or referred to the Co mmissio ner of Pub lic Health.
The rep ort shall state the lo catio n of the premises, a summary of the nature of the
co mp laint, the name of the Resp onsib le Party(ies), and the disp ositio n or the status of the
matter.
Page 5
