BOOKMARKS:
Directory Information Opt-Out
Use of Student Images and Likenesses in Public Information Programs
Maryland YOUTH TOBACCO and RISK BEHAVIOR SURVEY (YTRBS) (Grades 6 - 12 only)
Military Recruitment (Grades 11 and 12 only)
Page 1
Student Last Name:  Student First Name:  Grade: 
Parental Opt Out Form  Student ID: 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools – Department of Student Services
Parental Opt Outs / Disclosures is the annual opportunity to “opt” out of certain information disclosures. Information currently on files is
considered valid until a new form is submitted to the school. This form only needs to be returned if you do NOT want your child to
participate in one or more of the specific information disclosures listed below. 
Directory Information Opt-Out
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and state regulation permit St. Mary’s County Public Schools (SMCPS) to disclose
designated “directory information” without a parent’s written consent unless you have notified SMCPS to the contrary. As defined by FERPA, 
directory information is personally identifiable information that would not generally be considered harmful or an invasion of privacy if disclosed
SMCPS designates the following student information as directory information: Student first and last name, grade level, most recent school
attended. 
Does SMCPS have permission to disclose directory information for your student? Yes No
Use of Student Images and Likenesses in Public Information Programs
As part of our overall educational program, students are occasionally asked to be photographed or videotaped or have their work displayed. 
Unless indicated to the contrary below, the school will assume that your child may be photographed or videotaped by the news media or by
SMCPS staff, and that the student’s likeness (including yearbook), name (including honor roll), performance, artwork, or written work may be
used. SMCPS cannot control photography, taping, or interviews of students at events that are open to the public, nor decisions by the news
media to post school news on the Internet. 
Do you agree that your child may be photographed or videotaped by the news media and/or SMCPS staff and that the student’s likeness
(including yearbook), name (including honor roll), performance, artwork, or written work may be used? Yes  No
Maryland YOUTH TOBACCO and RISK BEHAVIOR SURVEY (YTRBS) (Grades 6 - 12 only) 
The Maryland Youth Risk Behavior Survey / Youth Tobacco Survey (YRBS/YTS) is conducted by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
in collaboration with the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The
survey will provide data on youth health risk behaviors identified by the CDC. Students are encouraged to participate so that state and local
programs can address these risk behaviors. 
−  Designed to protect student privacy
−  The survey is voluntary
−  The survey is confidential and anonymous
−  Students will not put their names on the survey
−  Students can skip questions that they are not comfortable answering
Do you give your child permission to participate in the YTRBS survey? Yes  No
Military Recruitment (Grades 11 and 12 only) 
Each public school under the jurisdiction of a county board of education that makes students aware of occupational or educational options is
required to provide student directory information to recruitment representatives of the United States military. If you, as a parent/legal guardian
DO NOT wish for your child’s name, address, and telephone number to be released to military recruitment representatives, please check the
space provided below. 
Do you give SMCPS permission to release your child’s name, address, and telephone number to military recruitment representatives? 
Yes  No
Parent / Legal Guardian Printed Name: 
Parent / Legal Guardian Signature:  Date: 
