Keywords: Genetics,Common disorders,Polygenic risk scores,Prediction,Pharmacogenetics,Risk
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
ModDate: 2020/05/18 16:59:15+02'00'
CreationDate: 2020/05/15 19:49:59+08'00'
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
Subject: Genome Medicine, 2020, doi:10.1186/s13073-020-00742-5
Author: Cathryn M. Lewis
Title: Polygenic risk scores: from research tools to clinical instruments
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Genetics,Common disorders,Polygenic risk scores,Prediction,Pharmacogenetics,Risk
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s13073-020-00742-5
xmp:dc:publisher: Genome Medicine
xmp:dc:description: Genome Medicine, 2020, doi:10.1186/s13073-020-00742-5
xmp:dc:subject: Genetics; Common disorders; Polygenic risk scores; Prediction; Pharmacogenetics; Risk
xmp:dc:title: Polygenic risk scores: from research tools to clinical instruments
xmp:dc:creator: Cathryn M. Lewis; Evangelos Vassos
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2020-05-18T16:59:15+02:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2020-05-18T16:59:15+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2020-05-15T19:49:59+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:20340eb7-0caa-400f-bcdc-5648ce5e66e6
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:a3174ee3-2c42-4783-81df-9388c5a9417b
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:20340eb7-0caa-400f-bcdc-5648ce5e66e6
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2020-05-17T01:06:04+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Cathryn M. Lewis
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8249-8476
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A reference to the original document from which this one is derived. It is a minimal reference; missing components can be assumed to be unchanged. For example, a new version might only need to specify the instance ID and version number of the previous version, or a rendition might only need to specify the instance ID and rendition class of the original.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DerivedFrom
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: ResourceRef
xmp:pdfaType:description: Identifies a portion of a document. This can be a position at which the document has been changed since the most recent event history (stEvt:changed). For a resource within an xmpMM:Ingredients list, the ResourceRef uses this type to identify both the portion of the containing document that refers to the resource, and the portion of the referenced resource that is referenced.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Part#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stPart
xmp:pdfaType:type: Part
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/t/pg/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpTPg
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Paged-Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Fonts
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag Font
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: XMP08 Spec: An ordered array of plate names that are needed to print the document (including any in contained documents).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: PlateNames
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaType:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Font#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stFnt
xmp:pdfaType:type: Font
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://www.aiim.org/pdfa/ns/id/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfaid
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/A ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Part of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:nameBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Background
Properties of polygenic risk scores
Applicability of PRS across ethnic groups
Clinical utility of PRS
Disease risk prediction
  Medical conditions
  Psychiatric disorders
PRS by environment interaction
PRS in treatment choice
PRS to refine penetrance of high-risk variants
Role of direct-to-consumer testing
Conclusions and future directions
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Authors’ contributions
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-020-00742-5
REVIEW  Open Access
Polygenic risk scores: from research tools to
clinical instruments
Cathryn M. Lewis1,2* and Evangelos Vassos1
Abstract
Genome-wide association studies have shown unequivocally that common complex disorders have a polygenic
genetic architecture and have enabled researchers to identify genetic variants associated with diseases. These
variants can be combined into a polygenic risk score that captures part of an individual’s susceptibility to diseases.
Polygenic risk scores have been widely applied in research studies, confirming the association between the scores
and disease status, but their clinical utility has yet to be established. Polygenic risk scores may be used to estimate
an individual’s lifetime genetic risk of disease, but the current discriminative ability is low in the general population.
Clinical implementation of polygenic risk score (PRS) may be useful in cohorts where there is a higher prior
probability of disease, for example, in early stages of diseases to assist in diagnosis or to inform treatment choices.
Important considerations are the weaker evidence base in application to non-European ancestry and the challenges
in translating an individual’s PRS from a percentile of a normal distribution to a lifetime disease risk. In this review,
we consider how PRS may be informative at different points in the disease trajectory giving examples of progress
in the field and discussing obstacles that need to be addressed before clinical implementation.
Keywords: Genetics, Common disorders, Polygenic risk scores, Prediction, Pharmacogenetics, Risk
Background
Over the last decade, genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have uncovered the contribution of inherited
variants to common complex disorders. Our current un-
derstanding is that most non-communicable disorders
with a major public health impact have a genetic under-
pinning that is highly polygenic, comprising hundreds or
thousands of genetic variants (or polymorphisms), each
having a small effect on disease risk. Each genetic variant
associated with a disease is valuable in indicating a gene
or pathway of biological relevance to the disorder, but
there are also expectations that the genetic data could be
used to predict disease risk, with potential clinical utility.
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:cathryn.lewis@kcl.ac.uk"] cathryn.lewis@kcl.ac.uk
1Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College London, de Crespigny Park,
London SE5 8AF, UK
2Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Life Sciences and
Medicine, King’s College London, London, UK 
In a polygenic disorder, a single variant is not informative
for assessing disease risk. Instead, a genetic loading con-
ferred by the combined set of risk variants is necessary to
obtain a measure that has sufficient information to identify
those at high risk. There are many possible approaches to
combine information across loci; the genetic risk is most
often assessed through the polygenic risk score (PRS),  a
weighted sum of the number of risk alleles an individual
carries. Despite methodological concerns about construct,
content, and criterion validity of PRS [1], many studies have
shown that PRSs can predict disease status in research-
based case-control studies [2–4].  More convincingly, the
prediction is also valid in population-based cohort studies
and in electronic health record-based studies [5–7].
In this review, we consider how polygenic risk scores
may be informative at different points in the disease tra-
jectory, from unaffected individuals being tested for fu-
ture disease risk to diagnosed patients, assessing how
genetic information might inform their treatment or
© The Author(s). 2020 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the
data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
Page 2
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44  Page 2 of 11
provide prognostic information on disease course. For
each stage, we illustrate how PRS might be used and give
examples of the current progress in the field.
Properties of polygenic risk scores
The PRS is formed from a set of independent risk vari-
ants associated with a disorder, based on the current evi-
dence from the largest or most informative genome-
wide association studies. For each individual, the number
of risk alleles carried at each variant (0, 1, or 2) is
summed, weighted by its effect size (i.e. log (OR) for bin-
ary traits or beta coefficient for continuous traits). The
outcome is a single score of each individual’s genetic
loading for a disease or for a continuous trait (Fig. 1).
Summing across variants assumes an additive genetic
architecture, with independence of risk variants. Although
simplistic, this reflects our best estimate of genetic architec-
ture of common complex disorders, where little evidence of
interaction between genetic variants is detected. These
additive polygenic risk scores do not model any gene-gene
or gene-environment interactions [9]; however, the largest
meta-analysis of heritability from twin studies supports a
simple additive model in most of the traits examined [10].
Several methods can be used to calculate polygenic risk
scores. These include ‘clumping/pruning and thresholding’
methods, where a reduced set of genetic variants is identi-
fied through pruning on linkage disequilibrium, and ac-
counting for evidence of association with the trait being
studied (clumping).  Polygenic risk scores are then 
calculated summing over all SNPs meeting a p value
threshold, or set of thresholds, as implemented in PRSice
[11] and PLINK [12]. In contrast, other methods assess the
best prediction genome-wide by explicitly modelling the
correlation structure between variants without attempting
to identify a minimal subset of SNPs for prediction; the
most widely used implementation is the Bayesian LDpred
approach [13]. Many novel risk score methods are under
development and may have increased power in comparison
with our current methods (for example, SBayesR [14]). We
will use the term ‘polygenic risk scores’ to cover all methods
that sum genetic data to provide individual risk measures
and will assume that these are transformed to have a stand-
ard normal distribution. The measures used to assess the
predictive ability of a PRS are summarised in Table 1.
The PRS measure is beguiling in its simplicity, but it is
limited in its ability to capture the full genetic loading
for a disorder. We currently have an incomplete list of
genetic variants associated with a disorder, and the effect
sizes used to construct the score are imprecise. The use
of tagging SNPs in place of the (unknown) causal variant
or variants also limits precision, but a novel method-
ology has been developed, for example, extensions of the
LDpred, in order to address this issue [18, 19]. Further,
it is becoming clear that genetic risk scores also capture
information from the environment. Evidence for this is
seen in family-based studies which show that contribu-
tions from the PRS computed from non-transmitted al-
leles of parents also affect offspring phenotypes. This
Fig. 1 Normal distribution of polygenic risk scores, for a disorder of prevalence 20% (prev), with cases having a mean PRS of t = 0.3. Black line:
population N(0,1) distribution. Grey shaded area: controls, unaffected with disorder, with mean PRS = − prev × t/(1 − prev) = − 0.075. Red shaded
area: cases, mean PRS t = 0.3. AUC = 0.605, calculated from Φ (Cohen’s d/√2), where Φ is the normal distribution cumulative distribution function,
and Cohen’s d is the difference between mean PRSs for cases and controls [8]
Page 3
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44  Page 3 of 11
Table 1 Assessing the clinical utility of polygenic risk scores
A: Population level
The predictive ability of polygenic risk scores can be measured in
research studies, where differences between cases and controls
(Fig. 1) or of a continuous trait in a population are assessed. Here, the
disease status or trait is pre-established, and the studies measure the
extent to which this is determined by the PRS. Outcome measures
from such studies include:
(1) R2 from linear regression, which quantifies the proportion of
variance in a continuous trait captured by the PRS, or equivalently
Nagelkerke’s R2 for logistic regression for case-control disease
status.
(2) R2 on a liability scale, which transforms Nagelkerke’s R2 to reflect
disease prevalence, instead of the case-control ratio of the research
study [15].
(3) The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC)
[16], which takes a value from 0.5 to 1. This gives an overall
summary of the predictive ability of the model. It is most easily
interpreted as the probability that a randomly selected case will
have a higher polygenic risk score than a randomly selected
control. Such models can also include risk factors such as age and
sex, which will increase the AUC values above that based on PRS
alone.
(4) The proportion of the population that has a k-fold increased
odds (k = 2, 3, …), compared to the population disease risk.
(5) Odds ratio of disease risk conferred by a 1-standard deviation in-
crease in PRS.
(6) Odds ratio of disease for an individual in the top PRS decile (or
other quantiles) compared to individuals in a different part of the
PRS distribution. The high-risk group may be compared to the low-
est decile, a mid-quintile (e.g. 40–60%), or those outside the high-
risk group (0–90%). Comparing the upper and lower tails maximises
the odds ratio for impact but raises concerns about the arbitrari-
ness of the quantile used.
B: Individual level
In a clinical setting, the focus is on a single person: what information
does their PRS give about their risk of disease? Possible outcome
measures that are relevant at an individual level include:
(a) At what percentile in the distribution of PRS does this individual
lie? This is between 0 and 100%, with scores having a normal
distribution.
(b) What is this person’s relative risk of disease compared to the
average risk in the population?
(c) What is this person’s absolute risk of disease, and by what age [17]?
‘genetic nurture’  phenomenon indicates, for example,
that educational attainment is influenced by both off-
spring genetics and the non-transmitted parental genet-
ics, which may determine the family environment [20].
There are four important considerations of the informa-
tion content of a polygenic score, and how it can be
interpreted:
1) The known information, which shows where an
individual lies compared to others on the risk scale
2) The unknown information from incomplete
genetics or unmodelled environment
3) The potential for incorrect information, for
example, where the individual differs from 
characteristics of the research study used to
estimate the effect size of each genetic variant by
genetic ancestry, age, environmental load, or disease
definition, or where there is a technical bias in data
collection
4) The intended use of the PRS, for example, more
complete information would be required for
justifying a pharmacological intervention than for
using the PRS to motivate behaviour change
The first two properties of known and unknown infor-
mation are summarised by the proportion of disease li-
ability that the polygenic risk score captures, whilst our
understanding of the incorrect information is still
evolving.
Applicability of PRS across ethnic groups
One of the most challenging aspects of moving PRS to
the clinical arena is ensuring that they are equally applic-
able to all health care users across ethnic groups to limit
exacerbating health disparities [21]. This is an important
issue both for minority ethnic groups within high-
income countries, who may be under-represented in re-
search studies, and for low- and middle-income countries,
where genetic studies of the relevant ancestry may not
exist because of limited research infrastructure. Current
PRS methods rely on an individual’s genetic ancestry be-
ing similar to the large GWAS study from which reference
effect sizes are taken for PRS calculation and may require
access to an ancestry-matched genotype-level reference
panel. Such studies are currently only widely available in
European ancestries [22, 23], so polygenic risk scores are
applicable to only a small proportion of the world’s popu-
lation; in this paper, unless otherwise stated, study partici-
pants are of European ancestries. Transferability of PRS
across populations is limited, with PRS generated from
GWAS in one population usually providing attenuated
predictive accuracy in other populations [21, 24]. Reasons
for this include the use of tagging SNPs, differences in the
patterns of linkage disequilibrium between populations,
and SNP arrays biased to variants of European descent
[25]. More importantly, differential genetic drift can cause
unpredictable biases when scores inferred from one popu-
lation are applied in another [26]. At an individual level, it
is crucially important that an individual’s PRS is compared
to a population-specific distribution so that the interpret-
ation is valid. Progress in performing GWAS on non-
European ancestries has been slow, with, for example, <
3% of study participants in the GWAS Catalog were of Af-
rican ancestry [22].  Large-scale GWAS of diabetes and
schizophrenia have been performed in African and East
Asian populations [27–29], and novel initiatives of the col-
lection in worldwide populations like the Human Heredity
and Health in Africa (H3Africa) Initiative ([URL: "https://h3africa.org/"] https://h3africa.
Page 4
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44  Page 4 of 11
 org/) and the African Mental Health Research Initiative
([URL: "https://amari-africa.org"] https://amari-africa.org) are underway. Key methodo-
logical considerations for GWAS in ancestrally diverse
populations have been recently discussed, including the
choice between performing a meta-analysis stratified by
ethnic groups and performing a joint mixed-model across
all participants [23]. Novel methods for ‘polyethnic’ scores,
like XP-BLUP and Multi-ethnic PRS, which improve pre-
dictive accuracy by combining transethnic with ethnic-
specific information, are being developed [30–32].
Substantial investment will be needed to achieve the
equivalence of genetic information required for equity of
access when polygenic risk scores are applied in the
clinic [21, 33].
Clinical utility of PRS
The potential value of polygenic scores is supported by
the increasing number of research studies that show a
highly significant association between PRS and disease
status, but their clinical utility has yet to be established.
Can PRS be used by clinicians for disease prediction or
stratification, either now or in the future? For this to be
achieved, the focus must shift from association with
case-control status to the information in the PRS for a
single individual. Furthermore, to translate PRS to clin-
ical tools, relative risks that compare individuals across
the PRS continuum with a baseline group will eventually
need to be transformed to absolute risks for the disease
[34, 35].  Unlike monogenic disorders caused by high-
penetrance mutations, in complex disorders, the dis-
criminative ability of PRS is compromised by the multi-
factorial contributors to the disease, the imperfect
measurement of the full genetic signal, and the poten-
tially incorrect measurement.
Risk prediction models, including a combination of
clinical, biochemistry, lifestyle, and historical risk factors,
are currently used to predict 10-year risk of cardiovascu-
lar disease and diabetes [36–39]. These models combin-
ing risk factors achieve a good prediction (AUCs of 80–
85%) and are included in clinical guidelines for prevention
and public health [40].  Polygenic risk scores have much
lower AUCs, as expected from a single risk factor, and
should not be considered as an alternative to these clinical
risk models but as a possible addition. With the established
polygenic architecture of complex disorders, the improve-
ment of genetic and statistical methodology, and the in-
crease of global genotyped samples, it is reasonable to
anticipate that genetic prediction will improve. In the mean-
time, it may be timely to consider the use of PRS in specific
cohorts where there is a higher prior probability of disease.
The current focus is on identifying individuals at high
genetic risk of disease for risk stratification. This informa-
tion could be useful in decisions about participation in
screening programmes, lifestyle modifications, or preventive 
treatment, when available and appropriate. PRS may also
be relevant at different points along disease diagnosis and
course (Fig. 2). An important consideration is the need to
avoid presenting a false impression of genetic determinism
(the notion that genes alone define biology).  This could
otherwise detrimentally impact personal choices, harming
physical and mental well-being (e.g. diet, exercise, lifestyle),
and possibly even education, employment, or family plan-
ning. Research on measuring the beliefs of the public in
genetic determinism [41] should expand from single-gene
disorders to include polygenic prediction of complex dis-
eases. The widespread interest in PRS is illustrated by their
use by direct-to-consumer genetic testing companies; for
example, 23andMe now offers polygenic risk scores for
T2D. The Polygenic Score Catalog ([URL: "http://pgscatalog.org/"] http://pgscatalog.org/)
curates data and tables extracted from polygenic risk scores
for common disorders, capturing performance metrics of
the PRS developed.
Disease risk prediction
Although one’s genetic liability is fixed from conception,
the risk arising from one’s genes is dynamic, depending
on changing factors such as age, environmental expo-
sures, and previous illnesses. For example, if someone is
at high genetic risk for alcohol/drug dependence but is
never exposed to alcohol or drugs, the genetic risk is ir-
relevant. Even if sequencing at birth were to become
standard clinical practice [42],  communicating risk
scores at birth is neither appropriate nor useful, and it is
likely that genetic data would be stored and interrogated
throughout life for both single-gene Mendelian disorders
and common polygenic disorders. The decision to assess
PRS might be triggered by age, onset of symptoms, fam-
ily history, or presence of relevant environmental factors.
The role that PRS will play in clinical care is currently
unclear, and any use of PRS must be predicated on clear
clinical utility, with a specific outcome activated by the
score. For example, a PRS for coronary artery disease
assessed in early adulthood may be useful to encourage
healthy behaviour throughout life, although we still lack
experience of how to use genetic data to motivate behav-
iour change [43–45]. Not all preventive strategies are so
benign; pharmacological interventions or surgical proce-
dures are more controversial. For example, it would be
very difficult to consider prophylactic mastectomy for
breast cancer prevention. Even simple decisions like
increased screening may result in false positives with sig-
nificant economic cost to society and unnecessary stress
of the individual. At its simplest, PRS may be used to
estimate an individual’s lifetime risk of disease. This ap-
plication follows the design of most genome-wide associ-
ation studies, differentiating between cases and controls.
From the studies performed in different clinical areas
assessing the predictive ability of PRS, we discuss below
Page 5
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44  Page 5 of 11
Fig. 2 Lifeline of the potential relevance of polygenic risk scores showing points through disease trajectory where polygenic risk scores have the
potential to impact clinical care
the strongest evidence for potential clinical utility, with
special reference to our research area, psychiatric disor-
ders [46].
Medical conditions
Much of the research to motivate moving polygenic risk
scores from research studies to clinical implementation
comes from cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes,
breast and prostate cancers, and Alzheimer’s disease
[47].  Khera et al. [2] recently demonstrated in the UK
Biobank that PRS can identify which percentage of the
sample have at least 3-fold increased risk for coronary
artery disease, atrial fibrillation, type 2 diabetes, inflam-
matory bowel disease, and breast cancer, with the pro-
portion of individuals identified varying between 1.5 and
8% depending on the disorder. Although these effects
appear modest, PRS can identify substantial larger frac-
tions of the population at high disease risk than mono-
genic mutations, making PRS potentially more clinically
relevant. Apart from the generic prediction of case-
control status, specific applications of PRS have been
proposed. For example, the PRSs of left ventricular car-
diovascular magnetic resonance phenotypes are predict-
ive of heart failure events independently of clinical risk
factors in the UK Biobank [48],  whilst elevated genetic
score for albuminuria is strongly associated with in-
creased risk of hypertension [49].
In breast cancer, pioneering work in risk prediction,
modelling genetic susceptibility based on two genes,
BRCA1 and BRCA2, [50] has been expanded to the use of
polygenic scores, which have improved predictive ability.
In a recent study, a PRS based on 303 genetic variants had
an AUC of 0.63, with an odds ratio of 1.61 (95% confi-
dence interval, 1.57–1.65) per unit increase in PRS [3].
Whilst these figures are modest, they translate into a sub-
stantial spread of risk in the population: women in the top
1% of PRS have a 4-fold increased risk of developing ER-
positive breast cancer and a corresponding 6-fold de-
creased risk for those in the lowest 1% PRS (both com-
pared to women in the mid-quintile of the PRS
distribution).  Despite the modest discriminative ability, 
PRS could be utilised in improving screening programmes,
including defining the age at which breast cancer screen-
ing should start and the screening interval. In the UK,
mammogram screening is offered to women over age 47,
when the average 10-year risk of breast cancer is ~ 2.6%.
However, Mavaddat et al. [3] show that PRS is informative
in stratifying risk, with the 20% of women with the highest
polygenic risk scores reaching this level of risk before age
40 and the 20% of women with the lowest scores never
reaching this level of risk. This study shows that breast
cancer polygenic risk scores already capture sufficient in-
formation to identify a high-risk subgroup of women who
could be offered mammogram screening at an earlier age.
Commercial breast cancer risk tests based on polygenic
risk scores are already offered by Myriad Genetics (risk-
Score™) and Ambry Genetics (AmbryScore).
These PRS studies were all performed in European-
ancestry populations, and expansion to worldwide popula-
tions is essential. For example, a study of lung cancer-
associated variants in Chinese populations [51] demon-
strated that PRS was an independent risk stratification in-
dicator for lung cancer beyond age and smoking pack-
years. Polygenic risk scores have been less widely applied
to auto-immune disorders. In type 1 diabetes, strong gen-
etic risk scores have been created, with the large effect of
the HLA haplotypes increasing AUC values to > 0.8 in
European ancestry and Hispanic populations [52].  An
ancestry-specific genetic score using 7 SNPs outperformed
a European-based genetic score in African ancestry partic-
ipants (AUC 0.87 and 0.80, respectively) [53].
PRS also can be used to predict continuous traits in
the population like BMI, which is important as a risk
factor for cardiometabolic traits. A recent large study
showed that participants in the highest BMI PRS decile
have a BMI that is 2.6 kg/m2 higher than those in the
mid-quantile PRS—to put in context, this is half the
width of the ‘overweight category’  of BMI (from 25 to
29.9 mg/m2)—and corresponds to 31% of individuals
with a BMI > 40 (obesity class 3) [54].  Genetically dis-
sected trajectories of BMI across the lifespan help us
identify where genetic prediction starts to be relevant.
Page 6
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44  Page 6 of 11
BMI PRS is only minimally associated with birthweight;
it has increasing prediction through childhood, and by
age 18, the differences in BMI by PRS quartile are simi-
lar to that seen in adulthood [54]. Despite the significant
polygenic prediction of BMI in the general population, it
remains to be determined whether BMI PRS has clinical
utility in high-risk populations. For example, a common
adverse effect of antipsychotics or antidepressants is
weight gain; however, we do not know whether this is
determined or modified by the BMI PRS.
Psychiatric disorders
Polygenic risk scores for major depression can be calcu-
lated using results from recent genome-wide association
studies [4, 55].  Wray et al. identified 44 SNPs at
genome-wide significance and showed that a PRS built
from SNPs with a p value < 0.05 had the highest predict-
ive ability. Individuals in the upper PRS decile had ap-
proximately 2.5-fold increased risk of disease compared
to those in the lowest decile, which translates into a sub-
stantial change in absolute risk, given an approximate
15% lifetime risk of major depression. However, this
score has an AUC of 0.57 and captures only 2% of vari-
ance in disease risk (R2 on the liability scale), whilst the
remaining 98% is uncaptured by the PRS. An individual’s
risk of depression therefore comprises 2% of measurable
genetic risk score and 98% unaccounted variation from
unmodelled genetic and environmental factors. Even for
an individual at very high genetic risk, the PRS signal
would be overpowered by the unmodelled component.
Depression PRS is therefore not yet useful, and any fu-
ture utility would be based on substantially increasing
the variance explained by the PRS or by joint modelling
of genetic and environmental risk factors. Increasing the
sample size with the inclusion of broader self-reported
definitions of depression [55] resulted in a modest in-
crease of the variance explained by PRS, albeit at the
cost of specificity for major depression. Phenotypic re-
finement has been proposed as an alternative to produce
more clinically relevant findings [56].
For schizophrenia, the predictive ability is higher, with
the current score accounting for 7% of trait variance and
an AUC of 0.61, but these values are still far below that
needed for an individual’s score to have sufficient signal
for interpretation or for clinical utility [57].  There is
greater potential for using risk prediction from genetics
in schizophrenia, since the heritability of 65–80% [58,
59] is much higher than 37% for major depression [60],
but the substantially different disease lifetime risks (< 1%
for schizophrenia vs. 15% for major depressive disorder)
is also relevant. Even though polygenic scores are not
meaningful for general prediction [57], there are points
in the clinical care pathway where PRS could be useful
in achieving an earlier or a more precise diagnosis. For 
example, in first-episode psychosis, we have shown that
schizophrenia PRS can differentiate schizophrenia from
other psychosis diagnoses (Nagelkerke’s R2 of 9% and
those in the top quintile of PRS having an approximately
2-fold increased risk of being subsequently diagnosed
with schizophrenia) [24]. This is a low predictive ability,
but the setting within first-episode psychosis cases
makes it more appealing because (1) it does not require
genotyping of the general population, only people with
psychosis, and (2) it is not relevant to major decisions
(like treat/not treat), but could provide additional infor-
mation potentially useful for the care plan. In addition
to assisting diagnosis, genotype data could be used to
calculate other PRS in secondary screening, for example,
cardiovascular disease, since psychosis cases are already
at high cardiometabolic risk.
In Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the three APOE variants
(ε2, ε3, and ε4) have been consistently associated with
disease risk, making it the strongest single-gene pre-
dictor at a population level in neuropsychiatry. However,
additional risk variants summarised in a PRS improve
the prediction model further. For example, Desikan et al.
[61] showed that amongst APOE ε3/3 carriers, PRS
modified the expected age of AD onset by more than 10
years between the lowest and highest deciles (hazard ra-
tio 3.34, p = 10−22).
PRS by environment interaction
All the common disorders considered here have both
genetic and environmental risk factors. Another area of
exploration in PRS is possible gene-environment inter-
action, which implies that the effect of the disease PRS
would depend on the level of the environmental risk fac-
tor. This interaction model contrasts with an additive
model, where PRS and environment contribute inde-
pendently to disease risk. With a positive interaction, the
effect of a high PRS would be amplified in the presence
of an environmental risk factor (E),  putting this sub-
group of the population (G+,  E+) at particularly high
risk of disease. These individuals could form a specific
target group for interventions, identified by either PRS
or environment, or both.
Despite the attraction of identifying PRS-E interac-
tions, currently, there is no strong evidence supporting
these interaction models.
In depression, childhood maltreatment is an important
risk factor for later diagnosis with depression. A meta-
analysis of 6000 individuals confirmed strong effects for
both PRS and childhood maltreatment contributing to
the risk of depression but showed no evidence of an
interaction [62].  In cardiovascular disease, an extensive
study of lifestyle effects (diet, exercise, BMI, smoking)
with polygenic risk scores showed strong effects from
both sources, but no evidence of an interaction [63].
Page 7
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44  Page 7 of 11
Similarly, a recent cohort study of UK Biobank partici-
pants aged > 60 without cognitive impairment, followed
up for 8 years, both genetic risk and lifestyle factors pre-
dicted incidence of dementia, but no interaction was
found [64]. Even though this paucity of confirmed inter-
actions in large samples is not helpful in identifying indi-
viduals at very high risk, testing and disproving
interactions are essential for correct joint modelling of
genes and environment for risk prediction [65]. 
highlights [75, 76]. This could reduce the time taken by
clinicians to find efficacious treatment, improve treat-
ment response, and prevent treatment-related adverse
effects, which is cost-effective for both the patient and
the healthcare system. When the choice of treatment is
not dictated by different effectiveness, but from personal
experience, preference, or intuition on a trial-and-error
basis, PRS can potentially give some quantifiable infor-
mation to be considered along other lines of evidence.
PRS in treatment choice
Pharmacogenetic studies test how genetic variants affect
response to treatment, with the aim of assisting treat-
ment choices to maximise efficacy and minimise side ef-
fects. Most progress has been made in identifying rare
high-risk variants that increase risk of adverse drug
events (for example, abacavir and HLA-B*57:01, carba-
mazepine and HLA-B*15:02), whilst prediction of treat-
ment efficacy has largely evaded genetic dissection.
The potential impact of PRS in treatment response is
unknown, but an easy first target is to test whether gen-
etic disease susceptibility also plays a role in treatment
outcome. Currently, the strongest evidence for a role of
PRS in treatment response is in statin use to reduce the
risk of first coronary event, where studies have shown
that the relative risk reduction is higher in those at high
genetic risk for cardiovascular disease [66, 67]. These re-
sults are in line with the previous reporting of better ef-
ficacy of statins in high-risk samples, for example, due to
diabetes, hypertension, or high CRP concentrations [68].
A recent study demonstrated a potential role of PRS for
electrocardiogram parameters in predicting the cardiac
electrical response to sodium channel blockade [69].
In psychiatric disorders, only weak evidence exists to
suggest that the PRS for disorder susceptibility might be
predictive of treatment response in depression [70, 71]
or psychosis [72].  Further studies to identify specific
treatment response polygenic risk scores are in progress
in these disorders, but it is challenging to achieve suffi-
ciently large sample sizes, with accurately captured re-
sponse measures. Meta-analysis studies are underway,
pooling clinical trials and observational studies of re-
sponse to anti-depressants and to anti-psychotics. These
would identify polygenic predictors for treatment re-
sponse that might be useful in, for example, deciding be-
tween pharmacological and psychological treatment for
depression [73].  Only one third of patients respond to
the first anti-depressant prescribed [74], so a polygenic
predictor might be useful to guide treatment; even a
modest increase in the proportion of patients responding
could have a substantial impact on the effectiveness and
time to recovery. An important perspective in genetic
testing for treatment response is in identifying patients
who are unlikely to respond to a specific drug, as Gibson 
PRS to refine penetrance of high-risk variants
Evidence is accruing that polygenic risk scores have a
role in both the general population and carriers of rare,
high-risk genetic variants. In disorders as diverse as
breast cancer, developmental disorders, and schizophre-
nia, polygenic risk scores affect penetrance, acting as
moderators for high-risk variants or structural variation.
This highlights a possible role for PRS within the well-
established framework of high-risk genetic testing. For
example, the Deciphering Developmental Disorders
study showed that in 7000 children with severe neurode-
velopmental disorders expected to be monogenic in aeti-
ology, common variation affects the overall risk of severe
neurodevelopmental disorders. It explains over 7% of the
variance and affects the individual presentation of symp-
toms [77]. The role of common variation in moderating
expressivity was confirmed in a large electronic health
record study, where, in addition to the large effect from
the rare pathogenic variants, PRSs for height and BMI
were associated with clinical outcome [78].  In breast
cancer, the absolute risk increase in carriers of BRCA1
and BRCA2 pathogenic variants depends on breast can-
cer polygenic risk scores, which might influence clinical
decision-making [79].  The joint modelling of common
and rare variants for breast cancer risk prediction can
now be performed in the risk calculation tool, BOADI-
CEA [80].  Similarly, in schizophrenia, both structural
variation and PRS contribute to risk: schizophrenia cases
that carry confirmed copy number variants (CNVs) have
higher PRS than cases which do not; within carriers of
CNVs, schizophrenia cases have higher PRS than con-
trols [81, 82]. Hence, even in the presence of CNVs with
high penetrance [83], polygenic scores affect the overall
risk of disease and may be relevant to the clinical expres-
sion in CNVs associated with multiple phenotypes like
the 22q11.2 deletion [84].
Role of direct-to-consumer testing
Direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing companies
give consumers easy access to their genetic data, specif-
ically genotyping on genome-wide chips of up to 1 mil-
lion variants. Estimates suggest that 26 million people
had used online DTC companies such as [URL: "http://ancestry.com"] Ancestry.com
and 23andMe up to the end of 2018 ([URL: "https://www.technologyreview.com/s/612880/more-than-26-million-people-have-taken-an-at-home-ancestry-test/"] https://www.
Page 8
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44  Page 8 of 11
 technologyreview.com/s/612880/more-than-26-million-
 people-have-taken-an-at-home-ancestry-test/).  Whilst
many purchasers are initially interested in ancestry test-
ing, customers may then move on to analyse their gen-
etic data for health [85], downloading their raw genotype
data to explore in third-party interpretation pro-
grammes. These programmes are unregulated and differ
in the genetic risks provided, the explanatory informa-
tion provided, and the cautions given over interpret-
ation. Some sites allow users to calculate polygenic risk
scores; for example, Impute.me ([URL: "https://www.impute.me/"] https://www.impute.
 me/) shows users where their polygenic risk score lies
against a population-specific distribution of scores. Alle-
lica provides an online service calculating polygenic risk
scores [86].  In direct-to-consumer genetic testing,
MyHeritage ([URL: "https://www.myheritage.com/health/genetic-risk-reports"] https://www.myheritage.com/health/gen-
 etic-risk-reports) provides polygenic risk scores on four
traits, ‘for people who are of mainly European ancestry’.
The most detailed assessment of PRS in a DTC setting is
from 23andMe, whose white paper presents their epi-
demiological modelling and the challenges of deriving
individual-level absolute disease risks from PRS [67].
23andMe provides polygenic risk scores for type 2 dia-
betes; based on external validation, their models have
AUC values of between 59 and 65%, similar to those ob-
tained from research studies [87].  Their customer re-
ports give an estimate of the remaining lifetime risk of
T2D based on genetics, age, and ancestry, with add-
itional information on how BMI, diet, and exercise
habits affect T2D prevalence.
The accuracy and generalisability of any PRS model
need to be validated with external data, but even when
the scientific basis is robust, the correct, unbiased inter-
pretation of risk profiles by the consumers will need to
be evaluated. The extent to which DTC genetic testing
will move polygenic risk scores into the clinical arena is
unknown. For example, patients bringing their DTC re-
sults may motivate conversations between primary care
physicians and patients on health education.
Conclusions and future directions
Polygenic risk scores have moved from research discovery
studies to clinical research studies (for example, a trial aim-
ing to assess the impact of PRS reporting on breast cancer
risk management recommendations NCT03688204)
([URL: "https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03688204"] https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03688204) and have
started on the slow path to clinical implementation. This re-
view discusses some of the disorders where this is likely to
occur and highlights the obstacles that remain in harnessing
the information contained in PRS. The strongest evidence
for PRS currently comes from cardiovascular diseases and
breast cancer, where risk stratification of those at high poly-
genic risk has clinical utility [2, 3, 47]. Other disorders are
likely to follow; however, there is still a long route to be 
covered before PRSs become useful tools for clinicians
(Table 2).
One challenge of exploring the value of PRS within
the clinical setting to predict the outcome, or determine
the treatment, is that the sample sizes from case-only
clinical studies with relevant phenotypic data related to
the course of illness, treatment response, or adverse ef-
fects are substantially lower than those from case-
control disease susceptibility studies. The latter requires
minimal phenotypic information—a clinical diagnosis, or
self-report—whilst determining prognosis or treatment
outcome requires longitudinal follow-up across sus-
tained periods of time. This is expensive and challenging
to collect, and such studies often have much smaller
sample sizes. Electronic health records (EHR) may pro-
vide longitudinal data, but ‘treatment response’  is often
poorly recorded and needs to be captured laterally
through prescription records. We highlight how applying
PRS in treatment response may better facilitate clinical
utility, as the genetic data will complement the clini-
cian’s choice of treatment. We envisage that the role of
PRS in informing treatment choices, for example, priori-
tising pharmaceutical or psychosocial interventions or
providing quantitative information on the benefit to
harm ratio for each treatment, rather than treat/not treat
decisions, may be the low-hanging fruit where the clin-
ical utility of PRS will become apparent.
An ultimate goal might be to have genotype data—and
later whole-genome sequence data—integrated into our
clinical record; this could then be interrogated at each
clinical encounter for relevant information on risk pre-
diction, treatment response, and disorder prognosis. For
polygenic risk scores, this is not yet scientifically justified
and is technically challenging, particularly since an indi-
vidual score must be built and interpreted against the
Table 2 A brief overview of the steps required to make PRS
relevant in a clinical setting
1. Realistic estimation of predictive ability in clinical populations, which
may differ from research samples in disease severity, ancestral diversity,
and exposure to environmental risk
2. Identification of the intended purpose of the PRS, which may affect
its design and validation, and relevant clinical questions that can be
answered, for example, prediction of severity, course of illness, or
response to treatment
3. Recognition that even though not useful for the majority of the
population with PRS in the middle of the distribution, the outcome may
be relevant for those with high or low PRS, in the tails of the
distribution
4. Clarification if PRS has an additive or interaction effect with
established epidemiological or biological risk factors before combining
in joint prediction models [88]
5. Engagement of clinicians and service users, to ensure that any
application of polygenic risk scores avoids deterministic interpretations
and is based on the understanding that PRS is an indicator, not a
precise measure
Page 9
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44  Page 9 of 11
appropriate genomic reference population, which may
not be available. Both these restrictions are likely to
change with continuing scientific progress in uncovering
the genetic contribution to common diseases and with
expanding capabilities of electronic health records [7].
Projects such as the eMERGE network ([URL: "https://emerge-network.org/"] https://emerge-
 network.org/) are leading the way in these initiatives, al-
though also highlighting clinicians’  concerns about the
role of unsolicited genetic results in their practice [89].
We focus on two limitations to the implementation of
polygenic risk scores in clinical practice: firstly, the
weaker evidence base in application to non-European
ancestry; this needs substantial research investment in
study collection worldwide and in methodological re-
search to improve genetic prediction in admixed individ-
uals. Secondly, major challenges exist with the
interpretation of polygenic risk scores. At its simplest,
an individual can be placed on the distribution, ‘your
PRS lies at the 22.8th percentile’, which gives limited in-
formation on their lifetime risk. But a more nuanced in-
terpretation is needed, for example, a lifetime risk of
disease that combines genetic information with their
current age, sex, and environmental and clinical risk
factors.
In summary, we have made astounding biological ad-
vances in uncovering the genetic component to common
complex disorders since the advent of genome-wide as-
sociation studies in 2007. This is slowly moving from re-
search discovery to clinical implementation, but much
work remains in acquiring the necessary research base
for polygenic risk scores and in establishing how the in-
formation can be best be used and communicated.
Abbreviations
AUC: Area under the receiver operating characteristic curve; BMI: Body mass
index; CNV: Copy number variant; DTC: Direct-to-consumer; EHR: Electronic
health records; OR: Odds ratio; PRS: Polygenic risk score
Acknowledgements
Not applicable
Authors’ contributions
Cathryn Lewis and Evangelos Vassos co-wrote the paper. The authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This paper was funded by the MRC (MR/N015746/1) and the National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at South
London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London.
The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the NHS, the NIHR, or the Department of Health and Social Care.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable
Consent for publication
Not applicable 
Competing interests
Cathryn Lewis is a member of the Research and Development SAB at Myriad
Neuroscience. The remaining author declares that there are no competing
interests.
Received: 23 October 2019 Accepted: 1 May 2020
References
1.  Janssens AC. Validity of polygenic risk scores: are we measuring what we
think we are? Hum Mol Genet. 2019;28(R2):R143-50.
2.  Khera AV, Chaffin M, Aragam KG, Haas ME, Roselli C, Choi SH, Natarajan P,
Lander ES, Lubitz SA, Ellinor PT, Kathiresan S. Genome-wide polygenic
scores for common diseases identify individuals with risk equivalent to
monogenic mutations. Nat Genet. 2018;50:1219–24.
3.  Mavaddat N, Michailidou K, Dennis J, Lush M, Fachal L, Lee A, Tyrer JP, Chen
TH, Wang Q, Bolla MK, et al. Polygenic risk scores for prediction of breast
cancer and breast cancer subtypes. Am J Hum Genet. 2019;104:21–34.
4.  Wray NR, Ripke S, Mattheisen M, Trzaskowski M, Byrne EM, Abdellaoui A,
Adams MJ, Agerbo E, Air TM, Andlauer TMF, et al. Genome-wide association
analyses identify 44 risk variants and refine the genetic architecture of major
depression. Nat Genet. 2018;50:668–81.
5.  Musliner KL, Mortensen PB, McGrath JJ, Suppli NP, Hougaard DM, Bybjerg-
Grauholm J, Baekvad-Hansen M, Andreassen O, Pedersen CB, Pedersen MG,
et al. Association of polygenic liabilities for major depression, bipolar
disorder, and schizophrenia with risk for depression in the Danish
population. JAMA Psychiatry. 2019;76:516–25.
6.  Lewis CM, Hagenaars SP. Progressing polygenic medicine in psychiatry
through electronic health records. JAMA Psychiatry. 2019;76:470–2.
7.  Zheutlin AB, Dennis J, Karlsson Linner R, Moscati A, Restrepo N, Straub P,
Ruderfer D, Castro VM, Chen CY, Ge T, et al. Penetrance and pleiotropy of
polygenic risk scores for schizophrenia in 106,160 patients across four
health care systems. Am J Psychiatry. 2019;176(10):846–55.
8.  Swets JA. Indices of discrimination or diagnostic accuracy: their ROCs and
implied models. Psychol Bull. 1986;99:100–17.
9.  Aschard H. A perspective on interaction effects in genetic association
studies. Genet Epidemiol. 2016;40:678–88.
10. Polderman TJ, Benyamin B, de Leeuw CA, Sullivan PF, van Bochoven A,
Visscher PM, Posthuma D. Meta-analysis of the heritability of human traits
based on fifty years of twin studies. Nat Genet. 2015;47:702–9.
11. Choi SW, O’Reilly PF. PRSice-2: Polygenic Risk Score software for biobank-
scale data. Gigascience. 2019;8(7). [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1093/gigascience/giz082"] https://doi.org/10.1093/gigascience/
 giz082.
12. Chang CC, Chow CC, Tellier LC, Vattikuti S, Purcell SM, Lee JJ. Second-
generation PLINK: rising to the challenge of larger and richer datasets.
Gigascience. 2015;4:7.
13. Vilhjalmsson BJ, Yang J, Finucane HK, Gusev A, Lindstrom S, Ripke S,
Genovese G, Loh PR, Bhatia G, Do R, et al. Modeling linkage disequilibrium
increases accuracy of polygenic risk scores. Am J Hum Genet. 2015;97:576–
92.
14. Lloyd-Jones LR, Zeng J, Sidorenko J, Yengo L, Moser G, Kemper KE,
Wang H, Zheng Z, Magi R, Esko T, et al. Improved polygenic prediction
by Bayesian multiple regression on summary statistics. Nat Commun.
2019;10:5086.
15. Lee SH, Goddard ME, Wray NR, Visscher PM. A better coefficient of
determination for genetic profile analysis. Genet Epidemiol. 2012;36:214–24.
16. Wray NR, Yang J, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. The genetic interpretation of
area under the ROC curve in genomic profiling. PLoS Genet. 2010;6:
e1000864.
17. Mars NJ, Koskela JT, Ripatti P, Kiiskinen TTJ, Havulinna AS, Lindbohm JV,
Ahola-Olli A, Kurki M, Karjalainen J, Palta P, et al: Polygenic and clinical risk
scores and their impact on age at onset of cardiometabolic diseases and
common cancers. Nat Med 2020;26(4):549–557. doi: [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0800-0"] https://doi.org/10.1038/
 s41591-020-0800-0. Epub 2020 Apr 7..
18. Hu Y, Lu Q, Liu W, Zhang Y, Li M, Zhao H. Joint modeling of genetically
correlated diseases and functional annotations increases accuracy of
polygenic risk prediction. PLoS Genet. 2017;13:e1006836.
19. Hu Y, Lu Q, Powles R, Yao X, Yang C, Fang F, Xu X, Zhao H. Leveraging
functional annotations in genetic risk prediction for human complex
diseases. PLoS Comput Biol. 2017;13:e1005589.
Page 10
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44  Page 10 of 11
20. Kong A, Thorleifsson G, Frigge ML, Vilhjalmsson BJ, Young AI, Thorgeirsson
TE, Benonisdottir S, Oddsson A, Halldorsson BV, Masson G, et al. The nature
of nurture: effects of parental genotypes. Science. 2018;359:424–8.
21. Martin AR, Kanai M, Kamatani Y, Okada Y, Neale BM, Daly MJ. Clinical use of
current polygenic risk scores may exacerbate health disparities. Nat Genet.
2019;51:584–91.
22. Morales J, Welter D, Bowler EH, Cerezo M, Harris LW, McMahon AC, Hall P,
Junkins HA, Milano A, Hastings E, et al. A standardized framework for
representation of ancestry data in genomics studies, with application to the
NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog. Genome Biol. 2018;19:21.
23. Peterson RE, Kuchenbaecker K, Walters RK, Chen C-Y, Popejoy AB,
Periyasamy S, Lam M, Iyegbe C, Strawbridge RJ, Brick L, et al. Genome-wide
association studies in ancestrally diverse populations: opportunities,
methods, pitfalls, and recommendations. Cell. 2019;179(3):589-603.
24. Vassos E, Di Forti M, Coleman J, Iyegbe C, Prata D, Euesden J, O’Reilly P, Curtis
C, Kolliakou A, Patel H, et al. An examination of polygenic score risk prediction
in individuals with first-episode psychosis. Biol Psychiatry. 2017;81:470–7.
25. Kim MS, Patel KP, Teng AK, Berens AJ, Lachance J. Genetic disease risks can
be misestimated across global populations. Genome Biol. 2018;19:179.
26. Martin AR, Gignoux CR, Walters RK, Wojcik GL, Neale BM, Gravel S, Daly MJ,
Bustamante CD, Kenny EE. Human demographic history impacts genetic risk
prediction across diverse populations. Am J Hum Genet. 2017;100:635–49.
27. Adeyemo AA, Zaghloul NA, Chen G, Doumatey AP, Leitch CC, Hostelley TL,
Nesmith JE, Zhou J, Bentley AR, Shriner D, et al. ZRANB3 is an African-
specific type 2 diabetes locus associated with beta-cell mass and insulin
response. Nat Commun. 2019;10:3195.
28. Suzuki K, Akiyama M, Ishigaki K, Kanai M, Hosoe J, Shojima N, Hozawa A,
Kadota A, Kuriki K, Naito M, et al. Identification of 28 new susceptibility loci
for type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population. Nat Genet. 2019;51:379–86.
29. Lam M, Chen C-Y, Li Z, Martin AR, Bryois J, Ma X, Gaspar H, Ikeda M,
Benyamin B, Brown BC, et al. Comparative genetic architectures of
schizophrenia in East Asian and European populations. Nat Genet. 2019;51:
1670–8.
30. Marquez-Luna C, Loh PR, South Asian Type 2 Diabetes C, Consortium STD,
Price AL. Multiethnic polygenic risk scores improve risk prediction in diverse
populations. Genet Epidemiol. 2017;41:811–23.
31. Coram MA, Fang H, Candille SI, Assimes TL, Tang H. Leveraging multi-ethnic
evidence for risk assessment of quantitative traits in minority populations.
Am J Hum Genet. 2017;101:218–26.
32. Grinde KE, Qi Q, Thornton TA, Liu S, Shadyab AH, Chan KHK, Reiner AP,
Sofer T. Generalizing polygenic risk scores from Europeans to Hispanics/
Latinos. Genet Epidemiol. 2019;43:50–62.
33. Wojcik GL, Graff M, Nishimura KK, Tao R, Haessler J, Gignoux CR, Highland
HM, Patel YM, Sorokin EP, Avery CL, et al. Genetic analyses of diverse
populations improves discovery for complex traits. Nature. 2019;570:514–8.
34. Sugrue LP, Desikan RS. What are polygenic scores and why are they
important? JAMA. 2019;321:1820–1.
35. Torkamani A, Wineinger NE, Topol EJ. The personal and clinical utility of
polygenic risk scores. Nat Rev Genet. 2018;19:581–90.
36. Wilson PW, D’Agostino RB, Levy D, Belanger AM, Silbershatz H, Kannel WB.
Prediction of coronary heart disease using risk factor categories. Circulation.
1998;97:1837–47.
37. Assmann G, Cullen P, Schulte H. Simple scoring scheme for calculating the risk
of acute coronary events based on the 10-year follow-up of the prospective
cardiovascular Munster (PROCAM) study. Circulation. 2002;105:310–5.
38. Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C, Vinogradova Y, Robson J, Minhas R, Sheikh A,
Brindle P. Predicting cardiovascular risk in England and Wales: prospective
derivation and validation of QRISK2. BMJ. 2008;336:1475–82.
39. Wilson PW, Meigs JB, Sullivan L, Fox CS, Nathan DM, D’Agostino RB Sr.
Prediction of incident diabetes mellitus in middle-aged adults: the
Framingham Offspring Study. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:1068–74.
40. Damen JA, Hooft L, Schuit E, Debray TP, Collins GS, Tzoulaki I, Lassale CM,
Siontis GC, Chiocchia V, Roberts C, et al. Prediction models for
cardiovascular disease risk in the general population: systematic review.
BMJ. 2016;353:i2416.
41. Carver RB, Castera J, Gericke N, Evangelista NA, El-Hani CN. Young adults’
belief in genetic determinism, and knowledge and attitudes towards
modern genetics and genomics: the PUGGS Questionnaire. PLoS One. 2017;
12:e0169808.
42. Berg JS, Agrawal PB, Bailey DB Jr, Beggs AH, Brenner SE, Brower AM, Cakici
JA, Ceyhan-Birsoy O, Chan K, Chen F, et al. Newborn sequencing in 
genomic medicine and public health. Pediatrics. 2017;139(2). [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-2252"] https://doi.org/
 10.1542/peds.2016-2252. Epub 2017 Jan 17.
43. Hollands GJ, French DP, Griffin SJ, Prevost AT, Sutton S, King S, Marteau TM.
The impact of communicating genetic risks of disease on risk-reducing
health behaviour: systematic review with meta-analysis. BMJ. 2016;352:i1102.
44. Silarova B, Sharp S, Usher-Smith JA, Lucas J, Payne RA, Shefer G, Moore C,
Girling C, Lawrence K, Tolkien Z, et al. Effect of communicating phenotypic
and genetic risk of coronary heart disease alongside web-based lifestyle
advice: the INFORM Randomised Controlled Trial. Heart. 2019;105:982–9.
45. Austin J. The effect of genetic test-based risk information on behavioral
outcomes: a critical examination of failed trials and a call to action. Am J
Med Genet A. 2015;167A:2913–5.
46. Martin AR, Daly MJ, Robinson EB, Hyman SE, Neale BM. Predicting polygenic
risk of psychiatric disorders. Biol Psychiatry. 2019;86:97–109.
47. Lambert SA, Abraham G, Inouye M. Towards clinical utility of polygenic risk
scores. Hum Mol Genet. 2019;28(R2):R133-42.
48. Aung N, Vargas JD, Yang C, Cabrera CP, Warren HR, Fung K, Tzanis E, Barnes
MR, Rotter JI, Taylor KD, et al. Genome-wide analysis of left ventricular
image-derived phenotypes identifies fourteen loci associated with cardiac
morphogenesis and heart failure development. Circulation. 2019;140(16):
1318-30.
49. Haas ME, Aragam KG, Emdin CA, Bick AG, International Consortium for
Blood P, Hemani G, Davey Smith G, Kathiresan S. Genetic association of
albuminuria with cardiometabolic disease and blood pressure. Am J Hum
Genet. 2018;103:461–73.
50. Antoniou AC, Cunningham AP, Peto J, Evans DG, Lalloo F, Narod SA, Risch
HA, Eyfjord JE, Hopper JL, Southey MC, et al. The BOADICEA model of
genetic susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancers: updates and
extensions. Br J Cancer. 2008;98:2015.
51. Dai J, Lv J, Zhu M, Wang Y, Qin N, Ma H, He YQ, Zhang R, Tan W, Fan J,
et al. Identification of risk loci and a polygenic risk score for lung cancer: a
large-scale prospective cohort study in Chinese populations. Lancet Respir
Med. 2019;7:881–91.
52. Oram RA, Redondo MJ. New insights on the genetics of type 1 diabetes.
Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2019;26:181–7.
53. Onengut-Gumuscu S, Chen WM, Robertson CC, Bonnie JK, Farber E, Zhu Z,
Oksenberg JR, Brant SR, Bridges SL Jr, Edberg JC, et al. Type 1 diabetes risk
in African-ancestry participants and utility of an ancestry-specific genetic risk
score. Diabetes Care. 2019;42:406–15.
54. Khera AV, Chaffin M, Wade KH, Zahid S, Brancale J, Xia R, Distefano M,
Senol-Cosar O, Haas ME, Bick A, et al. Polygenic prediction of weight and
obesity trajectories from birth to adulthood. Cell. 2019;177:587–96 e589.
55. Howard DM, Adams MJ, Clarke TK, Hafferty JD, Gibson J, Shirali M, Coleman
JRI, Hagenaars SP, Ward J, Wigmore EM, et al. Genome-wide meta-analysis
of depression identifies 102 independent variants and highlights the
importance of the prefrontal brain regions. Nat Neurosci. 2019;22:343–52.
56. Cai N, Revez JA, Adams MJ, Andlauer TFM, Breen G, Byrne EM, Clarke TK,
Forstner AJ, Grabe HJ, Hamilton SP, et al. Minimal phenotyping yields
genome-wide association signals of low specificity for major depression.
Nat Genet. 2020;52:437–47.
57. Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium.
Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature.
2014;511:421–7.
58. Sullivan PF, Kendler KS, Neale MC. Schizophrenia as a complex trait: evidence
from a meta-analysis of twin studies. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2003;60:1187–92.
59. Lichtenstein P, Yip BH, Bjork C, Pawitan Y, Cannon TD, Sullivan PF, Hultman
CM. Common genetic determinants of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
in Swedish families: a population-based study. Lancet. 2009;373:234–9.
60. Sullivan PF, Neale MC, Kendler KS. Genetic epidemiology of major
depression: review and meta-analysis. Am J Psychiatry. 2000;157:1552–62.
61. Desikan RS, Fan CC, Wang Y, Schork AJ, Cabral HJ, Cupples LA, Thompson
WK, Besser L, Kukull WA, Holland D, et al. Genetic assessment of age-
associated Alzheimer disease risk: development and validation of a
polygenic hazard score. PLoS Med. 2017;14:e1002258.
62. Peyrot WJ, Van der Auwera S, Milaneschi Y, Dolan CV, Madden PAF, Sullivan PF,
Strohmaier J, Ripke S, Rietschel M, Nivard MG, et al. Does childhood trauma
moderate polygenic risk for depression? A meta-analysis of 5765 subjects from
the psychiatric genomics consortium. Biol Psychiatry. 2018;84:138–47.
63. Khera AV, Emdin CA, Drake I, Natarajan P, Bick AG, Cook NR, Chasman DI,
Baber U, Mehran R, Rader DJ, et al. Genetic risk, adherence to a healthy
lifestyle, and coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:2349–58.
Page 11
Lewis and Vassos Genome Medicine (2020) 12:44  Page 11 of 11
64. Lourida I, Hannon E, Littlejohns TJ, Langa KM, Hypponen E, Kuzma E,
Llewellyn DJ. Association of lifestyle and genetic risk with incidence of
dementia. JAMA. 2019;322(5):430-37.
65. Gillett AC, Vassos E, Lewis CM. Transforming summary statistics from logistic
regression to the liability scale: application to genetic and environmental
risk scores. Hum Hered. 2018;83:210–24.
66. Natarajan P, Young R, Stitziel NO, Padmanabhan S, Baber U, Mehran R,
Sartori S, Fuster V, Reilly DF, Butterworth A, et al. Polygenic risk score
identifies subgroup with higher burden of atherosclerosis and greater
relative benefit from statin therapy in the primary prevention setting.
Circulation. 2017;135:2091–101.
67. Mega JL, Stitziel NO, Smith JG, Chasman DI, Caulfield M, Devlin JJ, Nordio F,
Hyde C, Cannon CP, Sacks F, et al. Genetic risk, coronary heart disease
events, and the clinical benefit of statin therapy: an analysis of primary and
secondary prevention trials. Lancet. 2015;385:2264–71.
68. Schunkert H, Samani NJ. Statin treatment: can genetics sharpen the focus?
Lancet. 2015;385:2227–9.
69. Tadros R, Tan HL, Investigators E-N, El Mathari S, Kors JA, Postema PG,
Lahrouchi N, Beekman L, Radivojkov-Blagojevic M, Amin AS, et al. Predicting
cardiac electrical response to sodium-channel blockade and Brugada
syndrome using polygenic risk scores. Eur Heart J. 2019;40:3097–107.
70. Garcia-Gonzalez J, Tansey KE, Hauser J, Henigsberg N, Maier W, Mors O,
Placentino A, Rietschel M, Souery D, Zagar T, et al. Pharmacogenetics of
antidepressant response: a polygenic approach. Prog Neuro-
Psychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2017;75:128–34.
71. Ward J, Graham N, Strawbridge RJ, Ferguson A, Jenkins G, Chen W,
Hodgson K, Frye M, Weinshilboum R, Uher R, et al. Polygenic risk scores for
major depressive disorder and neuroticism as predictors of antidepressant
response: meta-analysis of three treatment cohorts. PLoS One. 2018;13:
e0203896.
72. Zhang JP, Robinson D, Yu J, Gallego J, Fleischhacker WW, Kahn RS, Crespo-
Facorro B, Vazquez-Bourgon J, Kane JM, Malhotra AK, Lencz T. Schizophrenia
polygenic risk score as a predictor of antipsychotic efficacy in first-episode
psychosis. Am J Psychiatry. 2019;176:21–8.
73. Ramanuj P, Ferenchick EK, Pincus HA. Depression in primary care: part 2-
management. BMJ. 2019;365:l835.
74. Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, Nierenberg AA, Stewart JW, Warden D,
Niederehe G, Thase ME, Lavori PW, Lebowitz BD, et al. Acute and longer-
term outcomes in depressed outpatients requiring one or several treatment
steps: a STAR*D report. Am J Psychiatry. 2006;163:1905–17.
75. Gibson G. On the utilization of polygenic risk scores for therapeutic
targeting. PLoS Genet. 2019;15:e1008060.
76. Gibson G. Going to the negative: genomics for optimized medical
prescription. Nat Rev Genet. 2019;20:1–2.
77. Niemi MEK, Martin HC, Rice DL, Gallone G, Gordon S, Kelemen M, McAloney
K, McRae J, Radford EJ, Yu S, et al. Common genetic variants contribute to
risk of rare severe neurodevelopmental disorders. Nature. 2018;562:268–71.
78. Oetjens MT, Kelly MA, Sturm AC, Martin CL, Ledbetter DH. Quantifying the
polygenic contribution to variable expressivity in eleven rare genetic
disorders. Nat Commun. 2019;10:4897.
79. Kuchenbaecker KB, McGuffog L, Barrowdale D, Lee A, Soucy P, Dennis J,
Domchek SM, Robson M, Spurdle AB, Ramus SJ, et al. Evaluation of
polygenic risk scores for breast and ovarian cancer risk prediction in BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2017;109(7). [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djw302"] https://doi.org/
[URL: "https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djw302"] 10.1093/jnci/djw302.
80. Lee A, Mavaddat N, Wilcox AN, Cunningham AP, Carver T, Hartley S, Babb
de Villiers C, Izquierdo A, Simard J, Schmidt MK, et al. BOADICEA: a
comprehensive breast cancer risk prediction model incorporating genetic
and nongenetic risk factors. Genet Med. 2019;21:1708–18.
81. Bergen SE, Ploner A, Howrigan D, Group CNVA, the Schizophrenia Working
Group of the Psychiatric Genomics C, O’Donovan MC, Smoller JW, Sullivan
PF, Sebat J, Neale B, Kendler KS. Joint contributions of rare copy number
variants and common SNPs to risk for schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 2019;
176:29–35.
82. Tansey KE, Rees E, Linden DE, Ripke S, Chambert KD, Moran JL, McCarroll SA,
Holmans P, Kirov G, Walters J, et al. Common alleles contribute to
schizophrenia in CNV carriers. Mol Psychiatry. 2016;21:1085–9.
83. Vassos E, Collier DA, Holden S, Patch C, Rujescu D, St Clair D, Lewis CM.
Penetrance for copy number variants associated with schizophrenia. Hum
Mol Genet. 2010;19:3477–81. 
84. Cleynen I, Engchuan W, Hestand MS, Heung T, Holleman AM, Johnston HR,
Monfeuga T, DM MD-MG, Gur RE, Morrow BE, et al. Genetic contributors to
risk of schizophrenia in the presence of a 22q11.2 deletion. Mol Psychiatry.
2020. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-020-0654-3"] https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-020-0654-3. [Epub ahead of print].
85. Nelson SC, Bowen DJ, Fullerton SM. Third-party genetic interpretation tools:
a mixed-methods study of consumer motivation and behavior. Am J Hum
Genet. 2019;105:122–31.
86. Bolli A, Di Domenico P, Bottà G. Software as a service for the genomic
prediction of complex diseases. bioRxiv. 2019:763722. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1101/763722"] https://doi.org/10.
 1101/763722.
87. Multhaup ML, Kita R, Krock B, Eriksson N, Fontanillas P, Aslibekyan S, Del
Gobbo L, Shelton JF, Tennen RI, Lehman A, et al. The science behind
23andMe’s Type 2 Diabetes report. In: White paper 23–19: 23andMe; 2019.
88. Dudbridge F, Pashayan N, Yang J. Predictive accuracy of combined genetic
and environmental risk scores. Genet Epidemiol. 2018;42:4–19.
89. Pet DB, Holm IA, Williams JL, Myers MF, Novak LL, Brothers KB, Wiesner GL,
Clayton EW. Physicians’ perspectives on receiving unsolicited genomic
results. Genet Med. 2019;21:311–8.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
