Keywords: Next-generation sequencing,Variant calling,Mutation detection,Clinical sequencing,Cancer sequencing,Best practices
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
ModDate: 2020/11/09 11:58:36+01'00'
CreationDate: 2020/11/07 00:24:29+08'00'
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
Subject: Genome Medicine, 2020, doi:10.1186/s13073-020-00791-w
Author: Daniel C. Koboldt
Title: Best practices for variant calling in clinical sequencing
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Next-generation sequencing,Variant calling,Mutation detection,Clinical sequencing,Cancer sequencing,Best practices
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s13073-020-00791-w
xmp:dc:publisher: Genome Medicine
xmp:dc:description: Genome Medicine, 2020, doi:10.1186/s13073-020-00791-w
xmp:dc:subject: Next-generation sequencing; Variant calling; Mutation detection; Clinical sequencing; Cancer sequencing; Best practices
xmp:dc:title: Best practices for variant calling in clinical sequencing
xmp:dc:creator: Daniel C. Koboldt
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2020-11-09T11:58:36+01:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2020-11-09T11:58:36+01:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2020-11-07T00:24:29+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:159fb863-bf8b-44f0-bdb8-13839b8a3e98
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:76f2729f-1477-4166-b194-31311ca4316e
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:159fb863-bf8b-44f0-bdb8-13839b8a3e98
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2020-11-07T14:18:27+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A reference to the original document from which this one is derived. It is a minimal reference; missing components can be assumed to be unchanged. For example, a new version might only need to specify the instance ID and version number of the previous version, or a rendition might only need to specify the instance ID and rendition class of the original.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DerivedFrom
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: ResourceRef
xmp:pdfaType:description: Identifies a portion of a document. This can be a position at which the document has been changed since the most recent event history (stEvt:changed). For a resource within an xmpMM:Ingredients list, the ResourceRef uses this type to identify both the portion of the containing document that refers to the resource, and the portion of the referenced resource that is referenced.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Part#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stPart
xmp:pdfaType:type: Part
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/t/pg/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpTPg
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Paged-Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Fonts
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag Font
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: XMP08 Spec: An ordered array of plate names that are needed to print the document (including any in contained documents).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: PlateNames
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaType:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Font#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stFnt
xmp:pdfaType:type: Font
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://www.aiim.org/pdfa/ns/id/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfaid
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/A ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Part of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: part
xmp:pdfaProperBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Background
  Sequencing strategies and implications
  Alignment and pre-processing
  Benchmarking resources for variant calling
Best practices for germline variant calling
  Individual versus joint variant calling
  SNV/indel calling
  Filtering to remove artifacts
  Orthogonal validation of NGS variants
  Identifying de novo mutations
  Copy number and structural variant calling
  Benchmarking germline variant calling pipelines
Best practices for somatic mutation calling
  Filtering somatic variant calls
  Filtering with population databases
  High-confidence somatic SNV/indel calls
  Calling somatic copy number and structural variants
  Benchmarking somatic calling pipelines
Conclusions and future directions
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Author’s contributions
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-020-00791-w
REVIEW  Open Access
Best practices for variant calling in clinical
sequencing
Daniel C. Koboldt1,2
Abstract
Next-generation sequencing technologies have enabled a dramatic expansion of clinical genetic testing both for
inherited conditions and diseases such as cancer. Accurate variant calling in NGS data is a critical step upon which
virtually all downstream analysis and interpretation processes rely. Just as NGS technologies have evolved
considerably over the past 10 years, so too have the software tools and approaches for detecting sequence variants
in clinical samples. In this review, I discuss the current best practices for variant calling in clinical sequencing
studies, with a particular emphasis on trio sequencing for inherited disorders and somatic mutation detection in
cancer patients. I describe the relative strengths and weaknesses of panel, exome, and whole-genome sequencing
for variant detection. Recommended tools and strategies for calling variants of different classes are also provided,
along with guidance on variant review, validation, and benchmarking to ensure optimal performance. Although
NGS technologies are continually evolving, and new capabilities (such as long-read single-molecule sequencing) are
emerging, the “best practice” principles in this review should be relevant to clinical variant calling in the long term.
Keywords: Next-generation sequencing, Variant calling, Mutation detection, Clinical sequencing, Cancer
sequencing, Best practices
Background
The emergence of next-generation sequencing more than a
decade ago represented a major technological advance over
traditional sequencing methods. NGS technologies enabled
ambitious large-scale genomic sequencing efforts that have
transformed our understanding of human health and disease,
such The Cancer Genome Atlas [1–8], the Centers for Men-
delian Genomics [9], and the UK10K Project [10]. They have
also been widely adopted for clinical genetic testing. Whole-
exome sequencing, which selectively targets the protein-
coding regions of known genes, has become a frontline diag-
nostic tool for inherited disorders [11–14]. Targeted panels
which leverage this approach to interrogate medically
relevant subsets of genes have become core components of
precision oncology [15–17].
Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:Daniel.Koboldt@nationwidechildrens.org"] Daniel.Koboldt@nationwidechildrens.org
1Steve and Cindy Rasmussen Institute for Genomic Medicine at Nationwide
Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA
2Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA 
The characteristics and sheer volume of NGS reads ne-
cessitated the development of a new generation of compu-
tational algorithms and analysis pipelines equipped to
handle such data. As NGS technologies have matured, so
too have the software tools for key analytical tasks, such as
variant calling. Ten years and thousands of samples later,
we now have a much deeper understanding of the capabil-
ities and limitations of NGS for detecting and characteri-
zing sequence variation. In this review, I discuss the
current “best practices” for variant calling in clinical
sequencing for both germline analysis in family trios and
somatic analysis of tumor-normal pairs. This includes rec-
ommendations for the choice of sequencing strategy, NGS
read alignment/preprocessing, combination of multiple
variant calling tools, and rigorous filtering to remove false
positives. I also include guidance on benchmarking NGS
analysis pipeline performance using “gold standard” refer-
ence datasets to achieve the optimum balance of sensitiv-
ity and specificity.
© The Author(s). 2020 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the
data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
Page 2
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 2 of 13
Sequencing strategies and implications
The choice of sequencing strategy for a clinical sample has
important ramifications for variant calling (Table 1). Single-
or multi-gene panels are increasingly cost-effective means of
testing for subsets of genes associated with specific clinical
phenotypes. For example, the OtoSCOPE hearing loss panel
[18] targets 89 genes and microRNAs associated with hear-
ing loss (1574 total exons); across a cohort of 711 sequenced
patients, the average sequence depth achieved was 716× per
patient. Numerous gene panels are commercially available,
ranging in size from a single gene to hundreds of genes. Ex-
ome sequencing, which targets virtually all ~ 20,000 protein-
coding genes, typically achieves > 100× average depth across
the target regions. Whole-genome sequencing offers the
most comprehensive approach and typically yields ~ 30–60×
average sequence depth across the entire genome. Other
considerations, such as cost and turnaround time, also influ-
ence the choice of sequencing strategy but are beyond the
scope of this review.
These differences in depth and breadth of sequencing
coverage have implications on variant calling. All three
strategies generally offer excellent sensitivity for detect-
ing SNVs/indels using tools such as GATK Haplotype-
Caller [19] and Platypus [20].  Copy number variants
(CNVs) spanning multiple exons can be called with rea-
sonable sensitivity using panel and exome data [21].
Whole-genome sequencing remains the superior strategy
for the comprehensive detection of all types of sequence
variants. However, it should be noted that the higher se-
quence depth achieved in panel and exome sequencing
may enable more sensitive detection of variants at low
allele frequencies, e.g.,  subclonal somatic mutations in
cancer and mosaic germline variants [22–24].
Table 1 Sequencing strategies for NGS and empirical variant
detection sensitivity. The Otoscope hearing loss panel v5 [18],
which targets 89 genes and microRNAs, illustrates a typical
gene panel. The approximate size of the total target space is
given in megabase pairs (Mbp). Typical exome kits target ~
50 Mbp of genome bases comprising coding sequences, splice
sites, alternative exons, and some non-coding RNAs, though this
space varies among manufacturers
Strategy  Panel Exome Genome
Size of target space (Mbp) ~ 0.5  ~ 50  ~ 3200
Average read depth  500–100× 100–150× ~ 30–60×
Relative cost  $  $$  $$$
SNV/indel detection ++  ++  ++
CNV detection +  +  ++
SV detection  –  –  +
Low VAF  ++  +  +
Dollar signs represent approximate relative costs, though it should be noted
that the cost of panel sequencing depends on the size of the panel. The
empirical performance of each strategy for detecting variants of different
classes is indicated as good (+), outstanding (++), or poor/absent (−) 
Alignment and pre-processing
The primary analysis of sequencing data, including its
alignment to a reference sequence, is a critical phase of
NGS analysis. A selection of recommended tools can be
found in the top of Table 2.
In a typical pipeline (Fig. 1a),  raw sequence data in
FASTQ format are aligned to the reference sequence
using an aligner such as BWA-Mem [25], with the result-
ing alignments typically stored in binary alignment/map
(BAM) file format [31]. Because of their compressed file
size, indexed-access capabilities, and standardized data
formats, BAM files have become the standard format for
storing and sharing NGS data. The Samtools package [31]
provides most of the BAM file manipulation tools re-
quired for clinical sequencing.
Once NGS data are aligned to the reference sequence,
it is possible to identify redundant reads that originated
from the same DNA sequence molecule. These “PCR
duplicates” represent 5–15% of sequencing reads in a
typical exome [64] and can be identified on the basis of
the alignment position and read pairing information.
Tools such as Picard [28] and Sambamba [29] identify
and mark duplicate reads in a BAM file to exclude them
from downstream analysis.
The GATK Best Practices workflow [65] recommends
two additional steps for pre-processing BAM files prior
to variant calling. The first is base quality score recali-
bration (BQSR), which adjusts the base quality scores of
sequencing reads using an empirical error model. The
second is local realignment around indels, which aims to
reduce false-positive variant calls caused by alignment
artifacts (discussed below). Evaluations of variant calling
accuracy before and after BQSR/realignment suggest
that the improvements are marginal [66]; because of this
and the high computational cost, this may be viewed as
an optional step for pre-processing.
Routine quality control (QC) of analysis-ready BAMs
should be performed prior to variant calling to evaluate key
sequencing metrics [28], to verify that sufficient sequencing
coverage was achieved [32], and to check samples for evi-
dence of contamination [35]. In the case of family studies
and paired samples (e.g.,  tumor-normal),  expected sample
relationships should be confirmed with tools for relationship
inference such as the KING algorithm [34].
Benchmarking resources for variant calling
Evaluating the accuracy of variant calls requires access
to benchmark datasets in which the true variants are
already known. Several such benchmarking resources
have been made publicly available in recent years. The
most widely used ones include the Genome in a Bottle
(GIAB) [67] and the Platinum Genome [68] datasets for
NA12878, a human sample of European ancestry that
has been sequenced with various technologies at
Page 3
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 3 of 13
Table 2 Key components of NGS analysis and a list of exemplar tools. Most clinical sequencing pipelines will employ a single read
aligner (e.g., BWA-MEM) and mark duplicates with one algorithm (e.g., Picard). However, multiple tools for collecting sequencing
metrics and performing sample QC may be employed to meet the needs of the laboratory. For variant calling, it is recommended
that pipelines incorporate 2–3 tools for each class of variant to maximize detection sensitivity. See the relevant section of this review
for recommendations specific to each variant class
Strategy  Variant callers
Alignment and pre-processing
Read alignment  BWA-MEM [25], Bowtie 2 [26], minimap2 [27], Novoalign
Marking duplicates  Picard tools [28], Sambamba [29], SAMBLASTER [30]
BAM file creation  Samtools [31], GATK [19]
Sequencing metrics  BEDTools [32], Picard tools [28], QualiMap 2 [33]
Sample quality control  KING [34], VerifyBamID [35]
Variant calling
Inherited SNVs/indels  FreeBayes [36], GATK HaplotypeCaller [19], Platypus [20], Samtools/BCFtools [37]
Somatic mutations  deepSNV [38], MuSE [39], MuTect2 [40], SomaticSniper [41], Strelka2 [42], VarDict [43], VarScan2 [44]
Copy number variants  cn.MOPS [45], CONTRA [46], CoNVEX [47], ExomeCNV [48], ExomeDepth [49], XHMM [50]
Structural variants  DELLY [51], Lumpy [52], Manta [53], Pindel [54], SVMerge [55]
Gene fusions (RNA-seq)  fusionCatcher [56], fusionMap [57], mapSplice [58], SOAPfuse [59], STAR-Fusion [60], TopHat-Fusion [61]
Variant review/storage
Visualization and review  Artemis [62], Integrative Genomics Viewer [63]
VCF/BCF file manipulation BCFtools [37]
BAM binary alignment/map, SNV single nucleotide variant, VCF variant call format, BCF binary variant call format
laboratories around the world. Each benchmarking data-
set includes a set of “ground truth” small variant calls
(SNVs and indels) based on the consensus of several
variant calling tools, as well as defining the “high-confi-
dence” regions of the human genomes in which variant
calls can be benchmarked against a variety of public re-
sources. The GIAB dataset has been continually im-
proved with the addition of data from multiple short-
read and linked-read sequencing datasets and the expan-
sion of the reference from one sample to seven [69]. The
Global Alliance for Genomics and Health has also estab-
lished a best practice framework to guide evaluations of
variant calling accuracy using these resources [70].  As
discussed in this paper, sophisticated comparison tools
which account for subtle differences in variant represen-
tation are recommended when comparing a set of
variant calls against a benchmark resource.
One drawback of the aforementioned benchmarking
resources is that many of the same sequencing technolo-
gies and variant calling algorithms evaluated against
them were also used to construct the reference datasets
in the first place. Synthetically created datasets in which
the positions of all sequence variants are known a priori
have been published to address this issue. For example,
the synthetic diploid (Syndip) dataset is derived from de
novo long-read assemblies of two homozygous human
cell lines and aims to provide a less biased view of
variant calling accuracy genome-wide [71].  Syndip is
uniquely advantaged to provide benchmarking data for 
more challenging regions of the genome, such as dupli-
cated sequences. Although the cell lines themselves are
not in a public repository, sequencing datasets for both
are widely available. More guidance on using bench-
marking datasets to optimize variant calling performance
is offered in the relevant sections below.
Best practices for germline variant calling
Dozens of variant calling tools for NGS data have been
published in the past 10 years, and countless more have
been developed by researchers for internal use. A selection
of exemplar tools grouped by purpose can be found in the
middle of Table 2. Because SNV/indel detection tools
such as GATK HaplotypeCaller have demonstrated high
accuracy (F-scores > 0.99) in numerous benchmark data-
sets, choosing a single variant caller that meets the needs
of the laboratory (in terms of pipeline compatibility and
ease of implementation) is usually sufficient. However,
combining the results of two orthogonal SNV/indel cal-
lers, such as HaplotypeCaller and Platypus, may offer a
slight sensitivity advantage. Software packages such as
BCFtools make it possible to merge and reconcile multiple
variant callsets (in VCF format) into one, though care
should be taken to properly handle complex variants and/
or differences in variant representation [70].
To discuss the recommended best practices for germ-
line variant calling, we will consider trio sequencing for
inherited disorders, which is a common scenario for
clinical genetic testing. A trio analysis pipeline typically
Page 4
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 4 of 13
Fig. 1 Standard pipelines for NGS analysis. a Alignment and pre-processing of NGS data for an individual sample. Raw sequence data in FASTQ
format are aligned to the reference sequence, with the resulting alignments typically stored in binary alignment/map (BAM) file format. Marking
of duplicates in the BAM file is a critical step to account for duplicate reads of the same fragment. Base quality score recalibration (BQSR) and
local realignment around indels are a computationally expensive step that may marginally improve variant calls. At the conclusion of this step,
the file is ready for variant analysis. b Variant calling in NGS trio sequencing. In this common study design, variants are called jointly
(simultaneously) in a proband and both parents, which enables the phasing of variants by parent of origin. The initial variant calls are typically
filtered to remove a number of recurrent artifacts associated with short-read alignment and maybe visually confirmed by manual review of the
sequence alignments. Orthogonal validation may be performed to confirm the variant and its segregation within the family. De novo alterations
should be aggressively filtered to remove both artefactual calls in the proband (false positives) and inherited variants that were under-called in a
parent (false negatives). In addition to manual inspection of alignments, most de novo mutations are independently verified by orthogonal
validation techniques, such as Sanger sequencing. c Somatic variant calling in matched tumor-normal pairs. Identification of somatic alterations in
tumors requires specialized variant callers which consider aligned data from the tumor and normal simultaneously. Candidate somatic variants are
filtered and visually reviewed to remove common alignment artifacts as well as germline variants under-called in the normal sample. The
resulting variants are typically validated by orthogonal approaches, which may require specialized approaches for low-frequency variants
begins with the analysis-ready BAM files for the proband
and both parents (Fig. 1b). For optimal results, all three
samples should be sequenced under identical protocols
(capture kit, instrument, and reagent kit) and processed
with identical alignment and pre-processing steps. This
is particularly important for copy number variant calling
and SV calling, which rely on uniform sequencing depth
and library insert size, respectively.
Individual versus joint variant calling
Virtually, all variant calling tools can be applied to indi-
vidual samples after alignment and pre-processing are
complete. It may be preferable, therefore, to perform
variant calling on every sample as it comes through the
pipeline. Doing so can facilitate automation of NGS ana-
lysis, which may be desirable for laboratories processing
large numbers of samples. Individual VCF files can be
merged later using BCFtools or similar packages; how-
ever, it should be noted that VCF files typically only 
contain entries for positions that are variant in a particu-
lar sample. In other words, when a variant is only de-
tected in some samples but not others, it is not clear
whether the other samples are wild type for that position
or simply did not achieve sufficient coverage for the
variant caller to make a call.
Joint variant calling—which considers all samples sim-
ultaneously—offers several key advantages. First, it pro-
duces called genotypes for every sample at all variant
positions, not just the ones that were detected in a given
individual. This makes it possible to differentiate be-
tween a position that matches the reference sequence
with high probability and a position in which the sample
did not achieve sufficient coverage. Second, in the case
of trio sequencing, joint calling enables direct inference
of phase information to establish, for example, whether
two heterozygous variants in a proband are in cis or in
trans. Third, it mitigates the issue of variant representa-
tion differences which might otherwise be problematic,
Page 5
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 5 of 13
particularly for complex variants [72]. Finally, joint ana-
lysis allows a variant caller to use information from one
sample to infer the most likely genotype in another,
which has been shown to increase the sensitivity of vari-
ant calling in low-coverage regions [19].
SNV/indel calling
Numerous tools have been developed to identify single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) and short insertions/dele-
tions (indels) from aligned NGS data. Most tools for this
purpose, such as Samtools/BCFtools [37] and FreeBayes
[36],  employ Bayesian statistics to infer the most likely
genotype. GATK HaplotypeCaller [19] and Platypus [20]
also employ local realignment or assembly of sequencing
reads to improve the accuracy of variant calls. Numerous
studies have compared the relative performance of these
tools on various datasets and have found, generally, that
they produce similar results: variant concordance is typ-
ically 80–90% concordance or higher, with most differ-
ences are attributed to variants at low-coverage or low-
confidence positions [73–76]. Even so, such differences
could amount to thousands of variant calls genome-
wide. Thus, it is important not only to choose a robust
variant caller for SNVs/indels, but also to benchmark
and fine-tune it to achieve optimal performance on the
data to be analyzed.
Filtering to remove artifacts
The accuracy of NGS variant calls relative to the previ-
ous “gold standard” of Sanger sequencing has been well
documented at > 99% [77–79].  However, it should be
noted that NGS data are prone to certain types of
artifactual variant calls, many of which are related to er-
rors in short-read alignment [37, 66]. Numerous groups
including ours have investigated the source of artifacts
and demonstrated that they can be systematically filtered
without significantly compromising sensitivity [41, 44].
Even so, visual review of the alignments for clinically
relevant variants, using a tool like the Integrative
Genomics Viewer [63], is recommended to identify false-
positive variant calls that slip past automated filters.
Figure 2 depicts several frequently occurring artifacts
that can be identified by manual review: low-quality base
calls (Fig. 2a),  read-end artifacts (Fig. 2b) due to local
misalignment near indels (Fig. 2c),  strand bias artifacts
(Fig. 2d),  erroneous alignments in low-complexity re-
gions (Fig. 2e), and paralogous alignments of reads not
well represented in the reference (Fig. 2f).
Orthogonal validation of NGS variants
Whether or not Sanger confirmation should be required
for clinically relevant variants remains a matter of debate
[80, 81]. In general, the validation rate for NGS variant
calls is extremely high—99.965% according to a well- 
powered study [79]—suggesting that for the vast major-
ity of NGS variants, independent confirmation is un-
necessarily redundant. In many cases, a visual manual
review of the variant may be enough to determine if it
passes muster or warrants orthogonal validation. An
interlaboratory study of more than 80,000 clinical speci-
mens demonstrated that a heuristic approach examining
fewer than ten criteria (read depth, quality score, ob-
served variant allele sequence, repetitive sequence, etc.)
can identify the subset of variants most likely to be false
positives and thus requiring orthogonal validation [82].
Identifying de novo mutations
A key advantage of joint calling in trios is the ability to
distinguish de novo mutations, which account for a sig-
nificant proportion of positive diagnoses from clinical
genetic testing [11, 83–85].  According to recent large-
scale trio sequencing studies, the human de novo muta-
tion rate is approximately 1.29 × 10−8 per base pair per
generation [86, 87]. Thus, each proband likely harbors ~
70 de novo mutations genome-wide against a back-
ground of ~ 4–5 million inherited variants. In the
protein-coding exome, we expect ~ 1 de novo mutation
on a background of ~ 50,000 inherited variants. A se-
quence variant called in the proband is therefore far
more likely to be inherited than de novo. Furthermore,
even with extremely high variant calling precision
(99.9%), there will be 50 false-positive calls for each de
novo mutation. Thus, candidate de novo mutations
merit careful scrutiny.
In addition to filtering for artifactual calls as described
above, de novo mutations should be queried against
public databases of genome variation, such as the gno-
mAD database. Although true de novo mutations can
certainly occur at positions of known sequence variants,
a candidate de novo with appreciable frequency in the
population (i.e.,  MAF > 0.0001) is far more likely to
represent a germline variant. Similarly, manual review in
Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) should be used to
exclude both artifactual calls and variants with support-
ing evidence in one or both parents (e.g., Fig. 2a).
Copy number and structural variant calling
Copy number variants (CNVs) are a major source of hu-
man genetic variation and have been implicated in nu-
merous diseases [88–90],  such as autism [91],
intellectual disability [92],  and congenital heart disease
[93–95]. Although microarray testing is typically ordered
prior to panel or exome testing in a clinical setting,
NGS-based CNV detection is increasingly incorporated
into clinical diagnostic testing and accounts for 3–5% of
positive diagnoses. A number of tools exist for identify-
ing CNVs from targeted NGS data, such as cn.MOPS
[45],  CONTRA [46],  CoNVEX [47],  ExomeCNV [48],
Page 6
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 6 of 13
Fig. 2 Common artifacts in NGS alignments that gave rise to a false-positive de novo mutation call in a family trio. Each pane is an IGV
screenshot of WGS alignments for the proband (top track), mother, (middle track), and father (bottom track). Each sample’s track comprises two
parts: a histogram of the read depth and the reads as aligned to the reference sequence. Reads are colored according to the aligned strand
(red = forward strand; blue = reverse strand). a False positive associated with low base quality. Most reads supporting the variant have low base
quality indicated by lightly shaded non-reference bases. Four reads in the proband showed the alternate allele with good quality, triggering the
variant call. b False positive due to misalignments near the start or end of reads. Notice that the alternate allele is only observed at the start/end
of reads in the proband. In this case, the read depth histogram provides a clue as to the cause of the misalignment. As shown in the next panel,
this occurs at the breakpoint of a large paternally inherited deletion. c The same position as in b, but with soft-clipped bases shown in color.
BLAT alignment of such reads reveals that the soft-clipped portion matches the other side of the deletion segment some 5.2 kb downstream. d
False positive associated with strand bias. All but one variant-supporting reads in the proband are on the reverse strand, whereas reference-
supporting reads are equally represented on both strands. e False positives associated with low-complexity sequences. In this case, reads
erroneously showing a single-base deletion (horizontal black line) at a T-homopolymer are enriched in the proband. R supporting insertions
(purple) are also seen. Note that this position is zoomed out compared to the other panels, a recommended practice to visualize the end of
repetitive sequences. f False positives due to paralogous alignments of reads from regions not well represented in the reference. Alignments for
proband include reads with several substitutions relative to the reference sequence within the 41-bp viewing window. This typically occurs when
reads from sequences not represented in the reference are mapped to the closest paralog
ExomeDepth [49], and XHMM [50]. Most rely on com-
parisons of sequence depth between a test subject and a
comparator to identify significant changes in copy num-
ber. Not all CNV calling tools perform well in all situa-
tions, and as a rule, the sensitivity for CNV detection
using targeted NGS is limited compared to genome
sequencing [96].
Paired-end whole-genome sequencing data also en-
ables the detection of structural variants with increasing
precision. Popular tools for this application, such as
DELLY [51],  Lumpy [52],  Manta [53],  Pindel [54],  and
SVMerge [55], use two types of information to identify
signatures of structural variants. Read pairing informa-
tion serves to identify segments of the genome in which
molecularly linked read pairs map at unexpected dis-
tances or orientations. Split read alignments, in which a 
single sequence read maps to two different regions of
the genome, are also incorporated into SV calling. It
should be emphasized that while many consider SNV/
indel detection with NGS to be routine, SV detection
with whole-genome sequencing data is still challenging,
as illustrated by the fact that leading tools achieve F-1
values of only ~ 0.80–0.90 in benchmarking experiments.
There are at least two principal reasons for this. First, it
is widely recognized that a large proportion of structural
variation occurs in “difficult” regions of the genome,
such as repetitive or tandem-duplicated sequences. Sec-
ond, the relatively short length of NGS reads (~ 150 bp)
and typical fragments (~ 300–500 bp) is often insuffi-
cient to resolve complex structural variants and long in-
sertions [97]. For this reason, linked-read and long-read
sequencing technologies are increasingly being applied
Page 7
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 7 of 13
to resolve large SVs and complex sequences [98–100],
for a recent review, see [101].
Visual review of CNVs and structural variants called
by NGS can also, to some extent, be performed in IGV.
For SVs in particular, it is useful to view reads as pairs
and color them according to insert size, as shown in
Fig. 3. Well-supported structural variants are often sup-
ported by both discordant read pairs and changes in
overall sequence depth, such as the deletions in Fig. 3a
and b and the duplication in Fig. 3d. Manual review can
also help resolve ambiguous SV breakpoints (Fig. 3c).
Benchmarking germline variant calling pipelines
As described in the previous section, several reference
datasets and a “best practice” framework for benchmark-
ing variant calling pipelines are publicly available. At the
time of writing, the most recent dataset for sample
NA12878 includes ~ 3.04m SNVs and ~ 0.5m small
indels, as well as aligned high-depth Illumina sequencing
data in BAM format. These resources make it possible
to evaluate performance and fine-tune variant calling
pipelines to achieve optimal results. For small variants,
an F1 score > 0.99 should be achievable by robust variant
calling pipelines. High-quality DNA samples for
NA12878 can also be ordered from Coriell and se-
quenced independently to evaluate the performance of a
laboratory’s entire pipeline from sample preparation
through variant calling.
Benchmarking structural and copy number variant cal-
lers tends to be more challenging for two reasons. First,
these variants are more challenging to detect with preci-
sion using short-read sequencing data. Second, the precise
breakpoints for SVs/CNVs are not always well-defined,
which makes comparisons across callsets a more complex
endeavor. Even so, multiple “gold standard” SV callsets
such as GIAB [99], HS1011 [102], and HuRef [103] have
been published which employ orthogonal sequencing
technologies to define reference callsets comprising thou-
sands of structural variants. When benchmarking with
such resources, it is important to recognize that SV calling
with short-read data is more error-prone than small
variant calling; even the best-performing SV callers only
achieve F-1 scores of ~ 0.80–0.90 [103]. 
from a tumor sample and a matched control sample
(e.g.,  blood or skin) from the same patient. Although
tumor-only sequencing has been adopted by many la-
boratories as a cost-effective approach to guide cancer
diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy [16, 105–107],  doing
so makes it difficult to distinguish true somatic muta-
tions from constitutional variants [108–110].  Thus, the
emphasis of this section will be on the “best practice” of
sequencing a tumor sample with a matched comparator
sample.
Numerous variant callers have been published for this
purpose; a list of the most cited callers can be found in
Table 2. Widely used somatic mutation callers, such as
MuTect2 [40],  Strelka2 [42],  and VarScan2 [44],  con-
sider aligned data from the tumor and normal simultan-
eously. Several groups have attempted to directly
compare the performance of mutation callers for differ-
ent applications [111–113],  finding that each has
strengths and weaknesses. Because no somatic caller has
emerged which offers superior performance in all sce-
narios, an ensemble approach that combines the results
of two or more complementary callers may offer the best
balance of sensitivity and specificity [73, 114].
Several aspects of clinical tumor sequencing can make
the detection of somatic mutations more challenging.
Tumor purity—the proportion of cells in a sample that
are cancerous—governs the representation of somatic mu-
tations in a sequenced sample, but pathology estimates of
purity based on light microscopy are notoriously inaccur-
ate [115–117].  Somatic mutations present at low fre-
quency due to low tumor cellularity and/or subclonal
mutation architectures can be challenging to detect, even
with high-depth sequencing data. Although many somatic
mutation callers such as VarScan2 can be configured for
the detection of variants at low frequencies, doing so often
reduces the overall false-positive rate. The type of speci-
men obtained for sequencing also influences mutation
calling. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) sam-
ples, which are preferred for histopathological diagnosis,
often harbor thousands of artifacts arising from chemical
DNA damage [118–120]. These challenges call for a ro-
bust somatic mutation detection pipeline that performs
well across many types of clinical tumor samples.
Best practices for somatic mutation calling
NGS of tumor specimens is increasingly deployed in on-
cology to guide diagnosis, prognosis, and personalized
care [104].  Although ~ 10% of cancer patients harbor
germline predisposition variants, the main purpose of
clinical tumor sequencing is often the identification of
somatic mutations, copy number alterations, and fusions
that may have clinical relevance. A standard pipeline for
this is shown in Fig. 1c. It illustrates a paired tumor-
normal sequencing strategy, that is, sequencing DNA 
Filtering somatic variant calls
Similar to germline SNVs/indels, candidate somatic vari-
ants should be filtered to remove common alignment ar-
tifacts such as those illustrated in Fig. 2. In addition, the
availability of a matched normal sample enables a direct
comparison of data characteristics at the site of a candi-
date somatic variant call to help distinguish true variants
from false positives. For example, reads supporting high-
quality mutation calls should exhibit similar position
and strandedness as reads supporting the wild-type
Page 8
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 8 of 13
Fig. 3 Visual review of copy number and structural variants. Each pane is an IGV screenshot of WGS for a proband (top), mother, (middle), and
father (bottom). The top track for each sample is a histogram of sequence depth. Reads are viewed as pairs, with discordant pair alignments
highlighted in color. a A homozygous ~ 4-kb del that appears heterozygous in the proband, homozygous in the mother, and absent from the
father. Note the discordant read pairs suggesting a deletion (red) and visible change in read depth. b Homozygous deletion inherited from two
heterozygous parents. c A heterozygous paternally inherited deletion with ambiguous end point by paired-end mapping resolved by visual
inspection of read depth. d A maternally inherited tandem duplication. Note the increased read depth in the histogram and the discordant read
pairs highlighted in green that span the original sequence and their tandem duplication
allele. Other metrics, such as the difference in average
mapping quality or trimmed read length, help uncover
false positives due to alignment artifacts. Mismatch quality
sum (MMQS) difference, computed as the average sum of
base qualities for non-reference base calls in variant-
supporting reads, is a powerful metric for identifying false
positives associated with paralogous alignments [121].
Filtering with population databases
Population variant filtering is a powerful strategy for
identifying and removing likely germline variants from
somatic mutation callsets but should be done with 
caution. Simply removing all variants in dbSNP [122] is
an appealing but hazardous strategy, since that database
contains a number of recurrent mutations from human
tumors—such as p.(H1047R) in PIK3CA (rs121913279)
and p.(R132H) in IDH1 (rs121913500)—as well as sev-
eral mutations from the COSMIC somatic mutation
database [109].  There is a similar risk for applying a
broad filter based on all variants in the gnomAD data-
base [123],  in which the presence of apparent somatic
loss-of-function variants in hematological malignancy
genes like ASXL1 has been documented [124]. Allele fre-
quency information can be used to safeguard against the
Page 9
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 9 of 13
inadvertent filtering of true somatic variants that are
present in such databases. Requiring a minimum minor
allele frequency > 0.0001 in the gnomAD or TopMed
database is recommended to select variants for filtering
somatic mutation callsets.
Some groups have also found value in using an in-
ternal “panel of normals” to identify and remove recur-
rent sequencing artifacts [38].  In this approach,
sequencing data from a set of normal DNA specimens
(typically ~ 50) are compiled into a reference panel
against which candidate somatic variants from tumors
can be quickly filtered to remove variant calls associated
with germline variants or sequencing artifacts. This ap-
proach is advantageous because it identifies artifacts that 
may be specific to a laboratory’s sequencing protocols or
downstream analysis pipelines.
High-confidence somatic SNV/indel calls
In summary, high-confidence somatic SNV/indel calls
should be identified by multiple somatic mutation calling
tools at positions with sufficient sequencing coverage (>
10× in both tumor and normal tissue).  Variant alleles
should be supported by reads on both strands with no ap-
parent bias in read position, base quality, or mapping
quality. High-quality SNVs/indels should also be absent
from public databases and an internal laboratory panel of
normal (if available), or else present at very low frequen-
cies (MAF < 0.001).  Finally, candidate SNV/indel calls
Fig. 4 Detecting somatic rearrangements in cancer using NGS. Shown is whole-genome sequencing data for chromosome 1 for a tumor-normal
pair. Top: Log2 values indicate copy number changes in the tumor relative to the normal. Bottom: copy gains and losses skew tumor allele
frequencies for heterozygous variants, with loss of heterozygosity (red) apparent in regions of heterozygous deletions
Page 10
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 10 of 13
should be reviewed by visualization of the tumor and
normal sequencing alignments with a tool such as IGV.
Calling somatic copy number and structural variants
Many of the tools developed for germline CNV/SV call-
ing have been adapted for cancer genomics [125],  and
still, others have been developed for the critical task of
identifying fusions from RNA-seq data [126].  Somatic
copy number alteration (SCNA) detection is arguably
the easier of the two tasks, since a matched normal sam-
ple is often alive to use as a comparator. Further, deep
sequencing data allow for precise determination of vari-
ant allele frequencies, the skewing of which can often be
observed to support candidate variants. Similar to som-
atic mutation calling, combining the results of at least
two tools, such as VarScan 2 (less conservative) and
GATK (more conservative),  may provide the optimal
strategy for calling somatic CNAs. Further, incorpor-
ation of tumor variant allele frequency (VAF) informa-
tion can help generate supporting evidence for somatic
structural variants, since changes in copy number tend
to skew allele frequencies of heterozygous variants
(Fig. 4).  Similar to somatic SNV/indel calling, somatic
SV/CNA calls may be filtered against a panel of normals
to remove calls in regions of highly variable copy num-
ber and recurrent artifactual SVs. 
alignment and pre-processing, variant calling, filtering of
false positives, and visual manual review. While some of
these procedures, such as read alignment and SNV/indel
detection, can be suitably performed with a single soft-
ware package, others, such as CNV/SV calling and som-
atic mutation detection, benefit from incorporating
multiple independent tools. Benchmarking resources for
both germline and somatic variants provide an oppor-
tunity to evaluate and optimize the performance of vari-
ant calling. Although some classes of variants—such as
de novo mutations in germline studies and low-
frequency somatic mutations in cancer patients—likely
require validation on an orthogonal platform, the burden
of additional confirmatory testing is likely to decrease as
technologies continue to improve. However, the obser-
vation that even state-of-the-art SV callers only
achieve F-scores of ~ 0.80–0.90 in gold standard
datasets suggests that emerging long-read sequencing
technologies may ultimately be required to accurately
call large and/or complex structural variants. Never-
theless, the general principles discussed in this
review—rigorous pre-processing of sequencing data,
implementation of multiple variant calling ap-
proaches, and systematic filtering to remove arti-
facts—will remain relevant guidance for clinical
variant calling in years to come.
Benchmarking somatic calling pipelines
Benchmarking somatic mutation callers requires a reference
“truth set” of real somatic mutations. Such datasets have been
generated by synthetic mixing experiments (for example, of
NA12878 with another well-characterized sample at specific-
ally defined proportions). Of note, though numerous compari-
sons of somatic mutation callers have been published, the
findings are inconsistent [127]. One reason for this is that the
researchers conducting those studies often apply variant cal-
lers with default parameter settings or neglect to perform crit-
ical downstream filtering. To address this issue, the DREAM
ICGC-TCGA Somatic Mutation calling challenge invited
teams, including several developers of somatic mutation call-
ing tools, to benchmark their pipelines on a common dataset.
The organizers employed a robust simulation framework to
introduce synthetic somatic alterations (i.e., a truth set) into
real WGS data for three tumors upon which each team’s sub-
missions were evaluated. The simulated datasets and truth sets
from these challenges are freely available and offer a well-
vetted benchmarking resource for somatic SNV, indel, and
structural variant calling pipelines [128]. 
Abbreviations
BAM: Binary alignment/map; CNV: Copy number variant; NGS: Next-
generation sequencing; SNV: Single nucleotide variant; VCF: Variant call
format
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank Richard K. Wilson, Elaine R. Mardis, Catherine E.
Cottrell, Peter White, and other members of the Steve and Cindy Institute for
Genomic Medicine at Nationwide Children’s Hospital.
Author’s contributions
DCK wrote the manuscript in its entirety. The author read and approved the
final manuscript.
Funding
This work was generously supported by the Pediatric Innovation Fund, under
the auspices of the Research Institute at Nationwide Children’s Hospital.
Availability of data and materials
Not applicable
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable
Conclusions and future directions
Variant calling in NGS data, much like NGS technolo-
gies themselves, has evolved considerably over the past
decade and remains an active area of research. Robust
pipelines for NGS analysis include steps for optimized 
Consent for publication
Not applicable
Competing interests
The author is a co-inventor of VarScan 2 and thus receives a portion of
licensing royalties from several commercial licensees.
Page 11
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 11 of 13
Received: 30 October 2019 Accepted: 8 October 2020
References
1.  Cancer Genome Atlas N. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human
breast tumours. Nature. 2012;490(7418):61–70.
2.  Cancer Genome Atlas N. Comprehensive molecular characterization of
human colon and rectal cancer. Nature. 2012;487(7407):330–7.
3.  Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian
carcinoma. Nature. 2011;474(7353):609–15.
4.  Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. Comprehensive genomic characterization
of squamous cell lung cancers. Nature. 2012;489(7417):519–25.
5.  Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. Comprehensive molecular characterization
of clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Nature. 2013;499(7456):43–9.
6.  Cancer Genome Atlas Research N, Kandoth C, Schultz N, Cherniack AD,
Akbani R, Liu Y, et al. Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial
carcinoma. Nature. 2013;497(7447):67–73.
7.  Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. Genomic and epigenomic landscapes of
adult de novo acute myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(22):2059–74.
8.  Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. The Cancer Genome Atlas Pan-Cancer
analysis project. Nat Genet. 2013;45(10):1113–20.
9.  Bamshad MJ, Shendure JA, Valle D, Hamosh A, Lupski JR, Gibbs RA, et al.
The Centers for Mendelian Genomics: a new large-scale initiative to identify
the genes underlying rare Mendelian conditions. Am J Med Genet A. 2012;
158A(7):1523–5.
10. Consortium UK, Walter K, Min JL, Huang J, Crooks L, Memari Y, et al. The
UK10K project identifies rare variants in health and disease. Nature. 2015;
526(7571):82–90.
11. Farwell KD, Shahmirzadi L, El-Khechen D, Powis Z, Chao EC, Tippin Davis B,
et al. Enhanced utility of family-centered diagnostic exome sequencing with
inheritance model-based analysis: results from 500 unselected families with
undiagnosed genetic conditions. Genet Med. 2015;17(7):578–86.
12. Retterer K, Juusola J, Cho MT, Vitazka P, Millan F, Gibellini F, et al. Clinical
application of whole-exome sequencing across clinical indications. Genet
Med. 2016;18(7):696–704.
13. Trujillano D, Bertoli-Avella AM, Kumar Kandaswamy K, Weiss ME, Koster J,
Marais A, et al. Clinical exome sequencing: results from 2819 samples
reflecting 1000 families. Eur J Hum Genet. 2017;25(2):176–82.
14. Yang Y, Muzny DM, Reid JG, Bainbridge MN, Willis A, Ward PA, et al. Clinical
whole-exome sequencing for the diagnosis of mendelian disorders. N Engl
J Med. 2013;369(16):1502–11.
15. Parsons DW, Roy A, Yang Y, Wang T, Scollon S, Bergstrom K, et al.
Diagnostic yield of clinical tumor and germline whole-exome sequencing
for children with solid tumors. JAMA Oncol. 2016;2(5):616–24.
16. Frampton GM, Fichtenholtz A, Otto GA, Wang K, Downing SR, He J, et al.
Development and validation of a clinical cancer genomic profiling test based
on massively parallel DNA sequencing. Nat Biotechnol. 2013;31(11):1023–31.
17. Wheler J, Lee JJ, Kurzrock R. Unique molecular landscapes in cancer:
implications for individualized, curated drug combinations. Cancer Res.
2014;74(24):7181–4.
18. Sloan-Heggen CM, Bierer AO, Shearer AE, Kolbe DL, Nishimura CJ, Frees KL,
et al. Comprehensive genetic testing in the clinical evaluation of 1119
patients with hearing loss. Hum Genet. 2016;135(4):441–50.
19. DePristo MA, Banks E, Poplin R, Garimella KV, Maguire JR, Hartl C, et al. A
framework for variation discovery and genotyping using next-generation
DNA sequencing data. Nat Genet. 2011;43(5):491–8.
20. Rimmer A, Phan H, Mathieson I, Iqbal Z, Twigg SRF, Consortium WGS, et al.
Integrating mapping-, assembly- and haplotype-based approaches for calling
variants in clinical sequencing applications. Nat Genet. 2014;46(8):912–8.
21. de Ligt J, Boone PM, Pfundt R, Vissers LE, Richmond T, Geoghegan J, et al.
Detection of clinically relevant copy number variants with whole-exome
sequencing. Hum Mutat. 2013;34(10):1439–48.
22. Pagnamenta AT, Lise S, Harrison V, Stewart H, Jayawant S, Quaghebeur G,
et al. Exome sequencing can detect pathogenic mosaic mutations present
at low allele frequencies. J Hum Genet. 2012;57(1):70–2.
23. Qin L, Wang J, Tian X, Yu H, Truong C, Mitchell JJ, et al. Detection and
quantification of mosaic mutations in disease genes by next-generation
sequencing. J Mol Diagn. 2016;18(3):446–53.
24. Shin HT, Choi YL, Yun JW, Kim NKD, Kim SY, Jeon HJ, et al. Prevalence and
detection of low-allele-fraction variants in clinical cancer samples. Nat
Commun. 2017;8(1):1377. 
25. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-
Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics. 2010;26(5):589–95.
26. Langmead B, Salzberg SL. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat
Methods. 2012;9(4):357–9.
27. Li H. Minimap2: pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences.
Bioinformatics. 2018;34(18):3094–100.
28. Institute B. Picard Tools. [URL: "http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard"] http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard. Accessed 1
Oct 2019.
29. Tarasov A, Vilella AJ, Cuppen E, Nijman IJ, Prins P. Sambamba: fast
processing of NGS alignment formats. Bioinformatics. 2015;31(12):2032–4.
30. Faust GG, Hall IM. SAMBLASTER: fast duplicate marking and structural variant
read extraction. Bioinformatics. 2014;30(17):2503–5.
31. Li H, Handsaker B, Wysoker A, Fennell T, Ruan J, Homer N, et al. The Sequence
Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics. 2009;25(16):2078–9.
32. Quinlan AR, Hall IM. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing
genomic features. Bioinformatics. 2010;26(6):841–2.
33. Okonechnikov K, Conesa A, Garcia-Alcalde F. Qualimap 2: advanced multi-
sample quality control for high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics.
2016;32(2):292–4.
34. Manichaikul A, Mychaleckyj JC, Rich SS, Daly K, Sale M, Chen WM. Robust
relationship inference in genome-wide association studies. Bioinformatics.
2010;26(22):2867–73.
35. Jun G, Flickinger M, Hetrick KN, Romm JM, Doheny KF, Abecasis GR, et al. Detecting
and estimating contamination of human DNA samples in sequencing and array-
based genotype data. Am J Hum Genet. 2012;91(5):839–48.
36. Garrison E, Marth G. Haplotype-based variant detection from short-read
sequencing. arXiv. 2012;1207.3907. [URL: "https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3907v2"] https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3907v2.
37. Li H. A statistical framework for SNP calling, mutation discovery, association
mapping and population genetical parameter estimation from sequencing
data. Bioinformatics. 2011;27(21):2987–93.
38. Gerstung M, Beisel C, Rechsteiner M, Wild P, Schraml P, Moch H, et al.
Reliable detection of subclonal single-nucleotide variants in tumour cell
populations. Nat Commun. 2012;3:811.
39. Fan Y, Xi L, Hughes DS, Zhang J, Zhang J, Futreal PA, et al. MuSE:
accounting for tumor heterogeneity using a sample-specific error model
improves sensitivity and specificity in mutation calling from sequencing
data. Genome Biol. 2016;17(1):178.
40. Cibulskis K, Lawrence MS, Carter SL, Sivachenko A, Jaffe D, Sougnez C, et al.
Sensitive detection of somatic point mutations in impure and
heterogeneous cancer samples. Nat Biotechnol. 2013;31(3):213–9.
41. Larson DE, Harris CC, Chen K, Koboldt DC, Abbott TE, Dooling DJ, et al.
SomaticSniper: identification of somatic point mutations in whole genome
sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 2012;28(3):311–7.
42. Saunders CT, Wong WS, Swamy S, Becq J, Murray LJ, Cheetham RK. Strelka:
accurate somatic small-variant calling from sequenced tumor-normal
sample pairs. Bioinformatics. 2012;28(14):1811–7.
43. Lai Z, Markovets A, Ahdesmaki M, Chapman B, Hofmann O, McEwen R, et al.
VarDict: a novel and versatile variant caller for next-generation sequencing
in cancer research. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016;44(11):e108.
44. Koboldt DC, Zhang Q, Larson DE, Shen D, McLellan MD, Lin L, et al. VarScan
2: somatic mutation and copy number alteration discovery in cancer by
exome sequencing. Genome Res. 2012;22(3):568–76.
45. Klambauer G, Schwarzbauer K, Mayr A, Clevert DA, Mitterecker A,
Bodenhofer U, et al. cn.MOPS: mixture of Poissons for discovering copy
number variations in next-generation sequencing data with a low false
discovery rate. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012;40(9):e69.
46. Li J, Lupat R, Amarasinghe KC, Thompson ER, Doyle MA, Ryland GL, et al.
CONTRA: copy number analysis for targeted resequencing. Bioinformatics.
2012;28(10):1307–13.
47. Amarasinghe KC, Li J, Halgamuge SK. CoNVEX: copy number variation
estimation in exome sequencing data using HMM. BMC Bioinformatics.
2013;14(Suppl 2):S2.
48. Sathirapongsasuti JF, Lee H, Horst BA, Brunner G, Cochran AJ, Binder S, et al.
Exome sequencing-based copy-number variation and loss of heterozygosity
detection: ExomeCNV. Bioinformatics. 2011;27(19):2648–54.
49. Plagnol V, Curtis J, Epstein M, Mok KY, Stebbings E, Grigoriadou S, et al. A
robust model for read count data in exome sequencing experiments and
implications for copy number variant calling. Bioinformatics. 2012;28(21):2747–54.
50. Fromer M, Moran JL, Chambert K, Banks E, Bergen SE, Ruderfer DM, et al.
Discovery and statistical genotyping of copy-number variation from whole-
exome sequencing depth. Am J Hum Genet. 2012;91(4):597–607.
Page 12
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 12 of 13
51. Rausch T, Zichner T, Schlattl A, Stutz AM, Benes V, Korbel JO. DELLY:
structural variant discovery by integrated paired-end and split-read analysis.
Bioinformatics. 2012;28(18):i333–i9.
52. Layer RM, Chiang C, Quinlan AR, Hall IM. LUMPY: a probabilistic framework
for structural variant discovery. Genome Biol. 2014;15(6):R84.
53. Chen X, Schulz-Trieglaff O, Shaw R, Barnes B, Schlesinger F, Kallberg M, et al.
Manta: rapid detection of structural variants and indels for germline and
cancer sequencing applications. Bioinformatics. 2016;32(8):1220–2.
54. Ye K, Schulz MH, Long Q, Apweiler R, Ning Z. Pindel: a pattern growth
approach to detect break points of large deletions and medium sized
insertions from paired-end short reads. Bioinformatics. 2009;25(21):2865–71.
55. Wong K, Keane TM, Stalker J, Adams DJ. Enhanced structural variant and
breakpoint detection using SVMerge by integration of multiple detection
methods and local assembly. Genome Biol. 2010;11(12):R128.
56. Nicorici D, Şatalan M, Edgren H, Kangaspeska S, Murumägi A, Kallioniemi O,
et al. FusionCatcher – a tool for finding somatic fusion genes in paired-end
RNA-sequencing data. BioRxiv. 2014. [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1101/011650"] https://doi.org/10.1101/011650.
57. Ge H, Liu K, Juan T, Fang F, Newman M, Hoeck W. FusionMap: detecting
fusion genes from next-generation sequencing data at base-pair resolution.
Bioinformatics. 2011;27(14):1922–8.
58. Wang K, Singh D, Zeng Z, Coleman SJ, Huang Y, Savich GL, et al. MapSplice:
accurate mapping of RNA-seq reads for splice junction discovery. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2010;38(18):e178.
59. Jia W, Qiu K, He M, Song P, Zhou Q, Zhou F, et al. SOAPfuse: an algorithm
for identifying fusion transcripts from paired-end RNA-Seq data. Genome
Biol. 2013;14(2):R12.
60. Haas BJ, Dobin A, Stransky N, Li B, Yang X, Tickle T, et al. STAR-Fusion: fast
and accurate fusion transcript detection from RNA-Seq. BioRxiv. 2017.
 https://doi.org/10.1101/120295.
61. Kim D, Salzberg SL. TopHat-Fusion: an algorithm for discovery of novel
fusion transcripts. Genome Biol. 2011;12(8):R72.
62. Carver T, Harris SR, Berriman M, Parkhill J, McQuillan JA. Artemis: an
integrated platform for visualization and analysis of high-throughput
sequence-based experimental data. Bioinformatics. 2012;28(4):464–9.
63. Robinson JT, Thorvaldsdottir H, Winckler W, Guttman M, Lander ES, Getz G,
et al. Integrative genomics viewer. Nat Biotechnol. 2011;29(1):24–6.
64. Shigemizu D, Momozawa Y, Abe T, Morizono T, Boroevich KA, Takata S,
et al. Performance comparison of four commercial human whole-exome
capture platforms. Sci Rep. 2015;5:12742.
65. Van der Auwera GA, Carneiro MO, Hartl C, Poplin R, Del Angel G, Levy-Moonshine
A, et al. From FastQ data to high confidence variant calls: the Genome Analysis
Toolkit best practices pipeline. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. 2013;43:11 0 1–33.
66. Li H. Toward better understanding of artifacts in variant calling from high-
coverage samples. Bioinformatics. 2014;30(20):2843–51.
67. Zook JM, Chapman B, Wang J, Mittelman D, Hofmann O, Hide W, et al.
Integrating human sequence data sets provides a resource of benchmark
SNP and indel genotype calls. Nat Biotechnol. 2014;32(3):246–51.
68. Eberle MA, Fritzilas E, Krusche P, Kallberg M, Moore BL, Bekritsky MA, et al. A
reference data set of 5.4 million phased human variants validated by
genetic inheritance from sequencing a three-generation 17-member
pedigree. Genome Res. 2017;27(1):157–64.
69. Zook JM, McDaniel J, Olson ND, Wagner J, Parikh H, Heaton H, et al. An
open resource for accurately benchmarking small variant and reference
calls. Nat Biotechnol. 2019;37(5):561–6.
70. Krusche P, Trigg L, Boutros PC, Mason CE, De La Vega FM, Moore BL, et al.
Best practices for benchmarking germline small-variant calls in human
genomes. Nat Biotechnol. 2019;37(5):555–60.
71. Li H, Bloom JM, Farjoun Y, Fleharty M, Gauthier L, Neale B, et al. A synthetic-diploid
benchmark for accurate variant-calling evaluation. Nat Methods. 2018;15(8):595–7.
72. Toptas BC, Rakocevic G, Komar P, Kural D. Comparing complex variants in
family trios. Bioinformatics. 2018;34(24):4241–7.
73. Callari M, Sammut SJ, De Mattos-Arruda L, Bruna A, Rueda OM, Chin SF,
et al. Intersect-then-combine approach: improving the performance of
somatic variant calling in whole exome sequencing data using multiple
aligners and callers. Genome Med. 2017;9(1):35.
74. Highnam G, Wang JJ, Kusler D, Zook J, Vijayan V, Leibovich N, et al. An
analytical framework for optimizing variant discovery from personal
genomes. Nat Commun. 2015;6:6275.
75. Hwang S, Kim E, Lee I, Marcotte EM. Systematic comparison of variant
calling pipelines using gold standard personal exome variants. Sci Rep.
2015;5:17875. 
76. Sandmann S, de Graaf AO, Karimi M, van der Reijden BA, Hellstrom-
Lindberg E, Jansen JH, et al. Evaluating variant calling tools for non-
matched next-generation sequencing data. Sci Rep. 2017;7:43169.
77. Yohe S, Hauge A, Bunjer K, Kemmer T, Bower M, Schomaker M, et al. Clinical
validation of targeted next-generation sequencing for inherited disorders.
Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015;139(2):204–10.
78. Baudhuin LM, Lagerstedt SA, Klee EW, Fadra N, Oglesbee D, Ferber MJ.
Confirming variants in next-generation sequencing panel testing by sanger
sequencing. J Mol Diagn. 2015;17(4):456–61.
79. Beck TF, Mullikin JC, Program NCS, Biesecker LG. Systematic evaluation of sanger
validation of next-generation sequencing variants. Clin Chem. 2016;62(4):647–54.
80. Mu W, Lu HM, Chen J, Li S, Elliott AM. Sanger confirmation is required to
achieve optimal sensitivity and specificity in next-generation sequencing
panel testing. J Mol Diagn. 2016;18(6):923–32.
81. Strom SP, Lee H, Das K, Vilain E, Nelson SF, Grody WW, et al. Assessing the
necessity of confirmatory testing for exome-sequencing results in a clinical
molecular diagnostic laboratory. Genet Med. 2014;16(7):510–5.
82. Lincoln SE, Truty R, Lin CF, Zook JM, Paul J, Ramey VH, et al. A rigorous
interlaboratory examination of the need to confirm next-generation
sequencing-detected variants with an orthogonal method in clinical genetic
testing. J Mol Diagn. 2019;21(2):318–29.
83. Lee H, Deignan JL, Dorrani N, Strom SP, Kantarci S, Quintero-Rivera F, et al.
Clinical exome sequencing for genetic identification of rare Mendelian
disorders. JAMA. 2014;312(18):1880–7.
84. Posey JE, Harel T, Liu P, Rosenfeld JA, James RA, Coban Akdemir ZH, et al.
Resolution of disease phenotypes resulting from multilocus genomic
variation. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(1):21–31.
85. Zhu X, Petrovski S, Xie P, Ruzzo EK, Lu YF, McSweeney KM, et al. Whole-
exome sequencing in undiagnosed genetic diseases: interpreting 119 trios.
Genet Med. 2015;17(10):774–81.
86. Besenbacher S, Liu S, Izarzugaza JM, Grove J, Belling K, Bork-Jensen J, et al.
Novel variation and de novo mutation rates in population-wide de novo
assembled Danish trios. Nat Commun. 2015;6:5969.
87. Jonsson H, Sulem P, Kehr B, Kristmundsdottir S, Zink F, Hjartarson E, et al.
Parental influence on human germline de novo mutations in 1,548 trios
from Iceland. Nature. 2017;549(7673):519–22.
88. Sudmant PH, Kitzman JO, Antonacci F, Alkan C, Malig M, Tsalenko A, et al.
Diversity of human copy number variation and multicopy genes. Science.
2010;330(6004):641–6.
89. Itsara A, Cooper GM, Baker C, Girirajan S, Li J, Absher D, et al. Population
analysis of large copy number variants and hotspots of human genetic
disease. Am J Hum Genet. 2009;84(2):148–61.
90. Ionita-Laza I, Rogers AJ, Lange C, Raby BA, Lee C. Genetic association
analysis of copy-number variation (CNV) in human disease pathogenesis.
Genomics. 2009;93(1):22–6.
91. Bucan M, Abrahams BS, Wang K, Glessner JT, Herman EI, Sonnenblick LI, et al.
Genome-wide analyses of exonic copy number variants in a family-based study
point to novel autism susceptibility genes. PLoS Genet. 2009;5(6):e1000536.
92. Whibley AC, Plagnol V, Tarpey PS, Abidi F, Fullston T, Choma MK, et al. Fine-
scale survey of X chromosome copy number variants and indels underlying
intellectual disability. Am J Hum Genet. 2010;87(2):173–88.
93. Soemedi R, Wilson IJ, Bentham J, Darlay R, Topf A, Zelenika D, et al.
Contribution of global rare copy-number variants to the risk of sporadic
congenital heart disease. Am J Hum Genet. 2012;91(3):489–501.
94. Fakhro KA, Choi M, Ware SM, Belmont JW, Towbin JA, Lifton RP, et al. Rare
copy number variations in congenital heart disease patients identify unique
genes in left-right patterning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108(7):2915–20.
95. Greenway SC, Pereira AC, Lin JC, DePalma SR, Israel SJ, Mesquita SM, et al.
De novo copy number variants identify new genes and loci in isolated
sporadic tetralogy of Fallot. Nat Genet. 2009;41(8):931–5.
96. Tan R, Wang Y, Kleinstein SE, Liu Y, Zhu X, Guo H, et al. An evaluation of
copy number variation detection tools from whole-exome sequencing data.
Hum Mutat. 2014;35(7):899–907.
97. Alkan C, Coe BP, Eichler EE. Genome structural variation discovery and
genotyping. Nat Rev Genet. 2011;12(5):363–76.
98. Chaisson MJP, Sanders AD, Zhao X, Malhotra A, Porubsky D, Rausch T, et al.
Multi-platform discovery of haplotype-resolved structural variation in human
genomes. Nat Commun. 2019;10(1):1784.
99. Zook JM, Hansen NF, Olson ND, Chapman L, Mullikin JC, Xiao C, et al. A
robust benchmark for detection of germline large deletions and insertions.
Nat Biotechnol. 2020; [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0538-8"] https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0538-8.
Page 13
Koboldt Genome Medicine (2020) 12:91  Page 13 of 13
100. Audano PA, Sulovari A, Graves-Lindsay TA, Cantsilieris S, Sorensen M, Welch
AE, et al. Characterizing the major structural variant alleles of the human
genome. Cell. 2019;176(3):663–75 e19.
101. Ho SS, Urban AE, Mills RE. Structural variation in the sequencing era. Nat
Rev Genet. 2020;21(3):171–89.
102. English AC, Salerno WJ, Hampton OA, Gonzaga-Jauregui C, Ambreth S,
Ritter DI, et al. Assessing structural variation in a personal genome-towards
a human reference diploid genome. BMC Genomics. 2015;16:286.
103. Mu JC, Tootoonchi Afshar P, Mohiyuddin M, Chen X, Li J, Bani Asadi N, et al.
Leveraging long read sequencing from a single individual to provide a
comprehensive resource for benchmarking variant calling methods. Sci Rep.
2015;5:14493.
104. Giardina T, Robinson C, Grieu-Iacopetta F, Millward M, Iacopetta B, Spagnolo
D, et al. Implementation of next generation sequencing technology for
somatic mutation detection in routine laboratory practice. Pathology. 2018;
50(4):389–401.
105. Cheng DT, Mitchell TN, Zehir A, Shah RH, Benayed R, Syed A, et al. Memorial
Sloan Kettering-Integrated Mutation Profiling of Actionable Cancer Targets
(MSK-IMPACT): a hybridization capture-based next-generation sequencing
clinical assay for solid tumor molecular oncology. J Mol Diagn. 2015;17(3):
251–64.
106. Pritchard CC, Salipante SJ, Koehler K, Smith C, Scroggins S, Wood B, et al.
Validation and implementation of targeted capture and sequencing for the
detection of actionable mutation, copy number variation, and gene
rearrangement in clinical cancer specimens. J Mol Diagn. 2014;16(1):56–67.
107. Wagle N, Berger MF, Davis MJ, Blumenstiel B, Defelice M, Pochanard P, et al.
High-throughput detection of actionable genomic alterations in clinical
tumor samples by targeted, massively parallel sequencing. Cancer Discov.
2012;2(1):82–93.
108. Garofalo A, Sholl L, Reardon B, Taylor-Weiner A, Amin-Mansour A, Miao D,
et al. The impact of tumor profiling approaches and genomic data
strategies for cancer precision medicine. Genome Med. 2016;8(1):79.
109. Hiltemann S, Jenster G, Trapman J, van der Spek P, Stubbs A. Discriminating
somatic and germline mutations in tumor DNA samples without matching
normals. Genome Res. 2015;25(9):1382–90.
110. Sukhai MA, Misyura M, Thomas M, Garg S, Zhang T, Stickle N, et al. Somatic
tumor variant filtration strategies to optimize tumor-only molecular profiling
using targeted next-generation sequencing panels. J Mol Diagn. 2019;21(2):
261–73.
111. Wang Q, Jia P, Li F, Chen H, Ji H, Hucks D, et al. Detecting somatic point
mutations in cancer genome sequencing data: a comparison of mutation
callers. Genome Med. 2013;5(10):91.
112. Xu H, DiCarlo J, Satya RV, Peng Q, Wang Y. Comparison of somatic mutation
calling methods in amplicon and whole exome sequence data. BMC
Genomics. 2014;15:244.
113. Kroigard AB, Thomassen M, Laenkholm AV, Kruse TA, Larsen MJ. Evaluation
of nine somatic variant callers for detection of somatic mutations in exome
and targeted deep sequencing data. PLoS One. 2016;11(3):e0151664.
114. Fang LT, Afshar PT, Chhibber A, Mohiyuddin M, Fan Y, Mu JC, et al. An
ensemble approach to accurately detect somatic mutations using
SomaticSeq. Genome Biol. 2015;16:197.
115. Viray H, Li K, Long TA, Vasalos P, Bridge JA, Jennings LJ, et al. A prospective,
multi-institutional diagnostic trial to determine pathologist accuracy in
estimation of percentage of malignant cells. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2013;
137(11):1545–9.
116. Smits AJ, Kummer JA, de Bruin PC, Bol M, van den Tweel JG, Seldenrijk KA,
et al. The estimation of tumor cell percentage for molecular testing by
pathologists is not accurate. Mod Pathol. 2014;27(2):168–74.
117. Dudley J, Tseng LH, Rooper L, Harris M, Haley L, Chen G, et al. Challenges
posed to pathologists in the detection of KRAS mutations in colorectal
cancers. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015;139(2):211–8.
118. Bass BP, Engel KB, Greytak SR, Moore HM. A review of preanalytical factors
affecting molecular, protein, and morphological analysis of formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue: how well do you know your FFPE
specimen? Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014;138(11):1520–30.
119. Do H, Dobrovic A. Sequence artifacts in DNA from formalin-fixed tissues:
causes and strategies for minimization. Clin Chem. 2015;61(1):64–71.
120. Oh E, Choi YL, Kwon MJ, Kim RN, Kim YJ, Song JY, et al. Comparison of
accuracy of whole-exome sequencing with formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded and fresh frozen tissue samples. PLoS One. 2015;10(12):
e0144162. 
121. Koboldt DC, Larson DE, Wilson RK. Using VarScan 2 for germline variant
calling and somatic mutation detection. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics. 2013;44:
15 4 1–7.
122. Sherry ST, Ward MH, Kholodov M, Baker J, Phan L, Smigielski EM, et al.
dbSNP: the NCBI database of genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001;
29(1):308–11.
123. MacArthur DG, Balasubramanian S, Frankish A, Huang N, Morris J, Walter K,
et al. A systematic survey of loss-of-function variants in human protein-
coding genes. Science. 2012;335(6070):823–8.
124. Carlston CM, O’Donnell-Luria AH, Underhill HR, Cummings BB, Weisburd B,
Minikel EV, et al. Pathogenic ASXL1 somatic variants in reference databases
complicate germline variant interpretation for Bohring-Opitz syndrome.
Hum Mutat. 2017;38(5):517–23.
125. Alkodsi A, Louhimo R, Hautaniemi S. Comparative analysis of methods for
identifying somatic copy number alterations from deep sequencing data.
Brief Bioinform. 2015;16(2):242–54.
126. Liu S, Tsai WH, Ding Y, Chen R, Fang Z, Huo Z, et al. Comprehensive
evaluation of fusion transcript detection algorithms and a meta-caller to
combine top performing methods in paired-end RNA-seq data. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2016;44(5):e47.
127. Xu C. A review of somatic single nucleotide variant calling algorithms for next-
generation sequencing data. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2018;16:15–24.
128. Lee AY, Ewing AD, Ellrott K, Hu Y, Houlahan KE, Bare JC, et al. Combining
accurate tumor genome simulation with crowdsourcing to benchmark
somatic structural variant detection. Genome Biol. 2018;19(1):188.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
