Keywords: Meromictic lakes,Anoxic basin,Arctic Ocean,Sulfur cycling,Organic sulfur,Sulfur intermediates,Redox gradients,Metagenomics
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
ModDate: 2021/02/16 14:47:13+01'00'
CreationDate: 2021/02/15 08:49:43+08'00'
Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
Subject: Microbiome, 2021, doi:10.1186/s40168-021-00999-x
Author: Adrien Vigneron
Title: Genomic evidence for sulfur intermediates as new biogeochemical hubs in a model aquatic microbial ecosystem
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Meromictic lakes,Anoxic basin,Arctic Ocean,Sulfur cycling,Organic sulfur,Sulfur intermediates,Redox gradients,Metagenomics
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (SPRINGER SBM; licensed version)
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s40168-021-00999-x
xmp:dc:publisher: Microbiome
xmp:dc:description: Microbiome, 2021, doi:10.1186/s40168-021-00999-x
xmp:dc:subject: Meromictic lakes; Anoxic basin; Arctic Ocean; Sulfur cycling; Organic sulfur; Sulfur intermediates; Redox gradients; Metagenomics
xmp:dc:title: Genomic evidence for sulfur intermediates as new biogeochemical hubs in a model aquatic microbial ecosystem
xmp:dc:creator: Adrien Vigneron; Perrine Cruaud; Alexander I. Culley; Raoul-Marie Couture; Connie Lovejoy; Warwick F. Vincent
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2021-02-16T14:47:13+01:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2021-02-16T14:47:13+01:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2021-02-15T08:49:43+08:00
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:e2bb8aef-2eda-423d-804f-5d412de181d1
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:99aa4e9c-7a34-4690-92d5-d24c956de1b8
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:e2bb8aef-2eda-423d-804f-5d412de181d1
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2021-02-15T20:08:35+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:author:name: Adrien Vigneron
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3552-8369
xmp:author:name: Perrine Cruaud
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8628-3600
xmp:author:name: Alexander I. Culley
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6639-9112
xmp:author:name: Raoul-Marie Couture
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4940-3372
xmp:author:name: Connie Lovejoy
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8027-2281
xmp:author:name: Warwick F. Vincent
xmp:author:orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9055-1938
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer Nature ORCID Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: sn
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCID (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCID is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: editorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Editor information: contains the name of each editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: seriesEditorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Series editor information: contains the name of each series editor and his/her ORCID identifier.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/authorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaType:type: EditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/editorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: editor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of editor information: name and ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an editor.
xmp:pdfaType:type: SeriesEditorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springernature.com/ns/xmpExtensions/2.0/seriesEditorInfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: seriesEditor
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of series editor information: name and ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of a series editor.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A reference to the original document from which this one is derived. It is a minimal reference; missing components can be assumed to be unchanged. For example, a new version might only need to specify the instance ID and version number of the previous version, or a rendition might only need to specify the instance ID and rendition class of the original.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DerivedFrom
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: ResourceRef
xmp:pdfaType:description: Identifies a portion of a document. This can be a position at which the document has been changed since the most recent event history (stEvt:changed). For a resource within an xmpMM:Ingredients list, the ResourceRef uses this type to identify both the portion of the containing document that refers to the resource, and the portion of the referenced resource that is referenced.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Part#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stPart
xmp:pdfaType:type: Part
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/t/pg/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpTPg
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Paged-Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Fonts
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Bag Font
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: XMP08 Spec: An ordered array of plate names that are needed to print the document (including any in contained documents).
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: PlateNames
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaType:description: A structure containing the characteristics of a font used in a document.
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/sType/Font#
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: stFnt
xmp:pdfaType:type: Font
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe Document Info PDF eXtension Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
  Background
  Results
  Conclusions
Background
Results
  Microbial community composition
  Depth distribution of sulfur cycling genes
  Metagenome assembled genomes of S-cycling populations
    Sulfur-oxidizing populations
    Sulfur-reducing populations
    Organic sulfur utilizing populations
  Microbial network for sulfur metabolism
Discussion
  New microbial agents and genes for sulfur transformation
  Utilization of sulfur cycle intermediates
  Organic sulfur molecules as SCI sources
Conclusions
Methods
  Sample collection and nucleic acid extraction
  Quantitative PCR
  Illumina MiSeq Amplicon library preparation, sequencing and analysis
  Metagenomic library preparation, sequencing and analysis
  Binning and functional characterization
  Statistical analysis
Supplementary Information
Abbreviations
Acknowledgements
Authors’ contributions
Funding
Availability of data and materials
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Consent for publication
Competing interests
Author details
References
Publisher’s Note
Page 1
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-021-00999-x
RESEARCH  Open Access
Genomic evidence for sulfur intermediates
as new biogeochemical hubs in a model
aquatic microbial ecosystem
Adrien Vigneron1,2,3* [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3552-8369"] , Perrine Cruaud3,4  [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8628-3600"] , Alexander I. Culley2,3  [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6639-9112"] , Raoul-Marie Couture2,5  [URL: "http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4940-3372"] , Connie Lovejoy1,3,6* and
Warwick F. Vincent1,2
Abstract
Background: The sulfur cycle encompasses a series of complex aerobic and anaerobic transformations of S-containing
molecules and plays a fundamental role in cellular and ecosystem-level processes, influencing biological carbon transfers and
other biogeochemical cycles. Despite their importance, the microbial communities and metabolic pathways involved in
these transformations remain poorly understood, especially for inorganic sulfur compounds of intermediate oxidation states
(thiosulfate, tetrathionate, sulfite, polysulfides). Isolated and highly stratified, the extreme geochemical and environmental
features of meromictic ice-capped Lake A, in the Canadian High Arctic, provided an ideal model ecosystem to resolve the
distribution and metabolism of aquatic sulfur cycling microorganisms along redox and salinity gradients.
Results: Applying complementary molecular approaches, we identified sharply contrasting microbial communities and
metabolic potentials among the markedly distinct water layers of Lake A, with similarities to diverse fresh, brackish and saline
water microbiomes. Sulfur cycling genes were abundant at all depths and covaried with bacterial abundance. Genes for
oxidative processes occurred in samples from the oxic freshwater layers, reductive reactions in the anoxic and sulfidic
bottom waters and genes for both transformations at the chemocline. Up to 154 different genomic bins with potential for
sulfur transformation were recovered, revealing a panoply of taxonomically diverse microorganisms with complex metabolic
pathways for biogeochemical sulfur reactions. Genes for the utilization of sulfur cycle intermediates were widespread
throughout the water column, co-occurring with sulfate reduction or sulfide oxidation pathways. The genomic bin
composition suggested that in addition to chemical oxidation, these intermediate sulfur compounds were likely produced
by the predominant sulfur chemo- and photo-oxidisers at the chemocline and by diverse microbial degraders of organic
sulfur molecules.
Conclusions: The Lake A microbial ecosystem provided an ideal opportunity to identify new features of the biogeochemical
sulfur cycle. Our detailed metagenomic analyses across the broad physico-chemical gradients of this permanently stratified
lake extend the known diversity of microorganisms involved in sulfur transformations over a wide range of environmental
conditions. The results indicate that sulfur cycle intermediates and organic sulfur molecules are major sources of electron
donors and acceptors for aquatic and sedimentary microbial communities in association with the classical sulfur cycle.
Keywords: Meromictic lakes, Anoxic basin, Arctic Ocean, Sulfur cycling, Organic sulfur, Sulfur intermediates, Redox gradients,
Metagenomics
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:avignero@gmail.com"] avignero@gmail.com; [URL: "mailto:connie.lovejoy@bio.ulaval.ca"] connie.lovejoy@bio.ulaval.ca
1Département de Biologie, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© The Author(s). 2021 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the
data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.
Page 2
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 2 of 14
Background
The sulfur cycle encompasses complex energetic pro-
cesses where sulfur (S) ions and molecules in different
oxidation states, from the most reduced (− 2: sulfides,
H2
S/HS−) to the most oxidised (+ 6: sulfate, SO42
−), are
transformed through oxidation, reduction, dispropor-
tionation [1] and putative comproportionation [2] by
taxonomically diverse microorganisms. The sulfur cycle
is tightly interwoven with carbon, nitrogen and metal cy-
cles, and is tied to both cellular and ecosystem-level pro-
cesses [3]. In marine sediments, sulfate is an ubiquitous
electron acceptor and sulfate-reducing microorganisms
have been estimated to contribute to up to 29% of or-
ganic matter remineralisation in aquatic environments
[4]. Sulfate reducers can generate massive concentrations
of sulfides, which in turn serve as an electron donor for
symbiotic or free-living sulfur-oxidizing microorganisms
that recycle sulfides into sulfate [5].
Although sulfate reduction and sulfide oxidation have
received the most attention, our knowledge of the iden-
tity of microorganisms and metabolic pathways involved
in these processes is limited and novel lineages of micro-
organisms mediating steps in the sulfur cycle remain to
be discovered [6, 7]. Furthermore, sulfur cycling is highly
complex; sulfur transformations by microorganisms and
the geochemical reactivity of reduced sulfur molecules
with metal oxides generate several inorganic sulfur com-
pounds of intermediate oxidation states such as thiosul-
fate (S2
O32
−), tetrathionate (S4
O62
−), sulfite (SO32
−), and
polysulfides (S2−
n+1
). These inorganic S compounds are
all substrates for further microbial oxidation, reduction
or disproportionation [3, 8] and precipitation with re-
duced metals [9]. The rapid recycling of these sulfur spe-
cies has biogeochemical significance, especially in low
sulfate environments, where the rapid turn-over of these
compounds provides an opportunity for shortcuts in the
sulfur cycling and potentially sustains a large variety of
microorganisms [10]. However, because efficient micro-
bial use drives their concentrations down to the picomo-
lar range, the importance of these compounds and the
associated microbial processes remain unrecognised. An
alternative strategy to uncover such processes is to look
for genomic evidence of the identity, ecology and func-
tional properties of microbes metabolizing these
compounds.
The genetic underpinning of sulfur transformations is
still poorly resolved and is complicated by the bidirec-
tional activities of key enzymes and by the diversity and
complexity of many enzymatic pathways. For example,
the metabolic pathways involved in sulfur compounds
disproportionation remains unknown and even the exact
mechanisms involved in sulfide oxidation remain little
understood [1, 11]. Another important, yet largely over-
looked component of the sulfur cycle involves the 
utilisation and formation of organo-sulfur molecules
(OSM).  These labile metabolites, including sulfonate
(compounds with a R-SO3
− functional group) and sulfo-
nium such as dimethylsulphoniopropionate (DMSP), are
produced by macro- and micro-algae and may represent
an important source of sulfur for certain microorgan-
isms in freshwaters [12, 13] and oceans, where the gen-
etic potential for transformation of OSM is widespread
in marine bacteria [14].
Due to the abundance of sulfur compounds in sea
water, much of our knowledge about sulfur cycles comes
from marine sediments, which constitute a major bio-
tope for sulfur cycling microorganisms [3]. However, the
distribution of sulfur cycling microorganisms is not lim-
ited to marine environments, and sulfur cycling microor-
ganisms also have important ecological roles in
environments with low sulfate concentrations such as
wetlands and lakes [7, 15].
Marine-derived lakes are natural laboratories for un-
derstanding the sulfur cycle. In the polar regions, melt-
ing ice sheets lead to an isostatic rebound of the
continents, isolating fjords that become seawater-
trapped lakes. Melting snow and glaciers then discharge
freshwater into these lakes that float on the denser sea-
water beneath. This density gradient is re-enforced by a
mostly permanent ice cover, resulting in meromictic
lakes that are layered physically and chemically with
well-defined environments, enabling the development of
complex and stable microbial communities along light,
nutrient and redox gradients [16]. The water column of
these lakes is divided into a mixolimnion consisting of
the oxic surface freshwater layer immediately beneath
the ice, and an anoxic and sulfidic monimolimnion, de-
rived from the marine bottom layer. The chemocline at
the interface between these layers is a zone of highest
chemical reactivity in the lake, typically associated with
elevated microbial activity and intense sulfur cycling [17,
18]. Phototrophic or chemotrophic sulfur oxidisers that
recycle sulfides produced in the anoxic monimolimnion
overlap or coexist in the chemocline, depending on oxy-
gen and light penetration [19]. The activity of these mi-
croorganisms results in the production of sulfate and
sulfur deposits outside the cells, leading to yellow or or-
ange coloration of the water [20]. In addition, metal ox-
ides (iron and manganese) frequently accumulate in
meromictic lakes [21], leading to chemical oxidation of
sulfur species.
The broad range of physico-chemical conditions in a sin-
gle water column makes polar meromictic ecosystems ideal
lake-size laboratories to investigate sulfur-cycling microor-
ganisms and metabolic pathways. We hypothesised that
sulfur cycle intermediate (SCI) molecules such as thiosul-
fate, tetrathionate, sulfite and polysulfides are a major
source of energy for aquatic microbial communities, and
Page 3
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 3 of 14
that related biogeochemical processes would be evident in
a polar meromictic lake because of the prolonged selection
of microbial species and functions across stable biogeo-
chemical gradients.
To test this hypothesis, we analysed the microbial com-
munity composition, abundance and metabolic potential in
Lake A (83°00′N, 75°30′W), a deep marine-derived mero-
mictic lake in the Canadian High Arctic (Fig. 1a), with a
focus on sulfur cycling microorganisms across light and
redox gradients. Applying genome-centric metagenomics,
we recovered a large variety of sulfur cycling microorgan-
isms with contrasting and complex metabolic pathways in-
volved in sulfur transformations. We elucidated the
importance of sulfur cycle intermediates as well as organic
sulfur molecules as potential energy sources for microor-
ganisms over the broad range of geochemical conditions
that are represented in this model biogeochemical system.
Results
Oxygen, salinity and temperature profiles of Lake A,
measured at the sampling time (18 July 2017),  showed
that the water column under the ice was highly strati-
fied, with similar profiles to previous years [21].  The
freshwater oxygenated mixolimnion extended to the
chemocline, located from 12 to 24 m below the upper
ice surface ice, and marine-derived saline, anoxic water
occurred below 24 m (Fig. 1b).
Microbial community composition
Microbial community composition and abundance was
investigated by 16S rRNA and 16S rRNA gene sequen-
cing and quantification (qPCR) down the water column
with discrete samples from 2, 6, 14, 22, 34, 40, 55, and
65 m. In addition, shotgun metagenomes were also se-
quenced from each water layer and 16S rRNA gene se-
quences were extracted from the metagenomic dataset
and analysed along with the amplicon data to detect any
microbial lineages that might have been missed due to
PCR primer bias (Fig. 1d).  Bacteria represented nearly
100% of the 16S rRNA genes in both qPCR and metage-
nomic data in the upper freshwater samples and 90% in
the saline water samples (Supplementary Figure S1);
therefore, only the bacterial community is detailed in
this study. The bacterial community compositions of
replicate samples were highly similar (Fig. 1c and Sup-
plementary Figure S1).  Although the number of rRNA
genes may fluctuate depending on species and physio-
logical state, detection of 16S rRNA was used as a proxy
for identifying metabolically active microorganisms [22].
Taxonomic profiles from 16S rRNA and 16S rRNA
genes were largely congruent, with 92% of the bacterial
lineages being detected using these two approaches, sug-
gesting that these communities were likely active (Sup-
plementary Figure S2). The results were also congruent 
with the microbial community composition recovered
from metagenomic data with the exceptions of SAR11
(up to 3.8% and 1.5% of the 16S rRNA genes in meta-
genomes and amplicons respectively) and Patescibac-
teria (14.8% and 4.4% of the 16S rRNA genes in
metagenomes and amplicons respectively) lineages,
which appeared to be underestimated by amplicon se-
quencing (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Figure S2).
The different depth strata of the lake had sharply con-
trasting community structures (non-parametric multi-
variate analysis of variances, NPMANOVA, p = 0.0001,
Fig. 1c, d). The bacterial community from the 2 m sam-
ple collected immediately beneath the ice was dominated
by Flavobacteriales (39% of the 16S rRNA metagenomic
reads),  Burkholderiales (10%) and Actinobacteria HgcI
(13%).  At 6 m, Cyanobacteria (12%),  Verrucomicrobia
(Chtoniobacteraceae,  14%)  and Actinobacteria HgcI
(16%) were predominant. At the freshwater-saline transi-
tion (14 m), the proportion of Alphaproteobacteria (7%),
including SAR11, Planctomycetes (4%) and Bacteroidetes
(10%) increased. At the bottom of the oxic-anoxic transi-
tion zone (22 m),  the microbial community was domi-
nated by Alphaproteobacteria (13%), including members
of the Rhodospirillalles (17%),  Marinimicrobia,  also
known as SAR406 (14%),  Chlorobiaceae (6%)  and
Cyanobacteria (4%).  In the anoxic saline strata of the
lower water column (34, 40, 55 and 65 m), the microbial
community was mainly dominated by Chloroflexi (up to
19% at 55 m),  Desulfobacteraceae,  including the SEEP
SRB1 lineage (10%),  Atribacteria (up to 9% at 40 m),
Patescibacteria (up to 15% at 34 m) and Omnitrophi-
caeota (up to 12% at 65 m). The proportion of unclassi-
fied reads also increased with depth, from only 4% of the
reads in surface water to 40% at 65 m in the 16S rRNA
gene amplicon datasets (Supplementary Figure S1).
However, up to 28% of the unclassified reads of the 65
m samples were related to a single operational taxo-
nomic unit (OTU, 97% similarity) distantly related (96%
sequence similarity) to a sequence recovered from the
Okinawa Trough. Quantification of 16S rRNA genes in-
dicated a  relatively constant bacterial abundance
throughout the water column, with on average 1.36 ±
0.6 × 104 16S rRNA genes ml−1,  except for the oxic-
anoxic transition zone where bacterial abundance
reached 5.33 × 104 16S rRNA genes ml−1 (Fig. 1d).
Depth distribution of sulfur cycling genes
Shotgun metagenomes from the eight depths were se-
quenced to evaluate the metabolic potential of Lake A
microbial communities. A total of 10,378 different genes
(KEGG Orthologues) were identified in the metagen-
omes. Hierarchical clustering of the overall metabolic
potentials (all detected KOs) of the samples was congru-
ent with the clustering based on taxonomic profiles and
Page 4
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 4 of 14
Fig. 1 Overview of the physicochemical and microbial features of Lake A. a General location and photograph of Lake A. b Physicochemical
profiles in the lake. Photosynthetically active radiation data are derived from Charvet et al. 2012, SO42
−, H2
S, total Mn and total Fe were
extrapolated from Gibson et al. 2002. c NMDS of the bacterial community based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index calculated with 16S rRNA
amplicons and metagenomic datasets. d Relative bacterial abundance (qPCR) and community composition based on 16S rRNA genes from
metagenomes. The size of the circles represents the relative abundance of genes for each lineage. Only lineages with relative proportions > 1% of
the reads in at least one sample are shown. Overall size of the community and associated qPCR bar is related to qPCR data. qPCR data are
expressed in number of 16S rRNA genes per mL of lake water
geochemical data, with two major clusters: the freshwater
samples (2, 6 and 14 m) and the saline anoxic samples (34,
40, 55 and 65 m); and the oxycline sample (22 m) branch-
ing separately on the dendrogram (Fig. 2). A large number
of genes involved in sulfur cycling were identified in all
samples and were distinctly distributed vertically accord-
ing to the physicochemical gradients (Fig. 2).
Genes for thiosulfate oxidation (soxABCDXYZ,  doxD,
tsdA, TST and pdo_Rho, corresponding to a gene of per-
sulfide dioxygenase fused with a rhodanese domain)
were detected in all freshwater samples (from 2 to 22
m). Hydrogen sulfide (soxABCDXYZ) and sulfite (soeAB,
suoX) oxidation genes were mainly identified in the most 
oxygenated freshwater layers, whereas genes for sulfide
(fccAB), and polysulfide (SQR and Hdr-like, a novel gene
involved in bacterial sulfur oxidation [23]) oxidation
pathways were mainly found in the micro-oxic condi-
tions of the oxycline waters (14 and 22 m) (Fig. 2). Few
of these genes were also detected in anoxic waters. By
contrast, genes involved in dissimilatory sulfate and sul-
fite reduction pathways (dsrAB, aprAB, sat, qmo, asrAB)
were mainly detected in saline and anoxic waters (34, 40,
55 and 65 m). Polysulfide and thiosulfate reductases (Psr
and Phs) are complex iron–sulfur molybdoenzymes with
such a close phylogenetic relationship and with so few
characterised representatives, that distinction based on
Page 5
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 5 of 14
Fig. 2 Distribution of sulfur cycling genes. a Vertical profiles of sulfur cycling genes identified in metagenomes along geochemical gradients
(heat map of salinity, oxygen, SO42
− and H2
S). Hierarchical clustering at the right was computed based on all KEGG orthologues identified in
metagenomes. Numbers of genes per sample and per gene are after normalization. b Schematic representation of the sulfur cycle. Names of the
enzymes are available in Supplementary Table S1
sequence of the catalytic unit (phsA-psrA) is currently
impossible [24]. Here, we used the more characterised B
and C subunits of the thiosulfate reductase (phsBC), en-
coding the electron transporter and anchor as a proxy of
the entire thiosulfate reducing Phs complex. Although
anchor proteins could be involved in other functional
pathways, phsBC and ttrBC, are among the rare genes of
anchor and electron transfer protein characterised in
Kegg orthology suggesting evidence that these KOs are
associated with their described functions [25].  Further-
more, in absence of phsBC genes, we considered the
presence of psrA-phsA gene as an indicator of the poly-
sulfide reductase complex psrABC rather than phsABC.
Given the limited information about these genes, we
considered this to be a pragmatic and best supportable
approach. As sulfate and sulfite reduction pathways,
thiosulfate (phsBC) and tetrathionate (ttrABC,  otr) re-
ductions and polysulfide and elemental sulfur reductions
(psrA, hydABCD, npsr) were detected in saline and an-
oxic waters. All oxidative and reductive pathways were
detected at the bottom of the oxycline (22 m) (Fig. 2).
Genes for the transformation of organic sulfur mole-
cules (sulfonium and sulfonate) were also identified (Fig.
2).  Genes involved in degradation of dimethylsulfonio-
propionate (dddLQKPW,  dmdA),  methanesulfonate
(msmA) and other sulfonates, such as cysteine (cuyAZ),
sulfopropanediol (hspN), taurine (tauA) or sulfoacetalde-
hyde (xsc) were detected throughout the water column
but in higher proportion in freshwater. By contrast,
genes coding dimethyl sulfoxide reductases (dmsABC)
were mainly found in anoxic saline waters (Fig. 2). Genes
for sulfatases (betC and arslA),  catalysing hydrolysis of
sulfate esters, were abundant throughout the water 
column, with higher numbers at the bottom of the oxy-
cline (22 m) (Fig. 2).
Metagenome assembled genomes of S-cycling
populations
A total of 250 genomic bins with > 50% completeness
and < 5% contamination levels were recovered from the
combined metagenomic dataset (Supplementary Table 1,
Figure S4). Among them, 154 genomic bins (61.4%) har-
boured genes for sulfur cycling (Fig. 3). Taxonomic affili-
ation of these bins, inferred from 16S rRNA gene and
other ribosomal protein sequences, indicated a large di-
versity of sulfur cycling microorganisms representing
most of the predominant lineages identified in the water
column by 16S rRNA gene approaches. The most repre-
sented lineages in bins with sulfur transformation genes
(Fig. 3) were Bacteroidetes (21 different bins), Alphapro-
teobacteria (17 bins), Parcubacteria (17 bins), Omnitro-
phicaeota (12 bins), Chloroflexi (12 bins), Actinobacteria
(11 bins), Deltaproteobacteria (9 bins), Planctomycetes (9
bins) and Marinimicrobia (8 bins).
Sulfur-oxidizing populations
The potential for thiosulfate oxidation was widespread
in the community (Figs. 3 and 4). Numerous Parcubac-
teria, Actinobacteria and Chloroflexi bins included genes
for the thiosulfate:quinone dehydrogenase (doxD), while
the gene for the thiosulfate dehydrogenase (tsdA) was
mainly detected in Alphaproteobacteria and Bacteroi-
detes. Genes of persulfide dioxygenase fused with a rho-
danese domain (pdo_rho),  potentially involved in
thiosulfate oxidation [26] were widespread in the Bacter-
oidetes and Planctomycetes bins (Fig. 3).  The
Page 6
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 6 of 14
Fig. 3 Key genes for inorganic and organic sulfur transformation identified in the 154 genomic bins with sulfur cycling genes. Colors in the outer
circle represent the taxonomic affiliations of the bins. Bins are sorted per depth where they have been recovered. Ox. Oxidation Red. Reduction.
Details are provided in supplementary Table S1
SoxABCDXYZ complex for thiosulfate oxidation was also
identified in Alpha- and Beta-proteobacteria (Fig. 3).  In
addition to Sox genes, oxidative DsrAB genes were identified
in Alphaproteobacteria, indicating potential for H2
S oxida-
tion to sulfate. Oxidative DsrAB genes and genes for sulfide
(fccAB) and sulfur oxidation through the sulfide:quinone ox-
idoreductase (SQR) were identified in the Chlorobiaceae as
well as in few Alphaproteobacteria bins. Betaproteobacteria
bins harboured genes for sulfite oxidation (soeAB and sorB).
The SQR gene was also detected in Cyanobacteria, Actino-
bacteria,  Bacteroidetes,  Gamma- and Deltaproteobacteria.
Sulfur and thiosulfate oxidation through a Hdr-like complex
[23] was identified in one alphaproteobacterial bin.
Sulfur-reducing populations
The potential for thiosulfate reduction through thiosul-
fate reductase (PhsBC genes) was identified in 
Bacteroidetes bins recovered from anoxic samples (Figs.
3 and 4).  Tetrathionate reductase genes (ttrABC) were
mainly found in Rhodospirillales bins while genes coding
the octoheme tetrathionate reductase (otr),  involved in
tetrathionate and potentially nitrite and hydroxylamine
reduction [27] (Supplementary Figure S3), were detected
in few Desulfobacteraceae,  Anaerolineae,  Chlorobiaceae
and Bacteroidetes bins. The sulfate reduction pathway
(DsrAB, AprAB, Sat and Qmo genes) was identified in
Deltaproteobacteria bins as well as in one Chloroflexi,
two Planctomycetes and in Candidatus Nealsonbacteria,
Ca. Zixibacteria and Ca. Abyssubacteria bins recovered
from the saline anoxic waters (Figs. 3 and 4). Anaerobic
sulfite reductase genes (asrAB)  were detected in all
Omnitrophica bins as well as in two Planctomycetes and
two Parcubacteria bins. Polysulfide reductase genes
(psrA) were found in Deltaproteobacteria as well as in
Page 7
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 7 of 14
Fig. 4 Depth distribution of metabolic potentials identified in the genomic bins. Each point represents a genomic bin with the color
corresponding to its taxonomy
some Marinimicrobia and Bacteroidetes bins. Sulfhydro-
genase genes (hydABCD), involved in S0 and polysulfide
reduction were also identified in genomic bins. However,
while HydACD genes were detected in 8 Parcubacteria
bins, including Ca. Kuenenbacteria, the gene coding the
beta subunit (hydB) was detected only in half of these
bins. By contrast hydB alone was also detected in Omni-
trophica,  Marinimicrobia and WOR1 (Ca. Saganbac-
teria) bins (Fig. 3).  NADH-dependent persulfide
reductase genes (npsr), involved in persulfide, polysulfide
or S0 reduction were identified in Deltaproteobacteria,
Ca. Abyssubacteria and Calditrichaeota as well as in two
Planctomycetes bins. A fusion of DsrE, Npsr and TusA
genes and including two rhodanese regions was also
identified in the metagenomic sequences and in two bins
related to Ca.  Nealsonbacteria and Phycisphaeraceae
(Fig. 3), suggesting a novel gene. Rhodanese regions and
TusA protein are involved in sulfur binding and intracel-
lular transport while both DsrE and Npsr are involved in
sulfur reduction, suggesting a role in intracellular elem-
ental sulfur reduction for this new gene.
Organic sulfur utilizing populations
A metabolic potential for organic sulfur utilisation was
detected in 87 bins, mainly related to proteobacterial lin-
eages, was recovered throughout the water column (Fig.
4). The potential for transformation of dimethylsulfonio-
propionate (DMSP) into dimethylsulfide (DMS) was de-
tected in Alphaproteobacteria bins, including SAR11/
Pelagibacter bin (Figs. 3 and 4).  By contrast, genes for
anaerobic dimethylsulfoxide reductase (dmsAB)  were
identified in Deltaproteobacteria,  Chloroflexi and few
Bacteroidetes bins. The metabolic potential for sulfonate
degradation, including genes coding for enzymes in-
volved cysteine (cuyAZ),  sulfopropanediol (hspN), 
taurine (tauA) and sulfoacetaldehyde (xsc) catabolism,
was mainly found in Actinobacteria, Planctomycetes and
Alpha- and Beta-proteobacteria bins (Figs. 3, 4 and 5).
Multiple (more than 10) sulfatase genes were identified
in some Planctomycetes, Bacteroidetes,  Alphaproteobac-
teria and Chloroflexi bins.
Microbial network for sulfur metabolism
Based on the identified genes, metabolic capabilities of
Lake A populations were inferred to determine which S-
containing molecules were potentially produced or con-
sumed throughout the water column (Fig. 5). Up to 100
different bins (65% of the bins with S-cycling genes)
were predicted to be associated with hydrogen sulfide
production or consumption. Metabolic potentials involv-
ing the production or consumption of polysulfides (89
bins, 58%),  thiosulfate (72 bins, 47%) and tetrathionate
(61 bins, 40%) were also widespread in the Lake A com-
munity (Fig. 5).  A metabolic potential associated with
sulfite and sulfate was less represented in the community
with only 46 bins (30%) associated with sulfite and 30
bins (19%) with sulfate (Fig. 5).
Discussion
Ice-capped, permanently stratified Lake A is an extreme
microbial ecosystem, where strong, persistent environ-
mental gradients provide a natural model for broader
understanding of aquatic biogeochemical cycles. The
water physico-chemical stratification profile measured in
2017 in Lake A has been observed since 1974 [21, 28],
indicating a highly stable system and allowing extrapola-
tion of geochemical profiles from historical data. Based
on a previous complete geochemical characterization of
the lake waters [21], high concentrations of sulfate occur
in the chemocline and in the anoxic waters, where
Page 8
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 8 of 14
Fig. 5 Sulfur cycling network of the Lake A microbiome. a Genomic bins are represented as circles with color corresponding to their taxonomic
affiliation and size corresponding to the average number of reads mapping on the genomic bin. Genomic bins are connected to sulfur
compounds (white circle with pie chart) predicted to be utilised (blue link) or produced (purple link). For each sulfur molecule, the ring pie chart
represents the proportion of consumption (blue) and production (purple) and the size of the pie chart is proportional to the number of
connections. b Metabolic network overlaid with the potential for organic sulfur molecule utilisation in green
sulfide concentrations increase with depth (Fig. 1). High
manganese concentrations (total Mn) were also detected
at the chemocline, with a peak of iron (total Fe) a few
meters below (Fig. 1 [21]). Finally, under similar condi-
tions of snow and ice cover, photosynthetically available
radiation (PAR) was detected down to 20 m (Fig. 1 [28]).
These extrapolations were supported by the depth distri-
bution of green sulfur bacteria (Chlorobium) that con-
firmed light and sulfide transition zones around 24 m.
Together, these observations indicate a stable and in-
tense redox gradient throughout the water column for
microbial selection and growth.
DNA- and RNA-based amplicon sequencing was ini-
tially carried out to determine the composition of the
total and potentially active microbial community in the 
water column. The results of the amplicon sequencing
revealed that each depth sampled had a unique micro-
bial community composition, and we therefore se-
quenced metagenomes for all depths. We extracted 16S
rRNA genes from metagenomes to detect any microbial
lineages that might have been underestimated due to
PCR primer bias. Since we found few discrepancies, we
have chosen to present here the microbial community
detected by the metagenomic analyses. The amplicon re-
sults remain valuable as indicators of potential activity
and facilitated comparisons of our data with more com-
monly reported amplicon data from elsewhere. Finally,
we extended our analyses with quantitative PCR since
neither the amplicon nor metagenomic approaches pro-
vided estimations of abundances.
Page 9
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 9 of 14
The ensemble of RNA and DNA-based 16S amplicon
and metagenomic sequencing from High Arctic Lake A
revealed multiple contiguous layers of complex yet stable
and potentially active microbial communities, with puta-
tive metabolism aligning with the geochemical gradients
of the lake (Fig. 1). The microbial community of the oxic
mixolimnion beneath the ice was consistent with cold
freshwater communities, with lineages of the Verrucomi-
crobia, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Cyanobacteria and
Betaproteobacteria,  which are frequently observed in
northern lakes and rivers [29–31].  At the chemocline,
alphaproteobacterial chemotrophic sulfur oxidisers and
phototrophic sulfur oxidisers (Chlorobiaceae), both pre-
viously observed in microbial surveys of Antarctica [17,
32] and temperate meromictic lakes [19, 33] co-occurred
since the lower depth limits of the Lake A photic and
aerobic zones coincided (Fig. 1). The chemocline micro-
bial community also shared major similarities with mar-
ine communities with, for example, high proportions of
Marinimicrobia (SAR406),  Pelagibacter (SAR11) and
Deltaproteobacteria SAR324, which are frequently de-
tected in seawater, hadal waters in the deep ocean, dys-
oxic marine waters and oxygen minimum zones [24, 34–
36]. By contrast, the microbial community of the saline
anoxic monimolimnion showed homologies with deep-
sea hypersaline anoxic basin communities, notably with
sequences related to Chloroflexi MSBL5, Desulfobactera-
ceae MSBL7, Planctomycetes MSBL9 and Cloacimona-
dales MSBL8 [37].  At these depths, the microbial
community also shared similarities with anoxic and sulfi-
dic marine sediments, where Deltaproteobacteria SEEP
SRB1 and Desulfarculaceae,  Atribacteria,  Omnitrophica
and Chloroflexi members also flourish [38].  Taken to-
gether, these results reveal that, cascading along its geo-
chemical gradients, the Lake A water column hosts a
panoply of microorganisms, relevant to a broad range of
environments and environmental conditions from oxic
freshwaters to anoxic marine sediments. It is rare for a
single study to cover the entire range of freshwater oxic
to marine anoxic conditions. In this way, we were able
to track amplicons and MAGs that had peaks in one en-
vironment but were able to persist in adjacent layers,
providing insight into environmental selection. The find-
ing of organisms usually associated with anoxic sedi-
ments suggests that sulfur metabolisms associated with
sediments can occur in anoxic pelagic zones and our ob-
servations expand the available known habitats for these
pathways.
New microbial agents and genes for sulfur transformation
From surface layers to the bottom, most of the genomic
bins (61.4%) recovered from Lake A included genes for
sulfur cycling (Figs. 3 and 4).  Furthermore, bacterial
abundance in Lake A was correlated with the average 
number of metabolic pathways for sulfur transformation
per bin (R2 = 0.69, p = 0.04), supporting the notion that
sulfur cycling represents a major process in Lake A wa-
ters and involves a large microbial diversity. Reconstruc-
tion of genomic bins highlighted that in addition to the
conventional taxa associated with the classical sulfur
cycle in meromictic saline lakes such as sulfate-reducing
Desulfobacteraceae, sulfur-oxidizing Alphaproteobacteria
and phototrophic sulfur oxidizing Chlorobiaceae [17],
various lineages with poorly known ecological functions
are also involved in sulfur transformations. Among these
lineages, key genes of sulfur metabolism were identified
in Ca. WOR1 (Saganbacteria),  SAR86, Lentisphaerae,
Aminicentantes,  Marinimicrobia,  Calditrichaeota,  Abys-
subacteria,  Omnitrophica and Parcubacteria,  thereby
expanding the known diversity of sulfur cycling bacteria
(Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table S1).
A strong functional redundancy in sulfur transform-
ation pathways was detected throughout the water col-
umn, with taxonomically diverse microorganisms having
similar metabolic pathways (Figs. 3 and 4). For example,
sulfide oxidation potential through SQR and the Sox-
ABCXYZ complex was identified in Alphaproteobacteria
(Rhodospirillales)  and Gammaproteobacteria SAR86.
Oxidative DsrAB genes were also identified in half of the
Rhodospirillales bins and in the Deltaproteobacteria
SAR324, while the modified Hdr-like complex, also in-
volved in sulfide oxidation was discovered in another
Alphaproteobacteria bin, congruent with experimental
evidence in the Alphaproteobacterium Hyphomicrobium
denitrificans [23]. In addition, the SoxABCXYZ complex
coupled with SoeAB genes were detected in Betaproteo-
bacteria bins whereas SQR, FccAB and the oxidative
DsrAB genes were ascertained in the Chlorobiaceae bin
[32] (Fig. 3).  These multiple pathways for sulfide and
sulfite oxidations occurred in the freshwater and chemo-
cline layers (Fig. 4), suggesting that sulfides sustain mul-
tiple ecological niches in aquatic environments over
space and time. If the occurrence of these various sulfur-
oxidizing pathways and lineages at the chemocline is
supported by the chemical profiles, their identification in
the upper freshwater samples, coupled with the co-
detection of sulfonate degradation genes (Fig. 2),  sug-
gests that organic sulfur molecules may also support
sulfur-oxidizing populations in non-sulfidic waters,
multiplying the availability of ecological niches and
allowing functional redundancy.
In the anoxic saline waters of Lake A, the dissimilatory
sulfate reduction pathway (Sat, Qmo, AprAB and DsrAB
genes) occurred in the Deltaproteobacteria bins as ex-
pected [7], but was also found in genomic bins affiliated
with Chlorolexi, Planctomycetes, Calditrichaeota and Ca.
Nealsonbacteria, Ca. Abyssubacteria and Ca.  Zixibac-
teria (Fig. 3, Supplementary Table S1).  These results
Page 10
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 10 of 14
provide an ecological context for these new lineages of
sulfate reducers that were previously proposed after
mining of combined metagenomic datasets [6].  Our
metagenomic survey also predicted a sulfite reduction
potential (AsrAB genes) for Omnitrophica members
(Figs. 3 and 4), confirming previous mining of publicly
available metagenomes [6], as well as for few Planctomy-
cetes and Patescibacteria populations in the sulfidic wa-
ters of the monimolimnion.
Patescibacteria, Planctomycetes and Chloroflexi phyla
showed the strongest variability of genomic potential
within their lineages (Figs. 3 and 4). Each of these phyla
included populations predicted to gain energy from thio-
sulfate oxidation, sulfate and sulfite reduction as well as
polysulfide/elemental sulfur reduction or oxidation. A
new fusion gene probably involved in elemental sulfur/
polysulfide reduction was also identified in two genomic
bins affiliated with Patescibacteria and Planctomycetes
phyla. Sequence comparison with public databases indi-
cated that this gene is also present in a single-cell gen-
ome related to the Planctomycetes-derived phylum of
the Kiritimatiellaeota, isolated from a deep continental
microoxic subsurface aquifer [39],  suggesting that this
gene might be relevant in microoxic conditions. Interest-
ingly, Planctomycetes, Chloroflexi and Ca.  Nealsonbac-
teria (Patescibacteria)  genomic bins also included
numerous genes (> 10 per bin) coding for sulfatases.
These hydrolytic enzymes potentially release sulfate
from sulfated organic matter [40],  providing additional
electron acceptors throughout the water column. To-
gether, these results extend the diversity of sulfur cycling
microorganisms and metabolic pathways. They suggest
new fundamental roles in sulfur cycling for members of
the Patescibacteria,  Planctomycetes and Chloroflexi in
aquatic environments, with strong ecological niche dif-
ferentiation within members of these lineages.
Utilization of sulfur cycle intermediates
Sulfur cycle intermediates (SCIs: thiosulfate, tetrathio-
nate, sulfite, polysulfides, elemental sulfur) have a large
biogeochemical significance in anoxic and marine envi-
ronments, creating shortcuts around the classic sulfur
cycle [1, 8]. The potential for oxidation and reduction of
these sulfur molecules was widespread in the Lake A mi-
crobial community, with taxonomically diverse lineages
potentially using SCIs as electron donors or acceptors
(Fig. 3). The number of genes for SCI metabolism and
sulfate reduction was similar, suggesting that SCI utilisa-
tion represents a quantitatively important process in
Lake A sulfur cycling (Fig. 2). Furthermore, the number
of genomic bins with SCI utilization genes exceeded the
number of bins with sulfate reduction and hydrogen sul-
fide oxidization pathways and SCIs were major hubs in 
the sulfur network (Fig. 5), indicating a wide diversity of
microorganisms able to process SCIs.
The potential to use SCIs was shared among specialists
that have the genetic potential to use only a limited
range of these molecules, and generalists that could po-
tentially metabolise a broad range of sulfur compounds
including sulfate or hydrogen sulfide. The specialists in-
cluded some members of the Parcubacteria with the po-
tential limited to thiosulfate oxidation, Omnitrophica
with only genes for sulfite reduction and Bacteroidetes
populations with the metabolic potentials for thiosulfate
and polysulfide oxidation. By contrast, generalists were
mainly represented by members of the Deltaproteobac-
teria or Alphaproteobacteria lineages with a large suite
of sulfur transformation genes, suggesting high variabil-
ity in substrate utilization (Fig. 4).
The taxonomically diverse microorganisms observed
here are likely fuelled by microbial phototrophic and
chemotrophic hydrogen sulfide oxidations that generate
SCIs of various oxidation states [8], as well as by abiotic
oxidation of hydrogen sulfide with iron and manganese
oxides present in elevated concentrations in Lake A (Fig.
1) [21]. Although SCIs have not been measured in Lake
A, a sulfidic smell and a yellow-orange color of the water
below 22 m was detected during sampling supporting
the presence of polysulfides and aqueous elemental sul-
fur in the water, and the metabolic potentials detected in
metagenomic dataset. Together, these results indicated a
strong ecological role for SCIs by providing an energy
source for a diverse and abundant microbial community
in the fresh, brackish and saline waters.
Organic sulfur molecules as SCI sources
Oxidised organic sulfur molecules, such as sulfonate and
sulfonium, are produced by phytoplankton, especially di-
noflagellates, as osmoprotectants, cryoprotectant, antiox-
idants [41] or predator deterrents in aquatic
environments [42], and they are an important source of
sulfur and carbon for pelagic bacteria in the ocean [14]
and likely freshwaters. These compounds are even found
in metabolomes of diatoms [43]. Eukaryotic microalgae
including dinoflagellates such as Polarella and Scripp-
siella with wide salinity tolerances have been previously
reported in Lake A [28]. In addition, we detected Chry-
sophyceae and other ochrophytes (data not shown) in
metagenomes from the oxic mixolimnion, and given that
large eukaryotic algae would sink to greater depths, the
presence of eukaryotic sulfur metabolites throughout the
Lake A water column is to be expected. The genetic cap-
acity for OSM degradation was widely distributed, oc-
curring in 56% of the genomic bins (Figs. 3, 4 and 5).
Proteobacterial lineages were detected as major sulfonate
degraders in the mixolimnion and chemocline. Since
these degradation processes release sulfite in the water,
Page 11
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 11 of 14
our results suggest that organic sulfur molecules might
have an important ecological role, providing sulfur com-
pounds of intermediate oxidation states in aerobic and
microaerobic aquatic systems regardless of salinity and
sulfate concentrations.
Genes for DMSP utilisation, identified in the freshwater
and brackish waters of the lake were also detected in
Alphaproteobacteria (Rhodospirillales and SAR11/Pelagi-
bacter bins) and Actinobacteria (Acidimicrobiia),  as re-
ported in surface oceans [14].  In addition, numerous
genes for respiration of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) were
identified in the anoxic monimolimnion and in Desulfo-
bacteraceae, Chloroflexi and Bacteroidetes bins, suggesting
that algal metabolites could sink within senescent phyto-
plankton cells from the upper water column and then be
used as an alternative energy source by anaerobic micro-
bial populations in the lower water column.
Conclusions
Isolated and permanently stratified, High-Arctic mero-
mictic saline Lake A offered an ideal opportunity to un-
cover and dissect the pathways of microbial sulfur
metabolism across oxygen, sulfate, sulfide and salinity
gradients. Although the chemocline harboured the taxo-
nomically and functionally most diverse and abundant
microbial community, demarcating this layer as a hot-
spot for microbial activity and sulfur transformations as
in other meromictic lakes [17, 19],  genes for sulfur
transformations were identified throughout the water
column, and provided new insights into sulfur cycling by
microorganisms over an unusually wide range of envir-
onmental conditions. The pathways and taxa involved in
sulfide oxidation and sulfate reduction were complex
and diverse. However, the metagenomic dataset revealed
that sulfur transformations were not limited to these
classic processes and that multiple sulfur cycling path-
ways may be simultaneously operating throughout the
water column, with taxonomically diverse populations
using sulfur cycle intermediates as electron donors or
acceptors. Genes for organic sulfur molecule degradation
and respiration were also abundant and widely distrib-
uted in the microbial community, suggesting that phyto-
plankton metabolites might also be a major source of
energy for freshwater and marine bacteria. Our data ex-
tend the diversity of sulfur cycle lineages and metabolic
pathways in aquatic ecosystems and emphasise the eco-
logical importance of sulfur cycle intermediates as key
hubs for electron flow and energy production over a
wide range of environmental conditions.
Methods
Sample collection and nucleic acid extraction
In summer 2017 (18 July 2017), three independent 24-
cm-diameter holes were drilled through the ice (0.6 m 
thickness) near the middle of Lake A (Ellesmere Island,
82° 59.667′ N, 75° 26.602′ W; Fig. 1a). Oxygen concen-
tration, salinity and temperature profiles throughout the
water column were measured using a YSI-EXO2 profiler
(Xylem, Inc., Yellow Springs, USA) to 65 m, which was
the length of the instrument cable, to determine sam-
pling depth. Eight sampling depths (2, 6, 14, 22, 34, 40,
55 and 65 m) were selected to cover all identified water
layers (Fig. 1). A Limnos water sampler (KC, Denmark),
which was previously rinsed with 10% HCl, then sterile
MilliQ water and maintained closed until sampling, was
lowered into the ice holes down to the sampling depth.
Water was visibly orange in the 22 m, 34 m, 40 m, 55 m
and 65 m samples. For each selected depth, 1 L of each
triplicate water sample was directly filtered through sep-
arate 0.22-μm pore size Sterivex filters and then stored
below – 50 °C until nucleic acid extraction.
Nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) of two of the replicates
samples per depth were extracted from the same Steri-
vex filters using Qiagen Allprep DNA/RNA Mini Kit.
The Sterivex cartridges were opened and the membrane
filters were cut into small pieces before the lysis steps, as
previously described [44].  All steps of the nucleic acid
extractions, from the opening of the filters to the nucleic
acid resuspension in autoclaved, filtered and UV-treated
water, were carried out in a sterile laminar flow cabinet.
Negative control (no template) of nucleic acids extrac-
tion was simultaneously carried out. The DNA extracts
were stored at – 20 °C until library preparation. For
RNA extracts, two additional DNase steps (DNase I,
Ambion, Foster City, CA, USA) were carried out to re-
move any trace of carried over DNA. The absence of
DNA contamination was confirmed by amplification of
16S rRNA genes with bacterial primers using the RNA
extracts (undiluted and diluted 10 times) as template,
with no product detected after 35 PCR cycles. The RNA
was then immediately converted to cDNA using a High-
Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Applied Bio-
systems, Foster City, CA, USA) and stored as cDNA at −
20 °C until library preparation.
Quantitative PCR
The abundance of bacterial and archaeal 16S rRNA
genes was estimated on the two replicate samples per
depth using quantitative PCR (qPCR) with primers
Bact1369f/Bact1492r [45] and Arc787f/Arc1059r [46],
respectively. Quantification was performed in triplicate
with a range of template concentrations (0.1, 0.5, 1 ng of
DNA) to compensate for any PCR inhibition. Genomic
DNA extracted from Methylomonas methanica
(DSM25384) and Methanosarcina acetivorans
(DSM2834) were serially diluted to construct standard
curves (concentration ranged from 102 to 106 16S rRNA
genes per reaction). The R2 of standard curves obtained
Page 12
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 12 of 14
by qPCR were above 0.99, PCR efficiencies were above
88.7%,  and melting curves showed no trace of non-
specific amplifications. Threshold cycle (Ct) of the sam-
ples ranged from 15 to 25 cycles whereas Ct of negative
controls (water) were all after 37 cycles. The qPCR re-
sults were expressed in terms of 16S rRNA gene num-
bers per millilitre of water sample (Fig. 1d).
Illumina MiSeq Amplicon library preparation, sequencing
and analysis
Microbial community composition of the samples was
determined by high-throughput sequencing of bacterial
and archaeal 16S rRNA (cDNA) and 16S rRNA genes
(DNA) using primers targeting the bacterial V4–V5 re-
gion (S-D-Bact-0516-a-S-18/S-D-Bact-0907-a-A-20; 460
bp product) [47] and the archaeal V1–V3 region (A27F/
Arc518R; 500 bp),  respectively [48].  All PCR reactions
were carried out following [49].  Samples and negative
controls of nucleic acids extraction, transcription and
PCRs were sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq v3 kit at
the IBIS/Laval University, Plate-forme d’Analyses Géno-
miques (Québec, QC). Reads were assembled into single
paired-end sequences, curated and clustered into OTUs
(97% sequence similarity) as detailed in a GitHub reposi-
tory ([URL: "https://github.com/CruaudPe/MiSeq_Multigenique"] https: / /github. com/ CruaudPe/ MiSeq_
Multigenique). OTUs detected in negative controls were
removed from the analysis as described [27]. Taxonomic
affiliations of the reads were determined with Mothur
[50] using BLAST against Silva database release 132 as
reference [51].
Metagenomic library preparation, sequencing and
analysis
One metagenome per sample depth (8 metagenomes)
was constructed using a Nextera XT Library Kit (Illu-
mina, San Diego, CA, USA). The 8 metagenomes were
pooled equimolarly then sequenced in two Illumina
MiSeq (2 × 300 bp) runs and one Illumina NexSeq run
(2 × 150 bp) at the Institut de Biologie Integrative et des
Systèmes (IBIS) sequencing platform (Université Laval,
Canada) and at the CGEB–Integrated Microbiome Re-
source (Dalhousie University, Canada),  respectively.
Datasets were quality filtered using the Trimmomatic
tool [52],  with default settings. Paired-end joining was
done using FLASH2 [53].  The 16S rRNA reads longer
than 110 bp were isolated from metagenomic reads
using REAGO 1.1 [54], and taxonomic assignments were
performed as for the 16S rRNA gene amplicons.
Each metagenome was assembled separately from
paired-end reads passing quality filtering using SPAdes
[55].  Assembled contigs and mapping files (BAM files
generated using BBmap) were uploaded to the Depart-
ment of Energy Joint Genome Institute (DOE-JGI) IMG/
MER analysis pipeline [56] for gene calling and 
functional annotation. To account for differences in se-
quencing depth between samples, metagenomes were
normalised to the size of the smallest dataset.
Binning and functional characterization
For metagenome assembled genome reconstruction, all
quality filtered sequences were pooled and co-assembled
using MEGAHIT [57]. Read coverage of the contigs was
carried out using bwa-mem ([URL: "http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net"] http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.
net), followed by contig binning using MetaBAT-2 [58]
with contigs longer than 2000 bp. The completeness and
contamination level of the combined genomic bins were
then evaluated using CheckM [59].  Only bins with a
contamination level under 5% and completeness above
50% were analysed. Genetic composition of genomic
bins was then explored using KEGG [25] and MetaCyc
[60] pathway mappers with genes identified by IMG/
MER in the co-assembly. The results were checked
manually and the presence of specific pathways not
characterised in the KEGG database was determined
using BLASTP with parameters detailed in the notes for
Supplementary Table 1. In addition, presence and affili-
ation of genes coding molybdenum enzymes (DMSO re-
ductase family) was investigated using GraftM and its
DMSO superfamily package [61].  Taxonomic affiliation
of the bins was based on 16S rRNA gene when present
in the bin as well as on taxonomic affiliation and phylo-
genetic analysis of ribosomal protein genes. Protein se-
quence alignments were performed using Clustal Omega
[62] and phylogenetic tree of concatenated sequences of
ribosomal protein alignment and otr protein sequence
alignment were conducted using FastTree 2 [63] with
the JTT+CAT model and visualised using iTOL [64].
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses of the data set (Student’s t test, non-
parametric multivariate analysis of variance (NPMA
NOVA),  Bray-Curtis-based dissimilarity index calcula-
tions and correlation-based clustering, non-metric multi-
dimensional scale (NMDS)) were carried out according
to recommendations of the Guide to Statistical Analysis
in Microbial Ecology [65],  using PAST software [66].
Sulfur cycling network was represented using the soft-
ware environment R implemented with the igraph pack-
age [67].
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at [URL: "https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-021-00999-x"] https://doi.
 org/10.1186/s40168-021-00999-x.
Additional file 1: Supplementary Figure S1. Heatmap representing
the bacterial community composition in each sample determined using
16S rRNA gene (D), 16S rRNA (R) and 16S rRNA reads recovered from
metagenomic data (M). Results of the two duplicate samples are shown
for 16S rRNA gene and 16s rRNA. Only lineages with relative abundance
Page 13
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 13 of 14
>1% in at least one sample are shown. The right part of the graph
represents the bacterial 16S rRNA gene quantification in the duplicate
samples (blue bars), as well as the relative proportion between bacteria
and archaea determined by 16S rRNA gene qPCR quantification (D; red
bars) and in the metagenomic dataset (M; purple bar).
Additional file 2: Supplementary Figure S2. Relative proportion of
bacterial lineages obtained with the different molecular approaches a)
Relative proportion of bacterial lineages observed in the rRNA gene
amplicon dataset and rRNA amplicon dataset. b) Relative proportion of
bacterial lineages observed in the rRNA gene amplicon dataset and in
the metagenomic dataset. Each point represents a bacterial lineage as
defined in Supplementary Figure S1. Points are color coded according to
their sample of origin.
Additional file 3: Supplementary Figure S3. Phylogenetic tree of the
octaheme c-type cytochrome tetrathionate reductase genes (Otr). The
tree is rooted with octaheme c-type cytochrome nitrite reductase.
Additional file 4: Supplementary Figure S4. Phylogenetic tree of the
genomic bins. The tree is based on concatenated alignment of ribosomal
protein genes. Only bins with more than 50% of the ribosomal protein
genes are included in the tree. The branches are color coded according
to the taxonomy in Fig. 1.
Additional file 5: Supplementary Table S1. Description of the
genomic bins with sulfur-cycling genes identified in the Lake A micro-
biome presented in Figure 3.
Abbreviations
S: Sulfur; OSM: Organo-sulfur molecules; SCI: Sulfur cycle intermediate;
DMS: Dimethylsulfide; DMSP: Dimethylsulfoniopropionate;
DMSO: Dimethylsulfoxide; OTU: Operational taxonomic unit;
qPCR: Quantitative polymerase chain reaction; NMDS: Non-metric
multidimensional scaling; NPMANOVA: Non-parametric multivariate analysis
of variance; MSBL: Mediterranean Sea Brine Lake; Ca.: Candidatus;
BLAST: Basic Local Alignment Search Tool; PAR: Photosynthetically available
radiation
Acknowledgements
We thank Denis Sarrazin (Centre d’études nordiques) and members of the
Culley Viral Discovery and Ecology Laboratory (ViDEL) for assisting the
sampling effort, Parks Canada for access to facilities, Polar Continental Shelf
Program and Canadian Helicopter Ltd. for the logistic support, and Calcul
Quebec for computing resources and technical support.
Authors’ contributions
A.V. and W.F.V. designed the research. W.F.V. and A.I.C obtained funding,
logistics and permits for the research. A.I.C. and W.F.V. conducted the field
sampling. A.V. generated the molecular data. A.V. and P.C. analysed the data.
A.V. wrote the paper with W.F.V., C.L., P.C., R.-M.C. and A.I.C. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This work was supported by the program Sentinel North financed by the
Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF); the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC); the CNR (Italy)–Université
Laval UMI-MicroMeNu program; the fond de Recherche du Quebec Nature
et Technologies (FQRNT); and the Network of Centres of Excellence
ArcticNet.
Availability of data and materials
Assembled metagenome data are available in IMG/MR ([URL: "https://img.jgi.doe.gov/mer/"] https://img.jgi.doe.
 gov/mer/) under the following accession numbers: 3300033443, 3300033444,
3300033445, 3300033439, 3300033411, 3300033473, 3300033474 and
3300033495. Co-assembly is also available on IMG/MR under accession num-
ber 3300033064. Raw amplicon sequences and bin files were deposited in
the NCBI public database under Bioproject PRJNA616293 ([URL: "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA616293"] https://www.ncbi.
 nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA616293). In-house scripts used in this study are
available on GitHub/CruaudPe. Environmental metadata were previously
published [21] and additional data are available in the Nordicana D database
([URL: "http://www.cen.ulaval.ca/nordicanad"] http://www.cen.ulaval.ca/nordicanad). 
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All necessary permits were obtained for this study, specifically a Nunavut
Research License for research in Nunavut, and a Parks Canada Research and
Collection Permit, for sampling in Quttinirpaaq National Park.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author details
1Département de Biologie, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada. 2Centre
d’études nordiques (CEN), Takuvik Joint International Laboratory, Université
Laval, Québec, QC, Canada. 3Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes,
Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada. 4Département de Biochimie, de
Microbiologie et de Bio-informatique, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
5Département de Chimie, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada. 6Québec
Océan, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
Received: 17 November 2020 Accepted: 4 January 2021
References
1.  Jørgensen BB, Findlay AJ, Pellerin A. The biogeochemical sulfur cycle of
marine sediments. Front Microbiol. 2019;10:849.
2.  Amend JP, Aronson HS, Macalady J, LaRowe DE. Another chemolithotrophic
metabolism missing in nature: sulfur comproportionation. Environ Microbiol.
2020;22:1971–6.
3.  Wasmund K, Mußmann M, Loy A. The life sulfuric: microbial ecology of
sulfur cycling in marine sediments. Environ Microbiol Rep. 2017;9:323–44.
4.  Bowles MW, Mogollón JM, Kasten S, Zabel M, Hinrichs K-U. Global rates of
marine sulfate reduction and implications for sub–sea-floor metabolic
activities. Science. 2014;344:889.
5.  Sievert SM, Hügler M, Taylor CD, Wirsen CO. Sulfur oxidation at deep-sea
hydrothermal vents. In: Dahl C, Friedrich CG, editors. Microb Sulfur Metab.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2008. p. 238–58.
6.  Anantharaman K, Hausmann B, Jungbluth SP, Kantor RS, Lavy A, Warren LA,
et al. Expanded diversity of microbial groups that shape the dissimilatory
sulfur cycle. ISME J. 2018;12:1715–28.
7.  Vigneron A, Cruaud P, Alsop E, de Rezende JR, Head IM, Tsesmetzis N.
Beyond the tip of the iceberg; a new view of the diversity of sulfite- and
sulfate-reducing microorganisms. ISME J. 2018;12:2096–9.
8.  Findlay AJ, Kamyshny A. Turnover rates of intermediate sulfur species (Sx2-
S0, S2
O32-
, S4
O62-
, SO32-
) in anoxic freshwater and sediments. Front
Microbiol. 2017;8:2551.
9.  Rickard D, Morse JW. Acid volatile sulfide (AVS). Mar Chem. 2005;97:141–97.
10. Jørgensen BB. A thiosulfate shunt in the sulfur cycle of marine sediments.
Science. 1990;249:152.
11. Wang R, Lin J-Q, Liu X-M, Pang X, Zhang C-J, Yang C-L, et al. Sulfur
oxidation in the acidophilic autotrophic Acidithiobacillus spp. Front
Microbiol. 2019;9:3290.
12. Fakhraee M, Li J, Katsev S. Significant role of organic sulfur in supporting
sedimentary sulfate reduction in low-sulfate environments. Geochim
Cosmochim Acta. 2017;213:502–16.
13. Couture R-M, Fischer R, Van Cappellen P, Gobeil C. Non-steady state
diagenesis of organic and inorganic sulfur in lake sediments. Geochim
Cosmochim Acta. 2016;194:15–33.
14. Landa M, Burns AS, Durham BP, Esson K, Nowinski B, Sharma S, et al. Sulfur
metabolites that facilitate oceanic phytoplankton–bacteria carbon flux. ISME
J. 2019;13:2536–50.
15. Hausmann B, Pelikan C, Herbold CW, Köstlbacher S, Albertsen M, Eichorst
SA, et al. Peatland Acidobacteria with a dissimilatory sulfur metabolism.
ISME J. 2018;12:1729–42.
16. Cavicchioli R. Microbial ecology of Antarctic aquatic systems. Nat Rev
Microbiol. 2015;13:691–706.
17. Lauro FM, DeMaere MZ, Yau S, Brown MV, Ng C, Wilkins D, et al. An integrative
study of a meromictic lake ecosystem in Antarctica. ISME J. 2011;5:879–95.
18. Peduzzi S, Tonolla M, Hahn D. Isolation and characterization of aggregate-
forming sulfate-reducing and purple sulfur bacteria from the chemocline of
meromictic Lake Cadagno, Switzerland. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2003;45:29–37.
Page 14
Vigneron et al. Microbiome (2021) 9:46  Page 14 of 14
19. Pjevac P, Korlević M, Berg JS, Bura-Nakić E, Ciglenečki I, Amann R, et al.
Community shift from phototrophic to chemotrophic sulfide oxidation
following anoxic holomixis in a stratified seawater lake. Appl Environ
Microbiol. 2015;81:298.
20. Mas J, Van Gemerden H. Storage products in purple and green sulfur bacteria.
In: Blankenship RE, Madigan MT, Bauer CE, editors. Anoxygenic Photosynthetic
Bacteria. [Internet]. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands; 1995. p. 973–90.
21. Gibson JAE, Vincent WF, Van Hove P, Belzile C, Wang X, Muir D.
Geochemistry of ice-covered, meromictic Lake A in the Canadian High
Arctic. Aquat Geochem. 2002;8:97–119.
22. Blazewicz SJ, Barnard RL, Daly RA, Firestone MK. Evaluating rRNA as an
indicator of microbial activity in environmental communities: limitations
and uses. ISME J. 2013;7:2061.
23. Koch T, Dahl C. A novel bacterial sulfur oxidation pathway provides a new
link between the cycles of organic and inorganic sulfur compounds. ISME J.
2018;12:2479–91.
24. van Vliet DM, von Meijenfeldt FAB, Dutilh BE, Villanueva L, Sinninghe
Damsté JS, Stams AJM, et al. The bacterial sulfur cycle in expanding dysoxic
and euxinic marine waters. Environ Microbiol. n/a. Available from: [URL: "https://sfamjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1462-2920.15265"] https://sfa
 mjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1462-2920.15265.
25. Kanehisa M, Araki M, Goto S, Hattori M, Hirakawa M, Itoh M, et al. KEGG for linking
genomes to life and the environment. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008;36:D480–4.
26. Motl N, Skiba MA, Kabil O, Smith JL, Banerjee R. Structural and biochemical
analyses indicate that a bacterial persulfide dioxygenase–rhodanese fusion
protein functions in sulfur assimilation. J Biol Chem. 2017;292:14026–38.
27. Atkinson SJ, Mowat CG, Reid GA, Chapman SK. An octaheme c-type
cytochrome from Shewanella oneidensis can reduce nitrite and
hydroxylamine. FEBS Lett. 2007;581:3805–8.
28. Charvet S, Vincent WF, Comeau A, Lovejoy C. Pyrosequencing analysis of
the protist communities in a High Arctic meromictic lake: DNA preservation
and change. Front Microbiol. 2012;3:422.
29. Tran P, Ramachandran A, Khawasek O, Beisner BE, Rautio M, Huot Y, et al.
Microbial life under ice: Metagenome diversity and in situ activity of
Verrucomicrobia in seasonally ice-covered lakes. Environ Microbiol. 2018:2568–84.
30. Vigneron A, Lovejoy C, Cruaud P, Kalenitchenko D, Culley A, Vincent WF.
Contrasting winter versus summer microbial communities and metabolic
functions in a permafrost thaw lake. Front Microbiol. 2019;10:1656.
31. Cruaud P, Vigneron A, Fradette M-S, Dorea CC, Culley AI, Rodriguez MJ, et al.
Annual bacterial community cycle in a seasonally ice-covered river reflects
environmental and climatic conditions. Limnol Oceanogr. 2020;65:S21-37.
32. Ng C, DeMaere MZ, Williams TJ, Lauro FM, Raftery M, Gibson JA, et al.
Metaproteogenomic analysis of a dominant green sulfur bacterium from
Ace Lake, Antarctica. ISME J. 2010;4:1002–19.
33. Yurkova N, Rathgeber C, Swiderski J, Stackebrandt E, Beatty JT, Hall KJ, et al.
Diversity, distribution and physiology of the aerobic phototrophic bacteria in
the mixolimnion of a meromictic lake. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2002;40:191–204.
34. Hawley AK, Nobu MK, Wright JJ, Durno WE, Morgan-Lang C, Sage B, et al.
Diverse Marinimicrobia bacteria may mediate coupled biogeochemical
cycles along eco-thermodynamic gradients. Nat Commun. 2017;8:1507.
35. Wright JJ, Konwar KM, Hallam SJ. Microbial ecology of expanding oxygen
minimum zones. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012;10:381–94.
36. Nunoura T, Takaki Y, Hirai M, Shimamura S, Makabe A, Koide O, et al. Hadal
biosphere: Insight into the microbial ecosystem in the deepest ocean on
Earth. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2015;112:E1230.
37. Pachiadaki MG, Yakimov MM, LaCono V, Leadbetter E, Edgcomb V.
Unveiling microbial activities along the halocline of Thetis, a deep-sea
hypersaline anoxic basin. ISME J. 2014;8:2478–89.
38. Vigneron A, Alsop EB, Cruaud P, Philibert G, King B, Baksmaty L, et al.
Comparative metagenomics of hydrocarbon and methane seeps of the Gulf
of Mexico. Sci Rep. 2017;7:16015.
39. Sackett JD, Kruger BR, Becraft ED, Jarett JK, Stepanauskas R, Woyke T, et al.
Four draft single-cell genome sequences of novel, nearly identical
Kiritimatiellaeota strains isolated from the continental deep subsurface.
Microbiol Resour Announc. 2019;8:e01249–e01218.
40. Toesch M, Schober M, Faber K. Microbial alkyl- and aryl-sulfatases:
mechanism, occurrence, screening and stereoselectivities. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol. 2014;98:1485–96.
41. Sunda W, Kieber DJ, Kiene RP, Huntsman S. An antioxidant function for
DMSP and DMS in marine algae. Nature. 2002;418:317–20.
42. Kiene RP, Linn LJ, Bruton JA. New and important roles for DMSP in marine
microbial communities. J Sea Res. 2000;43:209–24. 
43. Durham BP, Sharma S, Luo H, Smith CB, Amin SA, Bender SJ, et al. Cryptic
carbon and sulfur cycling between surface ocean plankton. Proc Natl Acad
Sci. 2015;112:453.
44. Cruaud, Vigneron, Fradette, Charette, Rodriguez, Dorea CC, et al. Open the
SterivexTM casing: An easy and effective way to improve DNA extraction
yields. Limnol Oceanogr Methods. 2017;15:1015–20.
45. Suzuki MT, Taylor LT, DeLong EF. Quantitative analysis of small-subunit rRNA
genes in mixed microbial populations via 5′-nuclease assays. Appl Environ
Microbiol. 2000;66:4605–14.
46. Yu Y, Lee C, Kim J, Hwang S. Group-specific primer and probe sets to detect
methanogenic communities using quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2005;89:670–9.
47. Klindworth A, Pruesse E, Schweer T, Peplies J, Quast C, Horn M, et al. Evaluation
of general 16S ribosomal RNA gene PCR primers for classical and next-
generation sequencing-based diversity studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41:e1.
48. Teske A, Sorensen KB. Uncultured archaea in deep marine subsurface
sediments: have we caught them all? ISME J. 2007;2:3–18.
49. Vigneron A, Alsop EB, Lomans BP, Kyrpides NC, Head IM, Tsesmetzis N.
Succession in the petroleum reservoir microbiome through an oil field
production lifecycle. ISME J. 2017;11:2141.
50. Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M, Hollister EB, et al.
Introducing mothur: open-source, platform-independent, community-
supported software for describing and comparing microbial communities.
Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009;75:7537–41.
51. Pruesse E, Quast C, Knittel K, Fuchs BM, Ludwig W, Peplies J, et al. SILVA: a
comprehensive online resource for quality checked and aligned ribosomal
RNA sequence data compatible with ARB. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35:7188–96.
52. Bolger AM, Lohse M, Usadel B. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina
sequence data. Bioinformatics. 2014;30:2114–20.
53. Magoč T, Salzberg SL. FLASH: fast length adjustment of short reads to
improve genome assemblies. Bioinformatics. 2011;27:2957–63.
54. Yuan C, Lei J, Cole J, Sun Y. Reconstructing 16S rRNA genes in
metagenomic data. Bioinformatics. 2015;31:i35–43.
55. Bankevich A, Nurk S, Antipov D, Gurevich AA, Dvorkin M, Kulikov AS, et al.
SPAdes: A new genome assembly algorithm and its applications to single-
cell sequencing. J Comput Biol. 2012;19:455–77.
56. Markowitz VM, Mavromatis K, Ivanova NN, Chen I-MA, Chu K, Kyrpides NC.
IMG ER: a system for microbial genome annotation expert review and
curation. Bioinformatics. 2009;25:2271–8.
57. Li D, Liu C-M, Luo R, Sadakane K, Lam T-W. MEGAHIT: An ultra-fast single-
node solution for large and complex metagenomics assembly via succinct
de Bruijn graph. Bioinformatics. 2015;2015(31):1674–6.
58. Kang DD, Froula J, Egan R, Wang Z. MetaBAT, an efficient tool for accurately
reconstructing single genomes from complex microbial communities. PeerJ.
2015;3:e1165.
59. Parks DH, Imelfort M, Skennerton CT, Hugenholtz P, Tyson GW. CheckM:
assessing the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates, single
cells, and metagenomes. Genome Res. 2015;25:1043–55.
60. Caspi R, Altman T, Billington R, Dreher K, Foerster H, Fulcher CA, et al. The
MetaCyc database of metabolic pathways and enzymes and the BioCyc
collection of Pathway/Genome Databases. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42:D459–71.
61. Boyd JA, Woodcroft BJ, Tyson GW. GraftM: a tool for scalable,
phylogenetically informed classification of genes within metagenomes.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2018;46:e59.
62. Sievers F, Higgins DG. Clustal Omega for making accurate alignments of
many protein sequences. Protein Sci. 2018;27:135–45.
63. Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP. FastTree 2 - approximately maximum-
likelihood trees for large alignments. PLoS One. 2010;5:e9490.
64. Letunic I, Bork P. Interactive Tree Of Life (iTOL) v4: recent updates and new
developments. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019;47:W256–9.
65. Buttigieg PL, Ramette A. A guide to statistical analysis in microbial ecology:
a community-focused, living review of multivariate data analyses. FEMS
Microbiol Ecol. 2014;90:543–50.
66. Hammer Ø, Harper D, Ryan P. PAST-palaeontological statistics, ver. 1.89.
Palaeontol Electron. 2001;4:1–9.
67. Csárdi G, Nepusz T. The igraph software package for complex network
research; 2006.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
