Framingham Community Preservation Committee 
 Community Preservation Committee Website
Thomas Mahoney, Chair
Judy Grove, Vice Chair
Liz Kaprielian, Clerk
Shannon Stevens, Finance Administrator
T.J. Liveston
Joseph Norton
Steve Starr
Doug Stephan
Fred Wallace 
MINUTES: March 14th, 2022
REMOTE
7:00 PM
Approved: March 28th, 2022
Committee Members Participating Remotely: Thomas Mahoney, Judy Grove, Liz Kaprielian, Shannon Stevens, T.J. 
Liveston, Joe Norton, and Steve Starr. Doug Stephan and Fred Wallace were not present. Mr. Liveston left at 7:47
PM and returned at 7:49 PM. 
CALL TO ORDER 
At 7:02 PM Mr. Mahoney called the meeting to order, began the meeting recording and read the agenda. 
7:03 PM PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
No members of the public were present. 
7:04 PM DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 12 of Full Application (BGM1) 
Ms. Kaprielian presented DRAFT 12 of Full Application (BGM1). Committee members recommended some
wording changes and discussed online capabilities of the application form, steps in the application process, 
timing for notifying applicants, typed versus handwritten applications, translation of applications and
submissions into other languages, and funding processes. 
8:10 PM DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 2 of Historic Preservation Section
Mr. Mahoney will inquire about the most recent draft from Mr. Wallace. 
8:12 PM DISCUSSION - Final Version of Tax Bill Insert (BGM2) 
The Treasurer’s Office requested a draft within a few days of the last meeting, so Mr. Mahoney, Ms. Grove, Ms. 
Stevens, and Ms. Kaprielian had to quickly put it together and were not able to bring it to the CPC for approval. 
Committee members discussed the content of the next insert and the possibility of translating it into other
languages. 
8:20 PM DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 2b Voice Mail Greeting on Office Phone (BGM3) 
Committee members discussed removing the second paragraph from the DRAFT 2b Voice Mail Greeting to be
more concise. 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 1 of 3  Updated 3/28/2022 
Page 2
Motion to accept DRAFT 2b of the Voice Mail Greeting with the second paragraph removed made by Ms. Grove. 
Mr. Norton seconded. No discussion and approved by majority roll call vote: Mr. Mahoney, aye, Ms. Grove, aye, 
Ms. Stevens, aye, Ms. Kaprielian, aye, Mr. Liveston, aye, Mr. Starr, aye, Mr. Norton, aye. 
8:32 PM DISCUSSION – Review of In-Person Meetings – sponsor will not be present. 
Committee members discussed preferences on remote, hybrid, or in-person meetings. Committee members
generally agreed hybrid meetings would suit everyone’s preferences. Mr. Stephan and Mr. Wallace were not
present, so committee members decided to wait on a final decision. 
8:44 PM DISCUSSION – Review of Amendment to CPC Rules by adding Public-Facing Content (BGM4) 
Ms. Stevens presented the Amendment to CPC Rules by adding Public-Facing Content (BGM4). Committee
members replaced rule #11 under “All CPC Members” regarding approval CPC approval of web content with the
following: 
All public facing media will be reviewed and approved prior to distribution, publication, or dissemination, by a
quorum of the Framingham Community Preservation Committee (CPC) 
*Public Facing Media includes, but is not limited to any CPC related printed, spoken, audio, video content, made
available to any citizen outside of the CPC members. 
Committee members discussed whether the new rule would be too restrictive. 
Motion to replace rule #11 under “All CPC Members” and accept the new rule on public-facing media in its place
made by Ms. Kaprielian. Mr. Liveston seconded. Approved by majority roll call vote: Mr. Mahoney, nay, Ms. 
Grove, aye, Ms. Stevens, aye, Ms. Kaprielian, aye, Mr. Liveston, aye, Mr. Starr, aye, Mr. Norton, aye. Mr. Stephan
and Mr. Wallace were not present. 
8:56 PM Extend Meeting to 9:15 PM
Motion to extend the meeting to 9:15 PM made by Ms. Grove. Ms. Kaprielian seconded. No discussion and
approved by majority roll call vote: Mr. Mahoney, aye, Ms. Grove, aye, Ms. Stevens, aye, Ms. Kaprielian, aye, Mr. 
Liveston, aye, Mr. Starr, aye, Mr. Norton, aye. 
9:02 PM DISCUSSION – Updates from Working Groups
CPP Introduction: No update. 
Open Space/Recreation: No update. 
Community Housing: A draft will be prepared for discussion at the March 28, 2022 meeting. 
Historic Preservation: See DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 2 of Historic Preservation Section at 8:10 PM 
Application Form & Process: See DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 12 of Full Application (BGM1) at 7:04 PM
General Criteria: No update. 
Rules: See DISCUSSION – Review of Amendment to CPC Rules by adding Public-Facing Content (BGM4) at
8:44 PM
Finance: Ms. Stevens has discussed estimated taxes for FY23 with Carolyn Lyons, but is waiting on 3rd 
quarter numbers. Mr. Mahoney suggested discussing the budget at a future meeting. 
Public Relations: No update. 
Admin - Web report: No update. 
Admin - Staffing: Mr. Mahoney will have a draft prepared for the March 28, 2022 meeting. 
8:56 PM DISCUSSION - Calendar Review (BGM4) 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 2 of 3  Updated 3/28/2022 
Page 3
To discuss at the 3/28 meeting: Community Housing, Historic Preservation, Introduction, full draft of CPP, 
Appendix/Glossary, admin job description, and FAQ. 
9:08 PM Report from Chair/Vice Chair
Mr. Mahoney suggested adding a discussion item on the budget to a future meeting. 
Ms. Grove informed the Committee that DEP is holding a meeting on polluted sites in Framingham. 
9:09 PM Member Prerogatives
Committee members had no comments. 
TO DO’s Arising from the Meeting
1. Add to the March 28, 2022 agenda
a. DISCUSSION – Yearly “Window” for CPA Project Consideration 
b. DISCUSSION – Budget 
2. Documents expected for the March 28, 2022 meeting: 
a. Community Housing
b. Historic Preservation
c. Introduction
d. full draft of CPP
e. Appendix/Glossary
f. Admin job description
g. FAQ
h. Abatements/exemptions
9:09 PM Approve Minutes from February 28, 2022 meeting
Motion to approve Minutes from the February 28, 2022 meeting made by Ms. Stevens. Ms. Grove seconded. No
discussion and approved by majority roll call vote: Mr. Mahoney, aye, Ms. Grove, aye, Ms. Stevens, aye, Ms. 
Kaprielian, aye, Mr. Liveston, aye, Mr. Starr, abstain, Mr. Norton, aye. 
ADJOURN
Mr. Starr is retiring from the Housing Authority and CPC. Committee members thanked him for his service. 
9:11 PM Motion to Adjourn made by Ms. Grove. Mr. Liveston seconded. No discussion and approved by majority
roll call vote: Mr. Mahoney, aye, Ms. Grove, aye, Ms. Stevens, aye, Ms. Kaprielian, aye, Mr. Liveston, aye, Mr. 
Starr, aye, Mr. Norton, aye. 
Minutes prepared by Catie Colliton
Respectfully submitted by Liz Kaprielian, Clerk, Community Preservation Committee
Refer to the [URL: "http://framinghamma.iqm2.com/citizens/default.aspx?"] Public Meeting Portal for more information regarding Community Preservation Committee meetings, 
including full video recordings for remotely held meetings. 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 3 of 3  Updated 3/28/2022 
