Framingham Community Preservation Committee 
 Community Preservation Committee Website
Thomas Mahoney, Chair
Judy Grove, Vice Chair
Liz Kaprielian, Clerk
Shannon Stevens, Finance Administrator
T.J. Liveston
Joseph Norton
Doug Stephan
Fred Wallace 
MINUTES: March 28th, 2022
REMOTE
7:00 PM
Approved: April 11th, 2022
Committee Members Participating Remotely: Thomas Mahoney, Judy Grove, Liz Kaprielian, Shannon Stevens, T.J. 
Liveston, Doug Stephan, and Joe Norton. Fred Wallace was not present. Ms. Kaprielian arrived at 7:04 PM. Mr. 
Stephan arrived at 7:08 PM and left at 8:08 PM. 
CALL TO ORDER 
At 7:01 PM Mr. Mahoney called the meeting to order, began the meeting recording and read the agenda. 
7:03 PM PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
A member of the public was present later in the evening, after Public Participation had ended. 
7:03 PM DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 8 of Community Housing Section (BGM1) 
Mr. Mahoney presented the draft. Karen Margolis, former Framingham planner for the Planning Board , assisted
with many figures and other information in this draft. Committee members requested more information on
demographics and low-income housing, as well as tables and graphs to break up the text. Committee members
also discussed the extent of time and work needed for this section and other sections of the CPP. 
7:21 PM DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 6 of Historic Preservation Section (BGM2) 
Ms. Kaprielian presented the draft. Committee members requested additional information on the history of
Native Americans, industry, and development in Framingham, as well as a timeline to frame the history. 
Committee members also discussed the extent of time and work needed for this section. 
7:33 PM DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 1 of CPP Sections: Intro, full CPP document and Appendix/Glossary
(BGM3) 
Ms. Stevens reviewed the table of contents. Committee members were supportive of the draft and suggested
adding a letter to applicants for the beginning of the document. 
7:45 PM DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 4 of Administrative Job Description (BGM4) 
Mr. Mahoney presented the draft. Committee members discussed the oversight of the employee, working
hours, and wording of the job description. Mr. Mahoney will clarify the standard wording for similar positions
with Human Resources. 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 1 of 3  Updated 4/11/2022 
Page 2
8:03 PM DISCUSSION – Review of DRAFT 4 – FAQs (BGM5) 
Ms. Kaprielian presented the draft. Committee members can send comments to Mr. Mahoney and Ms. Kaprielian
to incorporate at the next meeting. 
8:08 PM DISCUSSION – Review of In Person Meetings
Mr. Stephan left the meeting, so Mr. Mahoney suggested tabling the discussion for later. 
8:09 PM DISCUSSION – Review of Amendment to CPC Rules by adding Attendance Notification (BGM6) 
Ms. Stevens presented the proposed addition to the General Meeting Rules. Committee members adjusted the
wording to be more flexible: 
4. In the event a member is unable to attend a scheduled meeting, the chair or vice chair must be notified
within 24 hours prior to the next meeting or as soon as possible. 
Motion to accept the new rule with the amended wording made by Ms. Kaprielian. Mr. Norton seconded. No
discussion and approved by majority roll call vote: Mr. Mahoney, aye, Ms. Grove, aye, Ms. Stevens, aye, Ms. 
Kaprielian, aye, Mr. Liveston, aye, and Mr. Norton, aye. Mr. Stephan and Mr. Wallace were not present. 
8:16 PM DISCUSSION – Updates from Working Groups
CPP Introduction: See DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 1 of CPP Sections: Intro, full CPP document and
Appendix/Glossary (BGM3) at 7:33 PM
Open Space/Recreation: Ms. Grove is working on making corrections and adding more photos and tables. 
Community Housing: See DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 8 of Community Housing Section (BGM1) at
7:03 PM
Historic Preservation: See DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 6 of Historic Preservation Section (BGM2) at
7:21 PM 
Application Form & Process: Committee members discussed application deadlines. Some communities
have rolling applications, though Framingham’s ordinance requires presentations to city council once a
year. A CPC employee working group discussed this at a recent meeting. Ms. Stevens suggested adding a
discussion item for a project timing proposal at a future meeting. 
General Criteria: No update. 
Rules: See DISCUSSION - Review of Amendment to CPC Rules by adding Attendance Notification (BGM6) 
at 8:09 PM
Finance: Ms. Stevens is working on the budget, but is waiting on preliminary projections for the CPA
revenue to finalize it. Mr. Mahoney added that Department of Revenue (DOR) match funding would also
need to be considered. 
Public Relations: No update. 
Admin - Web report: Ms. Kaprielian discussed website and online form possibilities with Technology
Services. Translation services may need to be budgeted for in the future, though the mayor’s office has
some funding for it now. 
Admin - Staffing: See DISCUSSION - Review of DRAFT 4 Administrative Job Description (BGM4) at 7:45 PM
8:29 PM DISCUSSION - Calendar Review (BGM4) 
To discuss at the April 11, 2022 meeting: Community Housing, Historic Preservation, Introduction, FAQ and
project timing. 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 2 of 3  Updated 4/11/2022 
Page 3
8:35 PM Report from Chair/Vice Chair
Mr. Mahoney attended the CPC employee forum, which meets monthly. He will look into sharing upcoming
meeting information. Mr. Mahoney said the CPA Coalition Newsletter discussed that the DOR preliminary match
funding for next year should be out shortly. 
Ms. Grove said the Coalition Newsletter discussed clarifying the criteria language for renovation, which would
change from allowing funding for renovation to not allowing unless it meets certain criteria. Ms. Grove requested
Ms. Stevens add a section to the Recreation section about the new dog park. 
8:38 PM Member Prerogatives
Ms. Stevens is planning to reach out to Keziah Franca (Citizen Participation Officer) to discuss getting diverse
community involvement. Ms. Stevens found that other CPCs take up to 2 years to start taking applications, so the
CPC is moving at a good pace. 
Ms. Kaprielian suggested discussing at a later date the other items that may need to come out of the
administrative budget. 
TO DO’s Arising from the Meeting
1. Add to the April 11, 2022 agenda
a. DISCUSSION – Review of In Person Meetings
b. DISCUSSION – Project timing
2. Documents expected for the April 11, 2022 meeting: 
a. Community Housing
b. Historic Preservation
c. Introduction
d. FAQ
8:45 PM Approve Minutes from March 11, 2022 meeting
Motion to approve Minutes from the March 11, 2022 meeting made by Mr. Norton. Ms. Stevens seconded. No
discussion and approved by majority roll call vote: Mr. Mahoney, aye, Ms. Grove, aye, Ms. Stevens, aye, Ms. 
Kaprielian, aye, Mr. Liveston, aye, Mr. Norton, aye. Mr. Stephan and Mr. Wallace were not present. 
ADJOURN
8:46 PM Motion to Adjourn made by Mr. Norton. Ms. Kaprielian seconded. No discussion and approved by
majority roll call vote: Mr. Mahoney, aye, Ms. Grove, aye, Ms. Stevens, aye, Ms. Kaprielian, aye, Mr. Liveston, 
aye, Mr. Norton, aye. Mr. Stephan and Mr. Wallace were not present. 
Minutes prepared by Catie Colliton
Respectfully submitted by Liz Kaprielian, Clerk, Community Preservation Committee
Refer to the [URL: "http://framinghamma.iqm2.com/citizens/default.aspx?"] Public Meeting Portal for more information regarding Community Preservation Committee meetings, 
including full video recordings for remotely held meetings. 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 3 of 3  Updated 4/11/2022 
