Framingham Community Preservation Committee 
 Community Preservation Committee Website
Thomas Mahoney, Chair
Judy Grove, Vice Chair
Liz Kaprielian, Clerk
Shannon Stevens, Finance Administrator
T.J. Liveston
Joseph Norton
Steve Starr
Doug Stephan
Fred Wallace 
MINUTES: January 10th, 2022
REMOTE
7:00 PM
Approved: January 10th, 2022
Committee Members Participating Remotely: Thomas Mahoney, Judy Grove, Liz Kaprielian, Shannon Stevens, 
Fred Wallace, TJ Liveston, Doug Stephan. Joe Norton and Steve Starr not in attendance. 
CALL TO ORDER 
At 7:05 PM Mr. Mahoney called the meeting to order, began the meeting recording and read the agenda. 
7:09 pm PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
Mr. Mahoney opened Public Participation by commenting that non-committee members should discuss things
pertinent to the work of the committee. 
Mr. Mahoney recognized Steve Weisman, member of the public, and asked if he wanted to speak. Mr. Weisman
said he was disappointed that the notice to explain the CPA surcharge in the City tax bill was confusing. It was a
good chance to put out better information. 
7:17 pm REVIEW & DISCUSSION - Job Description for part time Admin Staffer for CPC
Mr. Mahoney said he and Ms. Grove had met with the City’s new COO who provided a template for publication
of job descriptions. Mr. Mahoney said he will meet with the Working group to further the draft of the position. 
He said he would expect the Admin to have office space at City Hall somewhere. 
Ms. Kaprielian asked if the COO was aware that CPC currently does not have access to any CPA funds to pay an
Admin and wouldn’t until July 1, 2022 at the earliest per CPC budgeting process. Mr. Mahoney said the COO was
not aware of that. Ms. Grove said she thought there was a way to get money from the City Council in advance of
CPC having approved budget. 
Ms. Grove also said it was expressed at the last meeting that we don’t want to share this position with another
committee but that they may still need office space at City Hall. 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 1 of 6  Updated 1/19/2022 
Page 2
7:22 pm REVIEW & DISCUSSION – Public Relations/CPC Talking Points
Mr. Mahoney gave brief overview of the draft CPC PR document. It gave some historical context of how
Framingham came to adopt CPA and some key points about CPA, including how the CPA surcharge is
determined. He then asked committee members for feedback and input on the document. 
Ms. Grove said the explanation around CPA options should focus on the fact that Framingham is using the 1% 
CPA property tax surcharge, though some other cities and towns voted to use the maximum 3% CPA property tax
surcharge. Ms. Stevens strongly urged to focus on the 1% in place for Framingham. 
Mr. Mahoney confirmed the intent of this document is for committee members to use this to answer questions
in the public, though not necessarily to be posted on CPC City webpage. 
Ms. Kaprielian said document reads more like something to try and educate the public about CPC and CPA. Based
on committee discussion at prior CPC meeting, she said she thought it would be a list of obvious questions or
frequently asked questions that committee is likely to be asked right now. She said CPC needs a document that
has short clear answers to FAQ questions, in a web-based document, that committee can point people to and
also leverage wording from. It would be expected the answers in that FAQ will change and get updated over time
as CPC completes more planning steps and eventually opens the application process. The questions should be
more oriented to how the public is likely to pose the question, or already has ou on social media sites or in other
committees. The document also needs to spell out that CPC Committee members do not put thru projects; the
Community Preservation Plan provides a listing of opportunities that could be potential CPA projects should
someone in the community choose to bring them forward via the submission process. 
Mr. Stephan agreed that FAQ approach would be good. What CPC posts to the website can help people
understand that process will be open in due time. He said the CPC doesn’t need to be re-active or defensive. 
We’re a volunteer committee getting good work done. 
Ms. Grove reminded members that there is a lot of good FAQ content that can be leveraged in our document
and tailored to our use which will make it easier to come up with Framingham CPC FAQ. 
Ms. Stevens agreed we need a public facing document of FAQ’s and that a proactive approach to key information
is always more beneficial than a reactive approach to occasional comments or questions that might arise. 
7:38 pm STATUS REPORT ON CPP SECTIONS
Estimated
progress to
completion
0% 
CPP Section
CPP Introduction 
Point Person
Ms. Stevens 
90%  CPP Open Space
90%  CPP Recreation
80%  CPP Historic 
Ms. Grove
Ms. Grove
Mr. Wallace
60%  CPP Community Housing Mr. Mahoney
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 2 of 6 
Comment
will not be started till all other
sections at 80% level draft
Expects to circulate 4th draft by
1/10/22 CPC meeting. Will ask Liz
for some images to add to it. 
Might be able to circulate next draft
by 1/10/22 CPC meeting
Updated 1/19/2022 
Page 3
0%  CPP General Criteria Mr. Norton 10/27/21 Ms. Kaprielian sent the
basic criteria folded into the
Application form to help start the
General Criteria draft
80%  Appendix 1 – Plans, Docs, Ms. Stevens Many of the City plans have been
Studies  gathered
10%  CPP Glossary  Ms. Stevens Glossary should be done after other
sections are at 80% or more. 
65%  Application Forms – Pre- Ms. Kaprielian Application Forms are more like
Qualification & Full  standalone docs though may be
Application  referenced in the CPP
WORKING Group Reports
7:54 pm Rules – Ms. Stevens said Rules are currently complete 
7:55 pm Finance 
Ms. Stevens showed statement from the City Treasurer. 
She has asked the City Treasurer why there are funds listed in Installment 1 and Installment 2 sections. There
wasn’t any CPA surcharge taxes taken out for first 2 quarters for fiscal year 2022, so there should only be money
showing in Installment 3 and Installment 4 sections which cover Qtr 3 and Qtr 4 for fiscal year 2022. She is
waiting for answer back from the Treasurer regarding Installments 1 and 2. The taxes showing in Installments 3
and 4 are due by 8/1/2022 so can be used to help estimate how much of those taken in taxes will be towards
CPA. Ms. Shannon needs to research with the Community Preservation Coalition how to approach using
Treasurer’s information for CPA budgeting. She will also research when funds due by 8/1/22 would be available
for CPA project use. 
Mr. Mahoney said the dates due didn’t seem right, should be February 1, 2022 and May 1st, 2022. Ms. Stevens
said she will confirm tax due dates with the Treasurer and confirm back to the committee as well as when funds
would become available in our various CPA funds. Ms. Stevens reminded committee that there are factors that
will affect how much is taken in for CPA funds, including permitted exemptions to CPA surcharge. 
Ms. Grove said that the state match to CPA funds is additional separate add to total CPA funds committee will
consider in creating a budget. Mr. Mahoney said that Framingham will not receive any state CPA matching in
2022. There were no taxes collected for 2021 for CPA in Framingham. The state CPA match for Framingham will
only apply to 2022 CPA collected taxes, and will arrive in 2023. 
Mr. Mahoney asked Steve Weisman, member of the public on the call, to confirm if the CPA Study Group
estimates for CPA funds annual was 1.1 million. Mr. Weisman said it was more than that. Mr. Chick, member of
the public on the call, said he thought it was 1.5 million. Mr. Stephan said he agreed it was 1.5 and at one point
was even 1.8 and neither of these revenue numbers included state CPA match. Mr. Wallace said he thought the
City Revenue was estimated to be $1M and revenue from state match of approx. $500K. Mr. Chick said he
remembered it as $1.5 from the City and Mr. Stephan agreed. 
Ms. Stevens cautioned everyone to wait and see what the actual numbers are and to not use this preliminary
information in any official way. The understand of what the CPA funds will be still needs clarification and
confirmation. It is important to set expectations correctly. 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 3 of 6  Updated 1/19/2022 
Page 4
Ms. Kaprielian said the FAQ doc needs to include explanation of how the State CPA match happens and when
those funds get sent to cities and towns to set expectations appropriately. Even a question like “How much
money does CPA have to grant? “ should be tackled in some fashion. 
Ms. Grove noted that people who want abatement to CPA tax surcharge and it is unclear if they have to go thru
the onerous process currently in place for getting a standard property tax abatement. Ms. Kaprielian suggested
that the Community Preservation Coalition might have insight into that. Ms. Stevens said she will reach out to
Mr. Saginor with that question and to get better understanding of the law around it. 
Ms. Kaprielian said that many things were detailed and outlined in the CPA Study Group documents that people
are referencing in the meeting. But the material in there is now a few years old and doesn’t provide working nuts
and bolts of how parts of the final processes will work. That is the focus now for committee now, determining
and detailing all the specifics and how-to’s that citizens will ask about. 
8:08 pm Branding
Ms. Stevens requested vote on branding logo’s reviewed at last meeting. 
Ms. Grove motioned the logo’s be accepted. Seconded by Mr. Stephan. 
Roll call vote: Mr. Mahoney, aye, Ms. Groves, aye, Ms. Stevens, aye, Ms. Kaprielian, aye, Mr. Wallace, aye, Mr. 
Stephan, aye, Mr. Liveston, aye. 
8:12 pm Public Relations – Mr. Mahoney 
Mr. Mahoney says the City will help us when we have our FAQ ready. Ms. Kaprielian said she didn’t understand
what is meant by that, giving us “help”. She said when any of the CPC documents are approved by committee, 
then they are simply submitted to the City for posting to the CPC website page. So does giving us help mean
giving us our own social media account or something else. Mr. Mahoney said after our documents are posted, 
the City will use their general resources to further announce information about CPC and CPA. 
Admin - Web Report
Ms. Kaprielian said all the CPC meetings for January 2022 thru June 2022 are now posted into the Public Portal
meeting. The mini-agendas for each do include separate unique zoom meeting invites that Mr. Mahoney was
able to get setup with the City as well. City cannot provide a single unchanging ongoing Zoom link for meetings
due to cost, so each meeting requires a unique meeting link. Ms. Kaprielian reminded committee has yet to set
date for required yearly CPC public form for input which must happen by June 30, 2022, per CPA law. Holding
that meeting requires CPP and Application forms to be ready and a decision made for in person and location or
zoom only. 
Timeline/Milestones Review
Ms. Kaprielian said that while committee has been working hard to get to a point of opening the door to grant
application process within a year, given work yet to be done, that may not be feasible. Mr. Saginor has told us
before that the level of work needed to get things setup is why few new CPC’s are able to begin grant process
within their first year of forming. He has advised our committee that it is important to have the process fully
documented and understood before opening the grant process up to ensure success. 
Ms. Kaprielian said that in looking at the milestones yet to be completed, opening for grant process may not
even be possible by June 30, 2022. She said she felt that would be ok as it is key to getting the foundation set
properly first. 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 4 of 6  Updated 1/19/2022 
Page 5
Ms. Stevens agreed and said that what we are doing today is setting things up for the future with a solid
foundation. Important for us to have everything in order before we begin granting process. 
The timeline was updated, moving some things to more realistic future dates. It will be reviewed & updated
again at the January 23rd CPC meeting. 
8:27 pm report from Chair/Vice Chair
Mr. Mahoney said we don’t have any sort of central repository for working documents, including the Timeline
Calendar and suggested a Google drive. Ms. Stevens said that might not align to Open Meeting Law. The timeline
is a public document being reviewed in a public meeting. Ms. Kaprielian said CPC could choose to post the
Timeline calendar to CPC Website, where all our other documents are residing, but it is more like a working
document not a final document. Mr. Mahoney asked if he should go to City Solicitor to ask for a Google docs or
document sharing approach for committee work. If requested, the documents would have to be handed over. 
Ms. Kaprielian said that so far Timeline Calendar is the only document not posted to CPC Website, mostly
because it is an ongoing working document. Everything else for CPC goes out as background doc for meetings or
is posted on CPC website. With just 1 document at issue, she said it probably doesn’t make sense to use
Solicitor’s time. She also said this document is probably something committee needs just in year 1 to handle
tracking all the new things being created. 
Mr. Mahoney said he and Judy met in person with the COO. The COO was receptive to our Admin part-time
position and willing to help. The topic of Bonding, especially in light of possible Bruce Freeman rail trail project
down the road came up. Mr. Mahoney reminded committee that the Coalition had an upcoming Bonding
seminar for CPC committees. 
Mr. Mahoney also raised to COO, CPC’s issues and concerns in working with Technology. This included getting
CPC a general email issued by the City. Mr. Mahoney asked why that can’t be created and setup to forward to
the email of someone on CPC Committee. 
Mr. Mahoney provided COO bullet list from Ms. Kaprielian with various technology/web issues from our
committee. The COO said improving the City website is a priority and that the contract for outside firm that has
been doing web improvement work is expiring soon. So search for new vendor for that might be next step. 
Mr. Stephan stressed that there are few people now at City Hall. Staff has left or been cut and as a result, getting
anything done is a challenge. Recommended committee members send thoughts & comments to their City
Councilors to further clarify and raise the visibility of issues. 
Ms. Grove said that the Mayor’s Transition Team has criteria around Equity. This dovetails with how the
committee is incorporating aspects of equity into the CPP. 
8:46 pm Members Prerogatives
None by Mr. Wallace, Mr. Liveston, Mr. Stephan. 
Ms. Kaprielian asked whether or not CPC wants to translate final docs into other languages and decide when to
put that topic onto a meeting agenda. Mr. Stephan said diversity and bi-lingualism is important to new City Hall
administration so resource might be available to help. 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 5 of 6  Updated 1/19/2022 
Page 6
Ms. Stevens said the City has translation services right now. The topic of translation for CPC does will get added
to the Timeline as action item to consider. Ms. Stevens asked Mr. Stephan if the City’s Participation Office
position is something new City Administration is focused on or not. Mr. Stephan says only 1 application so far
and encouraged people to let others know about it. Ms. Stevens also said she does not agree with how the
committee is handling Public Participation. She asked if there are any sessions coming up for Open Meeting Law
training. That could provide more clarity around Public Participation. Mr. Mahoney said he will check with City on
that. 
TO DO’s Arising from the Meeting
1. Ms. Stevens – follow up with Treasurer about Tax Revenue estimates, especially Installment 1 and 2
a. Check with Coalition regarding abatement process for CPA surcharge. Is it the same as what
citizen has to go thru for property tax abatement
b. Email final approved CPC Logo’s to Liz K for use on future CPC documents
2. Mr. Mahoney – check with City on next Open Meeting training sessions
Approve Minutes from December 23rd , 2021 meeting
Not available to approve. 
ADJOURN
8:53 pm Motion To Adjourn made by Mr. Stephan. Ms. Stevens seconded. No discussion and approved by
majority roll call vote: Mr. Mahoney, aye, Ms. Groves, aye, Ms. Stevens, aye, Ms. Kaprielian, aye, Mr. Wallace, 
aye, Mr. Stephan, aye, Mr. Liveston, aye. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Liz Kaprielian, Clerk, Community Preservation Committee 
Refer to the [URL: "http://framinghamma.iqm2.com/citizens/default.aspx?"] Public Meeting Portal for more information regarding Community Preservation Committee meetings, 
including full video recordings for remotely held meetings. 
City of Framingham, Community Preservation Committee Page 6 of 6  Updated 1/19/2022 
