Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2015-09-15
Keywords: Eating disorders,Asia,Culture,Prevalence,Body image,Dieting,Risk factor,Development,Globalization,Westernization,Nutrition transition,Urbanization,Anorexia nervosa
CrossMarkDomains[1]: springer.com
ModDate: 2015/09/17 09:34:05+02'00'
Subject: Journal of Eating Disorders, 2015, doi:10.1186/s40337-015-0070-2
Creator: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
Title: The rise of eating disorders in Asia: a review
CrossMarkDomains[2]: springerlink.com
doi: 10.1186/s40337-015-0070-2
CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
Author: Kathleen M. Pike
CreationDate: 2015/09/15 21:25:12+08'00'
xmp:crossmark:DOI: 10.1186/s40337-015-0070-2
xmp:crossmark:MajorVersionDate: 2015-09-15
xmp:crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:crossmark:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:pdf:Keywords: Eating disorders,Asia,Culture,Prevalence,Body image,Dieting,Risk factor,Development,Globalization,Westernization,Nutrition transition,Urbanization,Anorexia nervosa
xmp:pdf:Producer: Acrobat Distiller 10.1.5 (Windows); modified using iText® 5.3.5 ©2000-2012 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkMajorVersionDate: 2015-09-15
xmp:pdfx:CrossmarkDomainExclusive: true
xmp:pdfx:doi: 10.1186/s40337-015-0070-2
xmp:pdfx:CrossMarkDomains: springer.com; springerlink.com
xmp:prism:url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40337-015-0070-2
xmp:prism:doi: 10.1186/s40337-015-0070-2
xmp:prism:issn: 2050-2974
xmp:prism:aggregationType: journal
xmp:prism:publicationName: Journal of Eating Disorders
xmp:prism:copyright: Pike and Dunne.
xmp:dc:format: application/pdf
xmp:dc:identifier: 10.1186/s40337-015-0070-2
xmp:dc:publisher: Journal of Eating Disorders
xmp:dc:description: Journal of Eating Disorders, 2015, doi:10.1186/s40337-015-0070-2
xmp:dc:subject: Eating disorders; Asia; Culture; Prevalence; Body image; Dieting; Risk factor; Development; Globalization; Westernization; Nutrition transition; Urbanization; Anorexia nervosa
xmp:dc:title: The rise of eating disorders in Asia: a review
xmp:dc:creator: Kathleen M. Pike; Patricia E. Dunne
xmp:xmp:CreatorTool: Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.440/W Unicode
xmp:xmp:ModifyDate: 2015-09-17T09:34:05+02:00
xmp:xmp:CreateDate: 2015-09-15T21:25:12+08:00
xmp:xmp:MetadataDate: 2015-09-17T09:34:05+02:00
xmp:xmpMM:DocumentID: uuid:586fa367-582f-41a2-b446-53dc13a431b7
xmp:xmpMM:InstanceID: uuid:8fa47bec-563b-41d1-bc3b-beab6a3289ad
xmp:xmpMM:RenditionClass: default
xmp:xmpMM:VersionID: 1
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:fc3149e1-81a4-43be-8669-69b85c403629
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2015-09-15T21:38:14+08:00
xmp:stEvt:action: converted
xmp:stEvt:instanceID: uuid:da8d4925-f868-4402-bf91-47c56e96b24d
xmp:stEvt:parameters: converted to PDF/A-2b
xmp:stEvt:softwareAgent: pdfToolbox
xmp:stEvt:when: 2015-09-15T21:59:55+08:00
xmp:pdfaid:part: 2
xmp:pdfaid:conformance: B
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdf/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdf
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Adobe PDF Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: A name object indicating whether the document has been modified to include trapping information
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Trapped
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/xap/1.0/mm/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: xmpMM
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: XMP Media Management Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: UUID based identifier for specific incarnation of a document
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: InstanceID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The common identifier for all versions and renditions of a document.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: OriginalDocumentID
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://www.aiim.org/pdfa/ns/id/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfaid
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/A ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Part of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: part
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Integer
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Amendment of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: amd
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/A standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: conformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: Springer ORCiD Schema
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://springer.com/ns/xmpExtensions/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: springer
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: authorInfo
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Author information: contains the name of each author and his/her ORCiD (ORCiD: Open Researcher and Contributor ID). An ORCiD is a persistent identifier (a non-proprietary alphanumeric code) to uniquely identify scientific and other academic authors.
xmp:pdfaType:type: AuthorInformation
xmp:pdfaType:namespaceURI: http://springer.com/ns/xmpExtensions/1.0/authorinfo/
xmp:pdfaType:prefix: author
xmp:pdfaType:description: Specifies the types of author information: name and ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: name
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the name of an author.
xmp:pdfaField:name: orcid
xmp:pdfaField:valueType: URI
xmp:pdfaField:description: Gives the ORCID of an author.
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://ns.adobe.com/pdfx/1.3/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: pdfx
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: PDF/X ID Schema
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: ID of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXVersion
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Conformance level of PDF/X standard
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: GTS_PDFXConformance
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Company creating the PDF
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: Company
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Date when document was last modified
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: SourceModified
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrosMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkMajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Mirrors crossmark:DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://crossref.org/crossmark/1.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: crossmark
xmp:pdfaSchema:schema: crossmark
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossMarkDomains
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Seq Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: CrossmarkDomainExclusive
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: internal
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: Usual same as prism:doi
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: DOI
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaProperty:category: external
xmp:pdfaProperty:description: The date when a publication was published.
xmp:pdfaProperty:name: MajorVersionDate
xmp:pdfaProperty:valueType: Text
xmp:pdfaSchema:namespaceURI: http://prismstandard.org/namespaces/basic/2.0/
xmp:pdfaSchema:prefix: prism
xmp:pdfaSchema:schBOOKMARKS:
Abstract
Introduction
  Eating disorder prevalence, incidence & trends over time in Asia
  EDs in Asia explained through the lens of “Westernization”
  A closer look at patterns and trends by country
    Singapore - trim and fit and mixed support for acculturation hypothesis
    Hong Kong, India & non-fat-phobic AN
    Fiji, Pakistan & Taiwan and the role of media
    Japan & steady rise in eating disorders
    South Korea, China and Thailand: eating disorders symptoms can outpace western comparison groups and challenge model of westernization
    Malaysia and cultural diversity within national borders
    China’s late arrival but significant rise in eating disorders
    India’s complex picture – eating disturbances in the context of low weight and shape concerns
    Thailand – clinical case report from rural, low-SES region
    Deconstructing “Westernization” and incorporating urbanization and industrialization
    Sociocultural transition and gender roles as related to industrialization, urbanization and eating disturbances
  Review & future directions
Conclusion
Competing interests
Authors’ contributions
Author details
References
Page 1
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33
DOI 10.1186/s40337-015-0070-2
REVIEW
The rise of eating disorders in Asia: a
review
Kathleen M. Pike1,3* and Patricia E. Dunne2 
Open Access
Abstract
Once concentrated among adolescent Caucasian females in high-income Western countries, today, eating disorders
(EDs) are truly global. Building upon previous work describing the rise of EDs among cultures in transition, we
contextualize the emergence of EDs in Asia by locating this development within the broader discourse about the
processes of change that have radically transformed Asian societies over the last three decades. By identifying
where EDs are emerging in the region, and by examining their particular expression, our aim is to explicate a fuller
story of the relationship between culture and eating disorders.
Much of the discussion of EDs in non-Western societies is predicated upon the assumption that an increase in EDs
is the by-product of “Westernization”, the term used to describe the process by which increased cultural contact
with the West results in the transmission of so-called ‘Western’ ideas and cultural norms to a non-Western culture.
While the Westernization literature represents a historical anchor in our understanding of EDs in Asia, we propose
that this analysis is incomplete in that societal change in the form of industrialization and urbanization occurring
independently from, or in tandem with, “Western” influence are critical factors contributing to the rise of EDs in
Asia. Further, our review of eating disorders in Asia suggests that an understanding of the diversity and
distinctiveness of the individual countries and cultures that comprise ‘Asia’ is crucial to understanding the
emergence and rise of EDs across this vast region, suggesting that eating disorders are not culture-bound or
culture-specific, but rather culture-reactive. Taking into account both the historical influence of Western culture and
the more contemporary effects of Asian industrialization and urbanization, key distinctions among respective Asian
cultures expands our understanding of the development and expression of EDs globally.
Keywords: Eating disorders, Asia, Culture, Prevalence, Body image, Dieting, Risk factor, Development, Globalization,
Westernization, Nutrition transition, Urbanization, Anorexia nervosa
Introduction
In 1873, Sir William Gull in England and Charles Lasegue
in France first described the “morbid mental state” of
anorexia nervosa (AN) based on their clinical experi-
ence in the late nineteenth century, thus anchoring the
modern study of eating disorders (EDs) in a specific
cultural and historical context which has informed, but
also limited, our understanding of these pathologies to
this day [1, 2]. During the twentieth century, the study
of EDs expanded to include a wider range of pathology,
but it continued to be heavily concentrated in Western
* Correspondence: [URL: "mailto:kmp2@cumc.columbia.edu"] kmp2@cumc.columbia.edu
1Departments of Psychiatry and Epidemiology, Columbia University, New
York, USA
3New York State Psychiatric Institute, Unit 9, Rm. 5808, 1051 Riverside Drive,
New York, NY 10032, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article 
countries and in those countries with significant popu-
lations of European descent.
Cultural factors are essential to understanding the
ways societies describe, diagnose and treat health condi-
tions [3], and in the case of EDs, dramatic increases in
prevalence began in the West during the mid-to-late
1960s in the wake of the counter-culture movement, and
they continued to rise throughout the ensuing decades
of the twentieth century [4]. Early conceptualizations of
EDs characterized them as afflictions primarily affecting
wealthy, white, educated, young women in industrialized
Western nations [5]. Research focused on identifying the
unique or particular features of society that increased
risk for young women, and thus an enormous body of
literature emerged documenting the pernicious effects of
the ultra-thin beauty ideal that was marketed to young
© 2015 Pike and Dunne. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
([URL: "http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/"] http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Page 2
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 2 of 14
women not only as the epitome of female beauty, but
furthermore, as an attainable ideal towards which all
women should aspire. In the West, the spread of the
thin ideal has been accompanied by the acceptance of
the notion of ‘body instrumentality,’ which promotes the
idea that improvement of the physical body via diet and
exercise provides a pathway through which an individual
may attain a certain level of control that is somehow
essential to achieving his or her ideal self.
As the new millennium approached, EDs in non-
Western cultures have steadily increased [4, 6–8], gener-
ating new data that shifted our frame of reference and
necessitated an articulation of eating pathology that rec-
ognizes the heterogeneity of cultural expression and in-
fluence in a rapidly changing global context. Our
conceptualization of EDs has evolved to encompass a
more global perspective and more varied expression, as
ED cases arising in the “East” have at times diverged
from the “normative” reference provided by the West, in
terms of risk and phenotype [9–12].
The emergence of EDs in Asia over the past three de-
cades illuminates the complex interplay between culture
and pathology. The proliferation of EDs across the Asian
continent has coincided with an era of unprecedented
growth and widespread social and economic transform-
ation across much of the region [13–15].  Indeed, Asia
now counts among its member nations some of the
most advantaged and dynamic economic systems, which
continue to evolve at a rapid pace [16–18]. By identify-
ing where EDs are emerging within Asia, and by examin-
ing the particular expression of EDs in these contexts,
our aim is to move beyond the notion that eating disor-
ders are culture-bound and to explicate a fuller story of
the relationship between culture and EDs.
Previous discussions of EDs in non-Western societies
have focused on the phenomenon of Westernization.
The study of westernization provides an important lens
for understanding the rise of eating disorders in Asia;
however, this analysis fails to recognize that amid
globalization, countries in Asia are experiencing a rise in
eating pathology as a result of multifaceted and pro-
found cultural transformations [14, 19],  driven by the
processes of industrialization and urbanization occurring
independently from, or in tandem with, “western” influ-
ence. These transformations include fundamental shifts
in population demographics, food supply, global econ-
omies, gender roles, and the traditional family structure,
The concurrent rise in EDs has given unique perspective
to the overall field of study, revealing previously un-
known manifestations of and documenting wide diver-
sity in rates of prevalence within different national and
social contexts, supporting the notion that there are
multiple ways in which eating disorders are culturally-
reactive but not necessarily culture-bound. 
In the discussion below, we explore both the model of
“westernization” and the ways in which Asia’s diverse and
distinct cultural foundations are shaping and shifting the
prevalence and expression of EDs as a result of the current
impact of rapid economic growth, industrialization and
urbanization, and intensifying globalization. This ex-
panded understanding is also an opportunity – the drama
unfolding in Asia challenges assumptions often made
about EDs in non-Western countries and promises to en-
hance our understanding and treatment of EDs around
the globe.
Eating disorder prevalence, incidence & trends over time
in Asia
It is crucial to recognize the size and scope of ‘Asia’,
which constitutes the largest continent both in terms of
landmass as well as population. Accordingly, the social,
political, and economic conditions of countries in this
region vary enormously, both historically and currently
[20], and their distinct histories and trajectories of soci-
etal transformation inform our understanding of the role
of culture in the incidence and expression of EDs.
Tellingly, the concept of an “Asian” people evolved
not inside the region of Asia but in the US [21]. As im-
migrants from different countries in Asia arrived and
settled in Hawaii and on the mainland, the dominant
Caucasian American culture began indiscriminately
lumping the successive waves of immigrants together,
first under the label of the dominant immigrant nation-
ality (i.e. ‘Chinese’ and then ‘Japs’) and later, referring to
them as ‘Asians.’  The label ignores the diversity of the
distinct cultures that characterize the region and is
based largely on white, European-American stereotypical
perceptions of homogeneity of individuals from the
‘East.’  This is reflected in studies of EDs in the West
where the appellation of “Asian” is typically employed to
describe individuals with non-Western heritage who hail
from somewhere between India and Japan. Given the
enormous diversity within the geographic region of Asia,
such gross terminology falls short in capturing the nu-
ance of culture in the etiology of EDs in the region.
Thus, it comes as no surprise that the study of EDs in
Asia did not actually begin in “Asia” per say, but rather,
began with studies of ‘Asians’  – immigrants from Asia
and their descendants who were residing in industrial-
ized, Western countries. Among these were studies of
Asian schoolgirls in Great Britain [22–28] and of refu-
gees from Southeast Asia in the U.S. (e.g. Kope & Sack,
1987) [29].  In Asia proper, a handful of cases of EDs
were reported in select countries prior to the 1990s, in-
cluding Malaysia [30], Singapore [31, 32], India [33], and
among Chinese in Hong Kong (then under British sover-
eignty) [34–36], but on the whole, EDs were largely ab-
sent from Asia [4],  with the exception of Japan, a
Page 3
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 3 of 14
country in which EDs arrived on the scene in the mid-
1970s [9, 37].  By the close of the 20th century, disor-
dered eating attitudes and behaviors increased dramatic-
ally across Asia’s high-income populations of young
females, with clinical EDs proliferating beyond Japan to
Singapore, Hong Kong, Korea, and Taiwan [4, 20, 35,
38–41].
Significantly, the order by which EDs have spread
among Asian countries closely tracks the so-called “Asian
miracle” of economic transformation as it extends across
the region [16, 19].  Which is to say, Japan has led the
pack, followed by the economies of Hong Kong,
Singapore, Taiwan, and South Korea; then a second wave
comprised of the remaining Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries – Philippines, Malaysia,
Indonesia, and Thailand; and lastly, China and Vietnam.
Mirroring this pattern, EDs were initially found less often
in less developed, poorer Asian countries such as China,
India, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines [20], Cambodia,
Myanmar, Laos, and Vietnam [39]. Expanding our scope
to include Pakistan and Fiji adds evidence pointing toward
a marked increase in the presence of EDs throughout the
region varying directly with economic growth and con-
comitant industrialization and urbanization.
In sum, today, many Asian countries report EDs
[4, 42–46] – as these countries have grown more in-
dustrialized and globalized, EDs have followed, and
the gap is closing between several Asian countries
and the West with regards to both clinical pathology,
as well as more widespread disordered eating, weight
and shape concerns, and dieting behaviors [39, 47].
Even in Asian countries where EDs are believed to
still be less prevalent than in the West, comparative
studies have emerged documenting eating attitudes
and body dissatisfaction levels that are similar to or
worse than those reported by individuals from West-
ern countries [39, 48–51].
EDs in Asia explained through the lens of
“Westernization”
While the ubiquity of McDonald’s franchises across the
Asian continent is a conspicuous sign of Western influ-
ence on Asia, its impact extends well beyond rench fries.
In particular, the West has played a substantial part in
Asia’s economic development, through various channels
including foreign investment, a rapidly growing business
community, technological advances which entwined glo-
bal economies and financial markets, and the arrival of
numerous US and European companies on Asia’s shores,
at first largely as a result of their outsourcing manufac-
turing operations to the region, but eventually, in pursuit
of profiting from an increasingly powerful ‘Asian’  con-
sumer market. As a consequence of the West’s growing
influence in the region, Asian urban populations were 
increasingly exposed to Western culture, and specifically,
to Western media, which frequently forms the corner-
stone of explanations proffered for the emergence and
spread of Eds in Asia (such as Westernization). Accord-
ing to this perspective, increasing exposure to ‘the West’
transmits a ‘thin body ideal’  and imparts Western no-
tions of body instrumentality to non-Western societies,
which in turn fosters growing body dissatisfaction, diet-
ing, and eating disorders. Evidence for ‘Westernization’s’
purported role in engendering Eds in Asian populations
includes research from Singapore [38, 52],  Hong Kong
[53], Fiji [13, 54], Pakistan [26, 27], and Taiwan [55, 56],
indicating a correlation between degree of Westernization
and elevated body image disturbance.
A closer look at patterns and trends by country
Singapore - trim and fit and mixed support for
acculturation hypothesis
From a timeline perspective, EDs became increasingly
common in Singapore throughout the 1990s surfacing
alongside their emergence in neighboring Malaysia and
Hong Kong [31]. Several studies also suggest that body
dissatisfaction had grown as pervasive among certain
segments of the population, such as university students
and Singaporean Chinese schoolgirls, as it is in the West
by as early as 2003 [38, 57, 58]. That said, the prevalence
of documented clinical EDs was still thought to be rela-
tively lower than in the West. Rates of EDs are forecast
to continue to climb based on data from surveys of clin-
ical samples, though this prediction would stand to
benefit from current epidemiological data, which unfor-
tunately is unavailable [59].
Lee et al. [57] explored the manifestation of different
patterns of EDs according to ethnicity in an eight-year
retrospective review of individuals with AN seen at an
ED clinic between 1994 and 2002. Although a large ma-
jority of the cases were female (91.3 %), males accounted
for 8.7 % of patients seen during that period. Results
showed that Malays (4.8 % of cases) were underrepre-
sented among AN cases in Singapore, as compared to
individuals of Chinese (84.1 %) and Indian (7.9 %) des-
cent [57]. In contrast, ethnic Malays appear to account
for a significantly larger proportion of bulimic and binge
eating disorder cases [60].
A particular social experiment carried out in Singapore
during the 1990s is noteworthy. Aimed at addressing the
rising rates of childhood obesity, the government estab-
lished a compulsory school-based weight-loss program
called “Trim and Fit” (TAF). The scheme was a failure in
terms of addressing childhood obesity, and may have
even contributed to ED onset in vulnerable individuals,
based on a later study’s finding that 11.1 % of the AN
patients seen during the 1994–2002 period were former
members of the program, and participants in the TAF
Page 4
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 4 of 14
club reported experiencing social stigma and teasing
from their peers [57], both of which are risk factors for
EDs. Meanwhile, two recent cross-cultural studies com-
paring Singaporean women to Australian women, both
with and without EDs, yielded inconsistent results.
While one study revealed a significant association be-
tween greater acculturation to Western culture and in-
creased body image disturbance [52],  the second study
found no significant relationship between acculturation
and eating pathology [43, 52].  Authors of the latter of
these two studies attribute the discrepancy in these find-
ings to the first study’s reliance on attitudinal sub-scales
of the EDE-Q rather than the full measure, which may
have obscured important differences between cultural
groups.
Hong Kong, India & non-fat-phobic AN
The single-most significant contribution of studies of
EDs in Hong Kong from the early- to-mid- 1990s was
the identification and documentation of a variant form
of AN in which the hallmark features of AN in the West,
namely ‘fat-phobia’  and/or distorted body image, were
conspicuously absent [4, 61]. In such cases, patients typic-
ally attributed their restrictive food intake to somatic com-
plaints such as epigastric bloating, abdominal/stomach
pain, or an absence of hunger/appetite [61]. Compared to
“typical” AN patients, individuals with non-fat-phobic An-
orexia Nervosa (NFP-AN) manifested bulimic symptoms
less frequently and tended to have lower pre-morbid BMI
[35, 51–53]. In the years since then, considerable research
has attempted to elucidate this ‘alternative’ form of AN,
which contested the previously held assumption that a
‘fear of fatness and/or weight gain’ was the essential, defin-
ing characteristic of individuals with AN. What is dra-
matic; however, is that over time reports of NFP-AN cases
in HK have steadily declined while BN and fat-phobic AN
have steadily increased. Thus, individuals presenting with
AN in Hong Kong today bear far greater resemblance to
AN patients seen in the West, as opposed to their non-
fat-phobic predecessors [35], with ‘desire for thinness’ and
levels of body dissatisfaction continuing to grow more
ubiquitous [54–56].
Beyond Hong Kong’s city limits, non-fat-phobic an-
orexia (AN) has also been reported in other Asian coun-
tries, such as India, although its occurrence is less
frequent than typical AN and cases of NFP-AN have
grown increasingly rare over time. In the context of
India, eating disorders paint a particularly complex pic-
ture both historically and at present, perhaps reflecting
the enormous diversity of its populace. Early reports of
EDs began appearing in the mid-1990s, including five
cases of young, single, Hindu women (aged 15-22), who
exhibited persistent vomiting, amenorrhea, refusal to
eat, significant weight loss, and numerous somatic 
complaints without particular import placed on thinness
or fat phobia [66, 67]. Likewise, a study from 1995 involv-
ing 210 Indian university students, split nearly equally be-
tween males (N = 104) and females (N = 106), determined
that 14.8 % of the sample evidenced Eating Distress Syn-
drome (EDS), a unique variant and precursor to clinical
EDs [67]. In both of these studies, some of the patients
did not evidence any detectable ‘fat phobia’  or ‘fear of
weight gain,’ much like their counterparts in Hong Kong
around this period of time.
Fiji, Pakistan & Taiwan and the role of media
Although technically located in Oceana, the cluster of
islands that comprise ‘Fiji’ have contributed considerably
to our understanding of the emergence and rise of EDs
in non-Western countries. Consistent with many pre-
industrialized countries, traditional Fijian notions of
beauty upheld a heavier, more robust female body ideal,
and as a result, EDs were quite rare, with only one case
of an ED documented prior to the mid-1990s. What’s
more, the islands were largely isolated from Western in-
fluences – specifically, Western media – until TV’s
introduction into Fijian society in the late 1990s. In this
way, Fiji has provided a real-world laboratory in which
the thesis of ‘Westernization’  has been tested. Anne
Becker and colleagues have conduced innovative studies
measuring eating psychopathology and beauty ideals,
both before and after the introduction of TV and found
that in the wake of TV’s arrival on the island, rates of eat-
ing disturbances surged among ethnic Fijian women over
the course of the next decade. Definitions of female beauty
and body ideals within the broader Fijian society were also
reconfigured in the image of a more ‘Westernized’  ‘thin
ideal’ [13, 54, 68].
The studies documenting the emergence and prolifera-
tion of eating disturbances in Fiji began in the late 1990s
and continued throughout the first decade of the new
millennium [6, 69]. Around the same time, Fiji was be-
ginning to industrialize. ED risk factors including in-
creases in body dissatisfaction, dieting, desire to lose
weight, thin ideal internalization, and disordered eating
behaviors including binge-eating and self-induced vomit-
ing, continued to become more widespread [54, 69, 70].
Acculturation has been posited as a key mediating factor
in light of one study’s findings, which revealed a sig-
nificant association between binge-eating and accul-
turated body attitudes [71].  Becker [13] suggests that
Fijian females’  explicit modeling of their behavior and
appearance on Western TV characters may reflect a
desire to position themselves competitively within a
rapidly changing culture. The most current research
from Fiji shows that EDs continue to increase, as do
reports from males who describe experiencing socio-
cultural pressure to achieve a muscular body ideal
Page 5
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 5 of 14
[70].  Additionally, it also appears contemporary social
media may exert further negative influence on eating
pathology among Fijians [72].
The media has likewise been implicated in influencing
risk of ED development in studies conducted in Pakistan
[73, 74] and Taiwan [41].  In many ways, Pakistan is a
country that straddles the indeterminate cultural demar-
cation drawn between ‘East’  (as in Asia) and ‘Middle
East’, which shares a long-standing but complex relation-
ship with the Western world. Early reports of EDs ap-
pear in the 1990s in Pakistan [75],  despite extant
malnutrition and a historical association of female ro-
bustness with wealth and authority [73]. Studies focusing
on schoolgirls were conducted in Mirpur, identifying
one case of BN using DSM-III-TR criteria [27],  and in
Lahore, where a combined prevalence of 1.6 % for full-
and partial EDs was found, as was some indication that
more ‘Westernized’ participants faced greater risk of ED
onset [26]. More recent data culled from studies involv-
ing university-level students report elevated risk for EDs
[74, 76], and estimate that a third of university women
(33.73 %) reported experiencing dissatisfaction with their
weight [77].  Furthermore, a study of females aged 16
to 20 published earlier this year, found that 64.9 % of re-
spondents scored 2 or above on the SCOFF questionnaire
[78], placing them at risk for developing an ED.
From a media standpoint, Pakistan has historically
been a more conservative, closed society with less expos-
ure to Western media, fashion and advertising, as com-
pared to many other countries in Asia. This has begun
to change in recent decades however, concurrent with
Pakistan’s increasing industrialization and urbanization.
Accordingly, results from two 2011 studies suggest that
media exposure correlates with negative body image
and body dissatisfaction among both males and females
[73, 79]. In fact, there is some reason to believe that males
in Pakistan and elsewhere in Asia may face growing risk
of developing EDs. A 2008 study of Body Dysmorphic Dis-
order in a sample of 156 Pakistani medical students
(57.1 % female) revealed that a full 78.8 % of students evi-
denced some degree of body dissatisfaction, with ‘being
fat’ ranking first among female students’ areas of concern
(40.4 %) and second among males (32.8 %). Further ana-
lysis showed that while females were significantly more
concerned about being fat (p = 0.005), males were signifi-
cantly more concerned about being thin (p = 0.01) [80].
While concern about weight and shape may be on the
rise among men in some areas of Asia, results from a
study comparing body image among 55 heterosexual
Taiwanese males to results obtained from identical stud-
ies conducted in the U.S. and Europe, suggests body dis-
satisfaction is less common among males in Taiwan [81].
Seeking to understand this outcome, the authors then
analyzed the number of undressed male and female 
models in American and Taiwanese women’s magazine
advertisements, respectively. They found that while
American magazine ads frequently depicted undressed
Western men, undressed Asian men were rarely portrayed
in Taiwanese magazines, leading them to hypothesize that
the pressure associated with male body ideals may be less
pervasive at this point in time in Taiwan.
On the whole, data from Taiwan suggest that clinical
EDs are less common than in Western countries. How-
ever, there is an abundance of research indicating that
risk factors associated with ED development, such as
body dissatisfaction and dieting, are increasing and are
now commonplace among adolescents and young adults
[39, 41, 82]. As was found in Pakistan, two studies con-
ducted in Taiwan indicate that the landscape of dis-
turbed eating pathology among a younger demographic
is cause for concern. The first study reported elevated
EAT-26 scores among 17.11 % of the 1605 high school
students surveyed [45],  while the second – a cross-
sectional survey of 835 female junior high school stu-
dents – found 10.4 % of students to be at elevated risk
for an ED based on EAT-26 scores exceeding 20 [83].
Delving deeper than identifying at-risk individuals,
Liou and colleagues [84] investigated methods of weight
control used by 15,716 adolescents (male: 7043; female:
8673) ages 10-18 years spread across 120 representative
schools. These schools were selected using a three-stage
stratified systematic sampling design with probability
proportionate to the size of the population in Taiwan, in
an effort to collect nationally representative data. Results
showed that younger adolescents were more likely to
engage in purging behaviors, and that such behaviors
were linked to factors including frequent daily media
use (e.g. TV, internet, etc.), consumption of fried foods,
and night-time snacking [84]. In regards to media expos-
ure – which serves as a conduit for thin-ideal messages –
research with Taiwanese adolescents showed that it fosters
greater internalization of the thin ideal and experiences of
‘media pressure’ to be thin, both of which were found to
significantly increase body dissatisfaction; in turn, ‘media
pressure’  and body dissatisfaction were identified as the
factors which significantly contributed to restrictive eating
behaviors and unhealthy weight-control methods, even
after all other variables were controlled for [56].
Japan & steady rise in eating disorders
Contemporary understanding of EDs in Japan has its
roots in investigations that began in the 1970s and con-
tinued over the subsequent two decades, which collect-
ively, show a consistent rise in ED prevalence and
incidence during this period. Despite this trend, however,
EDs remained less common in Japan than in industrialized
Western countries. Most of the evidence from this period
is derived from clinic-based studies, some of which
Page 6
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 6 of 14
focused on anorexia (AN) exclusively, as community-
based data was minimally available. On the whole, these
studies demonstrate a continual increase in reported cases
of EDs in Japan during the latter half of the twentieth cen-
tury [85]. Much like in the West, ED cases were highly
concentrated among adolescent females, with prevalence
estimates ranging from 25.2–30.7 (per 100,000) among fe-
males 13–29, as compared to 6.3–9.7 for the entire female
population, and 3.6- 4.5 among the general population
[86].  Cases of eating disorders among males, although
rare, have been documented in Japan [87]. In their 2010
review of the literature from Japan, Chisuwa & O’Dea note
that rates of EDs among males in non-clinical settings
were thought to be around 2–3 %, whereas rates reported
for Japanese female adolescents ranged from 5–10 % [88].
More research is available regarding body image concerns
among Japanese males, with studies reporting that male
adolescents often desire to gain weight, frequently under-
estimating their current body weight, and experience ris-
ing body satisfaction as they acquire more muscularity
with age [132].
With regards to bulimia nervosa (BN) and binge-
eating, a study of college women carried out in the
1980s indicated that 8.4 % of participants engaged in
binge-eating and self-induced vomiting, including a sub-
set of whom (2.9 %) reported purging more than once
weekly. Meanwhile, 4.6 % of women reported using purga-
tives as a weight-control strategy [89]. Rates of EDs surged
dramatically in the first decade of the millennium, with
cases of AN increasing four-fold and BN prevalence rising
to 4.7 times its 1990s-era levels [90]. As Pike and Borovoy
(2004) [24] note, the proliferation of EDs in Japan coin-
cided with increasing industrialization, urbanization, and
globalization, and this confluence of factors served to
catalyze significant changes in gender roles as well as the
traditional Japanese family structure – a pattern that
would be replicated in developing countries across the
globe. Today, more recent epidemiological data from
Japan indicates that EDs are now on par with rates in
many industrialized, Western countries, but consistent
with trends observed of late in Western countries, ED
rates appear to be relatively stable rather than increasing
at present [87].
Intriguingly, a recent study of women in Japan –
where conventional AN has historically been the norm –
suggests that unique subtypes and differences among
individuals with AN may be even more multi-layered
than was previously thought. Through structured clinical
interviews and administration of the Eating Attitudes
Test (EAT) and Eating Disorders Inventory (EDI),  the
authors identified three discernible groups of anorexic
patients: 200 women (52.2 %) were diagnosed with typ-
ical AN; 86 (22.5 %) with non-fat-phobic AN (NFP-AN);
and 97 women (25.3 %) with AN who displayed no 
evidence of distortions related to body shape and weight
(AN-NED). The groups differed significantly on factors
including duration of illness, maximum and minimum
BMIs, and AN subtypes, as well as EAT scores, EDI to-
tals, and all subscales of the EDI [90]. Thus it seems that
the clinical presentation of EDs, and specifically AN, is
dynamic and continuously evolving, much like Asia’s
rapidly transitioning economies.
South Korea, China and Thailand: eating disorders
symptoms can outpace western comparison groups and
challenge model of westernization
Like other countries in Asia, increases in rates of clinical
EDs and associated risk factors were observed in South
Korea in conjunction with a period of pervasive societal
change from the early 1960s through the late 1990s,
which was further buoyed by a rapidly accelerating econ-
omy. According to a 1998 epidemiological study (N = 3062)
of Korean adult Men (N = 1249) and women (N = 1813),
8.5 % of those surveyed evidenced abnormal eating path-
ology, as determined by scores above the cut-off (>20) on
the Korean version of the EAT-26 (K-EAT-26) [40]. Overall,
reports of EDs from Korea portray a clinical profile very
similar in presentation to cases observed in the West.
Moreover, recent findings suggest that body dissatisfaction
and internalization of the thin ideal may, in fact, be more
widespread in Korea than in the West. For instance, a study
that compared eating pathology as measured by the EAT-
26 between 167 s-generation female, young adult Korean-
Americans, with 37 Korean immigrant women (immigrated
in last 7 years), and 937 native Korean women, found that
Korean-American women scored significantly lower than
both Korean immigrants and native Koreans. Meanwhile,
Korean immigrant and native Korean women’s scores did
not differ significantly from one another, even though na-
tive Korean women reported significantly lower BMIs than
their Korean immigrant counterparts. Likewise, degree of
‘acculturation’  in both immigrant and native Korean
women, which was measured using the Suinn-Lew Asian
Self-Identity Acculturation Scale (SL-ASIA), did not bear a
significant relationship to their EAT-26 scores [91]. Rather
than solely crediting Western beauty ideals for perpetuating
an unhealthy ‘thin’ archetype, Jackson, Keel & Lee suggest
that native Korean values may also promote eating disor-
ders, owing to their emphasis on appearance rather than
ability or talent as the factor crucial to a woman’s success in
marriage and in career [91].
In a study comparing college women from China
(n = 109), Korea (n = 137), and the U.S. (n = 102), Korean
college women evidenced the greatest degree of body dis-
satisfaction and disordered eating behaviors, followed by
Chinese women, and lastly, U.S. women. Intriguingly, a
similar outcome was observed in a cross-cultural study
comparing eating-related attitudes and psychopathology
Page 7
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 7 of 14
among Thai (n = 101), Caucasian Australian (n = 110) and
Asian Australian (n = 130) students at a university in
Australia. Thai students scored significantly higher on both
the EAT-26 and Eating Disorders Inventory -2 (EDI-2)
than their Australian Asian and Caucasian Australian
counterparts, who did not differ significantly from one an-
other [92]. In both studies, these findings are inconsistent
with the premise of the ‘Westernization’  model of EDs,
which would predict that U.S. women would exhibit the
most eating-related dysfunction [15].,
Malaysia and cultural diversity within national borders
One of the earliest prevalence estimates for EDs in an
Asian country is from a 1981 study, conducted in
Malaysia, which extrapolated a national prevalence esti-
mate of 0.05 % for AN, based on a sample of 6000 psy-
chiatric patients [30]. A second wave of studies from this
region arrived nearly twenty years later, at a time when
Malaysia was experiencing a flurry of economic develop-
ment and concurrent increases in both population BMI
and rates of body dissatisfaction and dieting behaviors
[93].  Viewed collectively, the research from Malaysia
provides a solid base of evidence for implicating gender
and ethnicity as primary factors influencing ED risk.
Regarding significant gender differences, the research
suggests that in comparison with males, females often
exhibit greater body dissatisfaction and concern sur-
rounding eating and weight/shape issues; show a prefer-
ence for very slim or even underweight ideal body
figures; and employ a range of weight-loss strategies, in-
cluding dieting, self-induced vomiting, exercise, and
laxative abuse [8, 94, 95]. Males, on the other hand, are
more likely to perceive themselves as overweight but fail
to perceive if they are underweight, consider an overweight
figure to represent the male body ‘ideal’  [94], and report
engaging in activities intended to build muscle [8]. In an-
other study of 584 male and female university students,
roughly one in five students (18.2 %) were at heightened
risk for EDs, with females facing greater risk than males
(21.3 % vs. 13.5 %) and reporting higher stress scores [96].
Malaysia represents one of the most ethnically diverse
countries in Asia, and thus, several studies have com-
pared EDs among ethnic Malays (Malaysian Malays),
and Malaysian Chinese and/or Malaysian Indians. For
instance, results from an analysis of eating attitudes
among 187 ethnic Malays (M = 87) and 80 Chinese stu-
dents (M = 33) attending a Malaysian university, indi-
cated that Malay students were at greater risk for ED
onset as compared to fellow Chinese students, based on
scoring significantly higher on the EAT-26 [97]. Another
study, also comparing Malaysian (n = 459),  Chinese
(n = 307), and Indian (n = 150) women, assessed whether
ethnicity influenced the discrepancy between actual vs.
ideal weight. Indeed, Chinese women evidenced less 
discrepancy between ideal vs. actual weight than did
Malay and Indian women, however the effect size was
small [95]. Study findings also lent some support to the
premise that women may internalize appearance-based
media messages differently according to their ethnicity.
Conversely, a 2013 study comparing adolescents of
Malaysian Malay (n = 58),  Malaysian Chinese (n = 95),
Chinese native (n = 242),  and non-Asian Australian
backgrounds (n = 81),  reported that Malaysian Chinese
adolescents had the greatest degree of body dissatisfaction.
In particular, it was found that overall body dissatisfaction
was positively correlated with dissatisfaction with facial
features among Malaysian Malays and Australians [11] –
a finding that is consistent with traditional Asian beauty
ideals that focus on facial features. The diversity within
Malaysia is an important reminder that as much as
there are cultural trends, in many countries there will
be significant variations within country based on factors
such as ethnicity.
China’s late arrival but significant rise in eating disorders
The story of EDs in China represents a more recent and
less developed chapter in the rise of EDs in Asia, driven
in part, by the fact that Mainland China embarked on
the path of industrializing and modernizing slightly later
than some other Asian societies [98]. As was noted earl-
ier, initial reports of EDs in China surfaced in the early
1990s, including cases of BN in two females and one
male [99], and a case of early-onset AN in a 4-year-old
Chinese boy [100]. In each case, the individual exhibited
the hallmark ‘fear of fat’, which served as the underlying
driver of their ED. Some of the evidence from China in-
dicates that Asian males may face a heightened vulner-
ability to developing EDs as compared to males in the
West. Some have hypothesized that the presence of ‘fear
of fat’ in cases in China may stem from the fact that it is
one of the few non-Western societies in which there ex-
ists a historical precedent for valuing thinness in women,
as it was deemed a desirable trait of femininity [42, 101].
Other explanations offered for these findings have
included many of the same factors implicated in the
emergence of EDs in other Asian countries, namely
Westernization, mass migration from rural to urban
city-centers, and after-effects of sociocultural transform-
ation like economic stress, and competition, and the dis-
ruption of social and emotional support. Research from
China identifies several factors that increase overall vul-
nerability to EDs, including higher SES [102], concerns
about body shape and size and preference for a thin
body-ideal (esp. in girls) [103], a history of child abuse,
elevated anxiety levels, acrimonious relations with par-
ental figures, concerns related to media idols, and
above-average scores on the body dissatisfaction and in-
teroceptive awareness factors of the EDI [104].
Page 8
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 8 of 14
Furthermore, Jackson and Chen [105] make a convincing
case for the influence of environmental factors such as
perceived pressure from mass media, interpersonal rela-
tionships, and fear of negative appearance evaluation, in
the etiology of BN in adolescents. Other researchers
have likewise identified the media as a perceived source
of pressure relating to physical appearance, even positing
that it may predict body change behaviors in both males
and females [106, 107].
Our understanding of EDs in China has been advanced
considerably by the publication of several larger
community-based studies in the early years of 2000,
which explored factors known to play a role in ED onset
such as body image and eating behaviors, in male and fe-
male adolescents [106, 108, 109]. As a whole, these stud-
ies suggested that the incidence rates for clinical EDs
were relatively low, however, they also provided indica-
tion that cases of subclinical and/or partial EDs were not
uncommon, and risk factors such as body dissatisfaction
and maladaptive eating behaviors, were in fact wide-
spread. Indeed, some of the most recent studies indicate
that BN is becoming more prevalent among young
Chinese females [110, 111]. In illustration of this, preva-
lence rates of 1.05, 2.98, and 3.58 % for AN, BN, and
BED, respectively, were estimated from a 2013 study of
female university students in Wuhan, China. These find-
ings are a cause for great concern as these rates rival
those typically reported among similar groups in the
West, suggesting that EDs are quickly becoming a formid-
able problem and public health challenge in China [112].
A 1999 study that assessed measures of disordered eat-
ing attitudes and behaviors, drew an interesting com-
parison between high school girls in urban HK and
similar samples of girls residing in two locations within
Mainland China: the largely rural Hunan province, and
Shenzhen, a semi-urban, rapidly growing industrial cen-
ter. The level of industrialization was found to mediate
disordered eating attitudes and behaviors, such that girls
in HK displayed the most pronounced eating distur-
bances and body dissatisfaction, followed respectively, by
girls in Shenzhen and Hunan province [98].
India’s complex picture – eating disturbances in the context
of low weight and shape concerns
Although findings from individual case studies [113], as
well as larger studies involving male and female univer-
sity students [114, 115], describe the emergence of famil-
iar manifestations of EDs in India, the data also suggest
that psychogenic vomiting is the most common ED
diagnosis in India (approx. 84 %),  most often observed
in individuals from middle or lower-SES families, who
are first-born or only children, and in whom illness on-
set precedes puberty. By comparison, a diagnosis of AN
(14.6 % of all ED diagnoses),  was associated with an 
upper-SES background, not being the first-born, and ED
onset in adolescence. Therefore, although there may be
reason to believe that factors contributing to ED onset
such as body dissatisfaction and dieting, may be on the
rise, it is important to note that available evidence does
not suggest that unhealthy weight loss strategies and eat-
ing disordered behaviors are common in India [114–117],
nor does it give any indication that rates of clinical EDs
are rising [118]. Even so, the perception that EDs are in-
creasing in urban India appears to be gaining ground,
based on the findings of a 2012 survey of 66 practicing
psychiatrists whom were asked whether they perceived
EDs to be a ‘serious clinical issue’ in India. Collectively, a
total of 74 ED cases – including two males – were re-
ported based on accounts from 45 participants who indi-
cated having seen patients with EDs in the past
12 months, which included 32 instances of AN, 12 of BN,
and 30 of EDNOS, respectively. Interestingly, 23.5 % of re-
spondents believed that rates of EDs were rising in Banga-
lore, while 26.5 % surmised that rates were holding steady,
the largest group – 42 % – expressed uncertainty [119]. In
general, some of the data from India contradicts the hy-
pothesis that acculturation moderates eating pathology
(e.g., Bhugra, Bhui, Gupta, 2000) [125], while others report
results that suggest urbanization and SES (which is often
correlated with acculturation) are associated with elevated
risk for body weight dissatisfaction and dieting [120, 121].
In light of the sheer physical size of India and the
considerable diversity of its populace, it seems probable
that trends may vary among distinct segments of the In-
dian population and much further research is needed.
Thailand – clinical case report from rural, low-SES region
While fewer studies of EDs in Thailand are available as com-
pared to many other Asian countries, a case of restrictive
AN reported in a 13-year-old Thai female is intriguing on
account of the fact that the girl was from Thailand’s poorest
province (Khon Kaen) [122].  Differences in beauty ideals
and body shape/weight concern among Thai women typic-
ally reflect the influence of rural vs. urban settings, such that
women from more developed, urban regions, place greater
emphasis on body weight and shape in assessing physical
appearance identity [123]. Further evidence of vulnerability
to EDs comes to light in a study of 447 female undergradu-
ates in which 6.34 % of students reportedly obtained high
EAT-26 scores (>20). Consistent with findings from other
regions of Asia, 19.25 % of respondents exhibited body
image dissatisfaction (BSQ scores > 110) despite a majority
(56.17 %) of the sample having ‘normal’ BMIs [124].
Deconstructing “Westernization” and incorporating
urbanization and industrialization
In deconstructing the usage of the term “Westernization”
within the context of Asian economic development, it is
Page 9
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 9 of 14
important to acknowledge that many of the characteristics
that have been ascribed to “Westernization” may, in fact,
be more accurately associated with the processes of
industrialization and urbanization, irrespective of countries
of origin. While the “west” experienced industrialization
and urbanization earlier in history, that process now
unfolding throughout Asia may best be thought of as a
new wave of industrialization and urbanization, moving be-
yond the idea that the wholesale export of Western culture
and influence, broadly defined, is the variable to which we
should continue to devote primary attention when examin-
ing cultural factors associated with the rise of EDs in Asia.
Consistent with Omran’s hypothesis, industrialization and
urbanization are correlated with other social and cultural
shifts such as improved access to biomedical care, eradica-
tion of malnutrition and poverty and increased affluence.
Although positive overall, these developments trigger new
challenges, namely non-communicable disease such as
EDs. Given the range of pathways in the emergence of eat-
ing disorders in Asia, we will learn more about the rela-
tionship of culture to eating disorders if we recognize that
eating disorders are not culture-specific or culture bound,
but perhaps better thought of as culture-reactive, whereby
certain cultural contexts result in social and environmental
changes that increase risk for EDs.
What is beyond question is the fact that the world
population is becoming more urban, and in Asia, this
process of urbanization, driven by industrialization, has
been especially dramatic due to the sheer size of the
population and the rapid speed with which it has oc-
curred. While not unlike the first wave of Western
industrialization and urbanization, some of the conse-
quences of these profound societal transformations are
positive, such as increases in per capital income [16], how-
ever, Asian industrialization and resultant urbanization
have also been linked to increases in the overall rate of
psychopathology [125], including EDs, throughout the re-
gion. This is consistent with data from the Netherlands
that indicated that the incidence of BN was correlated
with degree of urbanization, with BN rates five times
higher in urban centers as compared to rural areas. An-
orexia nervosa (AN),  however, was not associated with
urbanization [14]. Meanwhile, in China, data suggest that
intensifying urbanization corresponds with increases in
overall eating pathology, as characterized by decreasing
BMIs, increasing weight and shape concerns and increas-
ing dieting behaviors [98].
Again, independent from the so-called “Westernization”
effect, data from countries across the globe substantiate
that the move from rural to urban living has been shown
to coincide with drastic changes in diet and a shift towards
a more ‘sedentary’ lifestyle. During the ensuing ‘nutrition
transition’  from farms to fast food, more prepared and
processed foods – foods that have high fat, sugar, and salt 
content - have steadily crept into Asian diets that were
traditionally rich in vegetables, fiber, and grains [17]. In
addition to urbanization broadly defined, other correlated
factors found to precipitate and facilitate this dietary shift
include rising income as well as the transition to a wage
economy, changing gender roles, and an overall increase
in the accessibility of food [126].  The proliferation of
American fast food chains, which first arrived in Japan in
the 1970s, and eventually spread throughout all of Asia
are quintessential examples [127].  Unfortunately, in-
creased consumption of these foods serves up a supersized
side order of “Nutrition-Related Non-Communicable Dis-
eases” (NRNCD) including obesity, hypertension, diabetes,
and other metabolic disorders [17].  Substantiating this
trend, population weights and obesity prevalence
across Asia are steadily climbing and have become
significant public health concern in Asian societies,
including but not limited to Japan [128], South Korea,
Malaysia and China [18, 129–130].
Sociocultural transition and gender roles as related to
industrialization, urbanization and eating disturbances
Among the manifold changes set in motion by the pro-
cesses of industrialization and urbanization, there also
exists ample evidence of a profound and dramatic shift
in gender roles that occurs within societies undergoing
transition. This shift marks one of the most significant
contextual factors in the rise of EDs across diverse Asian
societies, uniting concurrent forces of economic pres-
sures, a developing consumer culture including global-
ized fashion and beauty industries, as well as media
influence and acculturation. This pattern, which has
been observed consistently across Asia, has a particularly
transformative effect on the landscape of women’s lives.
Specifically, Witcomb, Arcelus and Chen [101] suggest
that the demands of an increasingly competitive envir-
onment in which women are expected to develop a new
set of skills, may unavoidably expose them to greater
criticism from peers, colleagues, and society, perhaps
in turn prompting women to engage in more self-
evaluation. Thus, physical appearance becomes one of
several domains in which women ‘measure’  themselves
against an aspirational ideal [101]. In Asia, the ‘gendered’
nature of societal transformation and globalization is es-
pecially striking due to the fact that economic develop-
ment was initially driven by the growth in the
manufacturing (specifically garment) industry, and later,
the service industries, which resulted in a spike in de-
mand for women’s labor in particular [19].
Unsurprisingly, with growing numbers of women pur-
suing employment and educational opportunities, famil-
iar definitions of “femininity” and conceptions about
gender roles are called into question and traditional fam-
ily structures are subject to change as well. During such
Page 10
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 10 of 14
times of rapidly changing gender roles, Striegel-Moore,
Silberstein and Rodin (1986) [131] suggest that girls, in
particular, are very likely experiencing the stresses of
these shifting roles and evolving expectations, which in
turn, may place them at greater risk for overall psycho-
logical distress [131]. Similarly, changes in male gender
roles may be contributing significantly to the increases
in rates of EDs among males.
Review & future directions
This discussion attempts to outline and contextualize the
emergence of EDs in Asia by locating this development
within the broader discourse surrounding the processes of
change that have radically transformed the region in the
last three decades. With the ‘Westernization’  thesis
serving as the foundation, adding the constructs of
industrialization and urbanization allows for a morecomplete and thoughtful analysis of EDs in Asia. The
construct of “Westernization” bestows assumptions of
primacy, power, and agency on ‘Western’  culture by
conceptualizing it as ‘exportable’,  while the “recipient”
cultures are constructed as immobile and fixed [37].
Indeed, overly exaggerated notions of ‘Westernization’
conflate, or fail to account fully for, concurrent pro-
cesses of societal transformation such as the current
wave of industrialization and urbanization now occurring
in Asia. The danger of subsuming these respective phe-
nomena under the umbrella of ‘Westernization’ is that it
over-attributes the diverse changes and distinct develop-
mental pathways of individual Asian societies, including
the emergence of EDs, to the influence of the West. As
variations in the expressions of EDs across cultures in Asia
make clear, individual Asian societies have not responded
uniformly to complex global shifts and pressures, nor have
they passively absorbed Western templates of beauty.
One challenge researchers face is that many of the
measures and criteria typically used to assess eating dis-
order psychopathology are based on Western models
and have not been fully validated for use with non-
Western samples. Progress is being made and the trans-
lation and evaluation of these assessment instruments
for use with diverse groups is increasing (e.g. [27, 40,
132, 133]).  By analyzing the multifold ways in which a
more inclusive range of significant societal phenomena
may impact the emergence and/or spread of EDs, we have
sought to shed light on how the changes within societies
affected by industrialization, urbanization, and ultimately,
globalization, have a unique impact on adolescent girls
and young women in particular. Consequently, women in
cultures undergoing transition inhabit a tenuous position
as they seek to navigate a landscape characterized by
changing definitions of femininity, gender roles, women’s
increasing integration into the public sphere and involve-
ment in emerging labor forces, and rising sociocultural 
pressure to conform to new aesthetic beauty ideals that
glorify thinness.
Building upon previous research that has linked the
emergence and rise of EDs with cultures undergoing
transition, we propose that the cumulative effects of so-
cietal changes including the proliferation of media im-
ages promoting thinness and a consumer culture
dominated by globalized fashion and beauty industries,
are placing individuals, especially women, across Asia at
risk for developing EDs. Faced with uncertainty, para-
doxical messages, and stress, those with individual risk
factors or underlying vulnerabilities to EDs may ultim-
ately join the growing ranks of women and men suffer-
ing from these disabling disorders. Increases in ED cases
in respective Asian countries will likely correspond to
the stage of societal transformation in a particular soci-
ety is in with nations further along the developmental
continuum exhibiting the highest rates of EDs.
Our examination of the pathways by which EDs have
emerged and socioeconomic transitions that have tran-
spired within Asia, has in turn necessitated a decon-
struction of this geopolitical label. From both a historical
and contemporary perspective, the individual societies
that comprise ‘Asia’  exhibit marked diversity both in
relationship to one another as well as in relation to the
larger global community. Recognition of the distinctive-
ness of these individual cultural and national identities is
crucial to understanding the emergence and rise of EDs
across these varied contexts.
Conclusion
Within the broader field of eating disorders, it is im-
portant to recognize that the study of EDs in Asia, spe-
cifically, is still in its early stages and that research is
limited, albeit quickly expanding [134].  Future epi-
demiological research and community and clinical stud-
ies are needed to further advance our understanding,
prevention, and treatment of these disorders within the
context of the various cultures in Asia. Bearing in mind
then the considerable heterogeneity and diversity of cul-
tures subsumed under the ‘Asia’ umbrella, it is particularly
important that future studies examine eating disorder psy-
chopathology not just within each of the individual coun-
tries in Asia, but also in relationship to one another, as
well as in broader cross-cultural studies. Studies that are
more broadly representative of a particular society, and
which include males, minority ethnic groups, and a wider
age range of participants, are needed if we are to discern a
truly complete picture of eating disorders across cultures.
Cross-sectional studies suggest that risk factors for eating
disorders among males are largely similar to those identified
among females, such as body mass index, negative affect,
self-esteem, perfectionism, drug use, perceived pressure to
lose weight from parents and peers, participation in sports
Page 11
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 11 of 14
that focus on leanness, and disturbances around the pursuit
of muscularity among adolescent boys [135]. These data are
largely cross-sectional, and further studies exploring risk for
eating disorders among Asian males is extremely important
given the sheer numbers of individuals this represents.
Fully validated and culturally appropriate assessment
instruments and design methodologies are needed, as is
a more flexible, adaptable approach to the application of
diagnostic criteria derived from Western samples within
non-Western settings. Furthermore, a critical aspect of
the emergence and spread of EDs in Asia is that it has
transpired concurrently with rapidly rising population
BMIs and rates of overweight and obesity across the
continent. Indeed, similar to many Western countries,
obesity rates have reached epidemic proportions in
Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, and other parts of South
Asia [18, 129, 130]. Although EDs and obesity have his-
torically been treated as independent public health is-
sues, they share many common etiological factors, and
successful strategies for combating one will almost cer-
tainly impact the other. Thus today, we are presented
with a critical and time-sensitive opportunity to address
two serious public health crises. Success in this endeavor
will be contingent on researchers and policymakers in both
arenas working in partnership with one another to develop
effective and innovative strategies around prevention and
intervention of EDs and obesity.
As the conversation within the field of eating disorders
shifts away from affirming ‘Westernization’ as the corner-
stone of explanations for the rise of EDs both in Asia, and
across the developing world, what we see in many ways is
the receding power of (or ‘emphasis on’) the West and the
concurrent, unabated transcendence of globalization.
Fueling this transition is growing recognition that the in-
dependent processes of societal change – industrialization
and urbanization – are not a byproduct or unique export
of Western culture, but rather are natural steps along a
society’s pathway of economic development. Thus, as the
countries on the Asian continent continue to advance
along the spectrum of development, we cannot assume
that their independent trajectories – and associated pat-
terns of EDs and obesity rates – will track a course identi-
cal to that observed in the West. We can, however, expect
that these continued processes of economic development
will play a significant role in impacting rates of EDs across
the region. Just as the transformation of Asian countries
on political, social, and economic terms has given rise to
unique societies that differ in significant ways from the in-
dustrialized West, so too, will the course of EDs in Asia
chart a distinct course that will contribute meaningfully to
our global understanding of eating disorders.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
Authors’ contributions
KMP conceived of the review and initiated the literature search. PD extended
the literature search. KMP and PD contributed to the drafting of the review.
Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Author details
1Departments of Psychiatry and Epidemiology, Columbia University, New
York, USA. 2Department of Clinical & Counseling Psychology, Columbia
University (Teachers College), New York, USA. 3New York State Psychiatric
Institute, Unit 9, Rm. 5808, 1051 Riverside Drive, New York, NY 10032, USA.
Received: 30 June 2015 Accepted: 4 September 2015
References
1.  Gull WW. Anorexia nervosa (apepsia hysterica, anorexia hysteria). Trans Clin
Soc (London). 1874;7:22–8.
2.  Vandereycken W, van Deth R. A tribute to Lasegue’s description of anorexia
nervosa (1873), with completion of its English translation. Br J Psychiatry.
1990;157:902–8.
3.  Lewis-Fernandez R, Kleinman A. Culture, personality, and psychopathology. J
Abnorm Psychol. 1994;103(1):67–71.
4.  Gordon RA. Eating disorders East and West: a culture-bound syndrome
unbound. In: Nasser M, Katzman M, Gordon R, editors. Eating disorders and
cultures in transition. New York: Brunner-Routledge; 2001. p. 1–16.
5.  Bruch H. Eating disorders: obesity, anorexia nervosa, and the person within,
vol. 5052. United States: Basic Books; 1973.
6.  Becker AE, Gilman SE, Burwell RA. Changes in prevalence of overweight and
in body image among Fijian women between 1989 and 1998. Obes Res.
2005;13(1):110–7.
7.  Yasuhara D, Homan N, Nagai N, Naruo T, Komaki G, Nakao K, et al. A
significant nationwide increase in the prevalence of eating disorders in
Japan: 1998-year survey. Int Congr Ser. 2002;1241:297–301.
8.  Mellor D, McCabe M, Ricciardelli L, Yeow J, Daliza N, Mohd Hapidzal NF.
Sociocultural influences on body dissatisfaction and body change behaviors
among Malaysian adolescents. Body Image. 2009;6(2):121–8.
9.  Pike KM, Borovoy A. The rise of eating disorders in Japan: issues of culture
and limitations of the model of “Westernization”. Cult Med Psychiatry.
2004;28(4):493–531.
10. Lee S. How abnormal is the desire for slimness? A survey of eating attitudes
and behaviour among Chinese undergradutes in Hong Kong. Psychol Med.
1993;23(2):437–51.
11. Mellor D, Waterhouse M, Hidayah BT Mamat N, Xu X, Cochrane J, McCabe
M, et al. Which body features are associated with female adolescents’ body
dissatisfaction? A cross-cultural study in Australia, China and Malaysia. Body
Image. 2013;10:54–61.
12. Bhugra D, Bhui K, Gupta KR. Bulimic disorders and sociocentric values in
north India. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2000;35(2):86–93.
13. Becker AE. Television, disordered eating, and young women in Fiji:
negotiating body image and identity during rapid social change. Cult Med
Psychiatry. 2004;28(4):533–59.
14. van Son GE, Hoeken DV, Bartelds AIM, van Furth EF, Hoek HW. Urbanization
and the incidence of eating disorders. Br J Psychiatry. 2006;189:562–3.
15. Jung J, Forbes GB. Body dissatisfaction and disordered eating among
college women in China, South Korea, and the United States: contrasting
predictions from sociocultural and feminist theories. Psychol Women Q.
2007;31(4):381–93.
16. Marcotullio PJ. Asian urban sustainability in the era of globalization. Habitat
Int. 2001;25:577–98.
17. Madanat HN, Hawks SR, Campbell T, Fowler C, Hawks JL. Young urban
women and the nutrition transition in China: a familiar pattern emerges.
Glob Health Promot. 2010;17(4):43–51.
18. Ramachandran A, Snehalatha C. Rising burden of obesity in Asia. J Obes.
2010;2010:1–8.
19. Pettman JJ. Gendering globalization in Asia through miracle and crisis.
Gend Technol Dev. 2003;7(2):171–87.
20. Lee S. Engaging culture: an overdue task for eating disorders research. Cult
Med Psychiatry. 2004;28(4):617–21.
21. Takaki R. Strangers from a different shore: a history of Asian Americans.
Updated and Revisedth ed. New York: Back Bay Books; 1998.
Page 12
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 12 of 14
22. Mumford D, Whitehouse A. Increased prevalence of bulimia nervosa among
Asian schoolgirls. Br Med J. 1988;297(6660):1404.
23. King MB, Bhugra D. Eating disorders: lessons from a cross-cultural study.
Psychol Med. 1989;19:955–8.
24. Khandelwal SK, Saxena S. Anorexia nervosa in people of Asian extraction. Br
J Psychiatry. 1991;157:784.
25. Mumford DB, Whitehouse AM, Platts M. Sociocultural correlates of eating
disorders among Asian schoolgirls in Bradford. Br J Psychiatry.
1991;158(2):222–8.
26. Mumford DB, Whitehouse AM, Choudry IY. Survey of eating disorders in
English-medium schools in Lahore, Pakistan. Int J Eat Disord. 1992;11(2):173–84.
27. Choudry IY, Mumford DB. A pilot study of eating disorders in Mirpur
(Pakistan) using an Urdu version of the eating attitudes test. Int J Eat Disord.
1992;11(3):243–51.
28. Ahmad S, Waller G, Verduyn C. Eating attitudes among Asian schoolgirls:
the role of perceived parental control. Int J Eat Disord. 1994;15(1):91–7.
29. Kope TM, Sack WH. Anorexia nervosa in Southeast Asian refugees: a report
on three cases. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1987;26(5):795–7.
30. Buhrich N. Frequency of presentation of anorexia nervosa in Malaysia. Aust
N Z J Psychiatry. 1981;15(2):153–5.
31. Ong YL, Tsoi WF, Cheah JS. A clinical and psychosocial study of seven cases
of anorexia nervosa in Singapore. Singapore Med J. 1982;23:255–61.
32. Kua EH, Lee SL, Chee KT. Bulimia nervosa–a case report. Singapore Med J.
1982;23(5):287–9.
33. Chadda R, Malhotra S, Asad AG, Bambery P. Socio-cultural factors in
anorexia nervosa. Indian J Psychiatry. 1987;29(2):107.
34. Zheng YM. The psychotherapy of child anorexia nervosa—a follow-up study
of a case for 23 years (author’s transl). Zhonghua Shen Jing Jing Shen Ke Za
Zhi. 1982;15(1):46.
35. Lee S, Chiu HFK, Chen C. Anorexia nervosa in Hong Kong. Why not more in
Chinese? Br J Psychiatry. 1989;154:683–8.
36. Tseng MC, Lee MB, Lee YJ. A clinical study of Chinese patients with eating
disorders. Chin Psychiatry. 1989;3:17–28.
37. Lester R. Commentary: eating disorders and the problem of “culture” in
acculturation. Cult Med Psychiatry. 2004;28(4):607–15.
38. Ung EK. Eating disorders in Singapore: a review. Annu Acad Med Singapore.
2003;32:19–24.
39. Tsai G. Eating disorders in the Far East. Eat Weight Disord. 2000;5:183–97.
40. Lee YH, Rhee MK, Park SH, Sohn CH, Chung YC, Hong SK, et al.
Epidemiology of eating disorder symptoms in the Korean general
population using a Korean version of the EAT. Eat Weight Disord.
1998;3(4):153–61.
41. Yeh H, Tzeng N, Chu H, Chou Y, Lu R, O'Brien AP, et al. The risk of eating
disorders among female undergraduates in Taiwan. Arch Psychiatr Nurs.
2009;23(6):430–40.
42. Pike KM, Yamamiya Y, Konishi H. Eating disorders in Japan: cultural context,
clinical features, and future directions. In: Streigel-Moore RH, Wonderlich SA,
Walsh BT, Mitchell J, editors. Developing an evidence-based classification of
eating disorders: Scientific findings for DSM-V. 1st ed. Arlington: American
Psychiatric Association; 2011.
43. Mond JM, Chen A, Kumar R. Eating-disordered behavior in Australian
and Singaporean women: a comparative study. Int J Eat Disord.
2010;43(8):717–23.
44. Wan F, Faber RJ, Fung A. Perceived impact of thin female models in
advertising: a cross-cultural examination of third person perception and its
impact on behaviors. Asia Pac J Mark Logistics. 2003;15(1/2):51–73.
45. Lee HY, Lock J. Anorexia nervosa in Asian-American adolescents: do they
differ from their non-Asian peers. Int J Eat Disord. 2007;40(3):227–31.
46. Lee S, Ng KL, Kwok K, Fung C. The changing profile of eating disorders at a
tertiary psychiatric clinic in Hong Kong (1987-2007). Int J Eat Disord.
2010;43(4):307–14.
47. Hoek HW, van Hoeken D. Review of the prevalence and incidence of eating
disorders. Int J Eat Disord. 2003;34(4):383–96.
48. Kayano M, Yoshiuchi K, Al-Adawi S, Viernes N, Dorvlo ASS, Kumano H, et al.
Eating attitudes and body dissatisfaction in adolescents: cross-cultural study.
Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2008;62(1):17–25.
49. Jung JH, Forbes GB. Multidimensional assessment of body dissatisfaction
and disordered eating in Korean and US college women: a comparative
study. Sex Roles. 2006;55(1-2):39–50.
50. Jung JH, Forbes GV, Lee YJ. Body dissatisfaction and disordered eating among
early adolescents from Korea and the US. Sex Roles. 2009;61(1-2):42–54. 
51. Jung J, Forbes GB, Chan P. Global body and muscle satisfaction among
college men in the United States and Hong Kong-China. Sex Roles.
2010;63(1-2):104–17.
52. Soh NL, Touyz S, Dobbins T, Surgenor L, Clarke S, Kohn M, et al. Body image
disturbance in young North European and East Asian women with and
without eating disorders in Australia and Singapore. Eur Eat Disord Rev.
2008;16(4):287–96.
53. Lee S, Leung T, Lee AM, Yu H, Leung CM. Body dissatisfaction among
Chinese undergraduates and implications for eating disorders in Hong
Kong. Int J Eat Disord. 1996;20(1):77–84.
54. Becker AE, Burwell RA, Gilman SE, Herzog DB, Hamburg P. Eating behaviours
and attitudes following prolonged television exposure among ethnic Fijian
adolescent girls. Br J Psychiatry. 2002;180(6):509–14.
55. Chang YJ, Lin W, Wong Y. Survey on eating disorder-related thoughts,
behaviors, and their relationship with food intake and nutritional status in
female high school students in Taiwan. J Am Coll Nutr. 2011;30(1):39–48.
56. Chang FC, Lee CM, Chen PH, Chiu CH, Pan YC, Huang TF. Association of
thin-ideal media exposure, body dissatisfaction and disordered eating
behavior among adolescents in Taiwan. Eat Behav. 2013;14(3):382–5.
57. Lee HY, Lee EL, Pathy P, Chan YH. Anorexia nervosa in Singapore: an eight-
year retrospective study. Singapore Med J. 2005;46(6):275–81.
58. Ung EK, Lee S, Kua EH. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia- a Singapore
perspective. Singapore Med J. 1997;38(8):332–5.
59. Tan JOA, Karim SA, Lee HY, Goh YL, Lee EL. Cultural and ethical issues in the
treatment of eating disorders in Singapore. Asian Bioeth Rev. 2013;5(1):40–55.
60. Ho TF, Tai BC, Lee EL, Cheng S, Liow PH. Prevalence and profile of females
at risk of eating disorders in Singapore. Singapore Med J. 2006;47(6):499–503.
61. Lee S, Lee AM, Ngai E, Lee DT, Wing YK. Rationales for food refusal in
Chinese patients with anorexia nervosa. Int J Eat Disord. 2001;29(2):224–9.
62. Lee S, Chan YY, Hsu LK. The intermediate-term outcome of Chinese patients
with anorexia nervosa in Hong Kong. Am J Psychiatry. 2003;160(5):967–72.
63. Fung MSC, Yuen M. Body image and eating attitudes among adolescent
Chinese girls in Hong Kong. Percept Mot Skills. 2003;96:57–66.
64. Leung FY, Mak T. Disordered eating attitudes and behaviors among Chinese
adolescent boys in Hong Kong. Journal of Psychosomatic Research.
2003;55(2):148.
65. Lai CM, Mak KK, Pang JC, Fong SSM, Ho RCM, Guldan GS. The associations
of sociocultural attitudes towards appearance with body dissatisfaction and
eating behaviors in Hong Kong adolescents. Eat Behav. 2013;14(3):320–4.
66. Khandelwal SK, Sharan P, Saxena S. Eating disorders: an Indian perspective.
Int J Soc Psychiatry. 1995;41(2):132–46.
67. Srinivasan TN, Suresh TR, Vasantha J, Fernandez MP. Eating disorders in
India. Indian J Psychiatry. 1995;37(1):26–30.
68. Williams LK, Ricciardelli L, McCabe MP, Waqa GG, Bavadra K. Body image
attitudes and concerns among indigenous Fijian and European Australian
adolescent girls. Body Image. 2006;3(3):275–87.
69. Becker AE, Burwell RA, Navara K, Gilman SE. Binge eating and binge eating
disorder in a small-scale, indigenous society: the view from Fiji. Int J Eat
Disord. 2003;34(4):423–31.
70. McCabe MP, Mavoa H, Ricciardelli LA, Waqa G, Fotu K, Goundar R.
Sociocultural influences on body image among adolescent boys from Fiji,
Tonga, and Australia. J Appl Soc Psychol. 2011;41(11):2708–22.
71. Becker AE, Fay K, Gilman SE, Striegel-Moore RH. Facets of acculturation and
their diverse relations to body concern in Fiji. Int J Eat Disord. 2007;40(1):42–50.
72. Becker AE, Fay KE, Agnew-Blais J, Khan AN, Striegel-Moore RH, Gilman SE.
Social network media exposure and adolescent eating pathology in Fiji. Br J
Psychiatry. 2011;198(1):43–50.
73. Abideen ZU, Latif A, Khan S, Farooq W. Impact of media on development of
eating disorders in young females of Pakistan. Int J Psychol Stud. 2011;3(1):122–47.
74. Memon AA, Adil SE, Siddiqui EU, Naeem SS, Ali SA, Mehmood K. Eating
disorders in medical students of Karachi, Pakistan-a cross-sectional study.
BMC Res Notes. 2012;5(1):84.
75. Yager J, Smith M. Restricter anorexia nervosa in a thirteen-year-old sheltered
muslim girl raised in Lahore, Pakistan: developmental similarities to
westernized patients. Int J Eat Disord. 1993;14(3):383–6.
76. Babar N, Alam M, Ali SS, Ansari A, Atiq M, Awais A, et al. Anorexic behaviour
and attitudes among female medical and nursing students at a private
university hospital. J Pak Med Assoc. 2002;52:272–6.
77. Sirang Z, Bashir HH, Jalil B, Khan SH, Hussain SA, Baig A, et al. Weight
patterns and perceptions among female university students of Karachi: a
cross sectional study. BMC Public Health. 2013;13(1):230.
Page 13
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33  Page 13 of 14
78. Shaikh MA, Kayani A. Detection of eating disorders in 16-20 year old female
students - perspective from Islamabad, Pakistan. J Pak Med Assoc.
2014;64(3):334–6.
79. Khan AN, Khalid S, Khan HI, Jabeen M. Impact of today’s media on
university student’s body image in Pakistan: a conservative, developing
country’s perspective. BMC Public Health. 2011;11(1):379.
80. Taqui AM, Shaikh M, Gowani SA, Shahid F, Khan A, Tayyeb SM, et al. Body
Dysmorphic Disorder: Gender differences and prevalence in a Pakistani
medical student population. BMC Psychiatry. 2008;8(1):20.
81. Yang C, Gray P, Pope HG. Male body image in Taiwan versus the West:
Yanggang Zhiqi meets the Adonis complex. Am J Psychiatry. 2005;162:263–9.
82. Wong Y, Huang Y. Obesity concerns, weight satisfaction and characteristics
of female dieters: a study on female Taiwanese college students. J Am Coll
Nutr. 1999;18:194–9.
83. Tsai MR, Chang YJ, Lien PJ, Wong Y. Survey on eating disorders related
thoughts, behaviors and dietary intake in female junior high school
students in Taiwan. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2011;20(2):196–205.
84. Liou YM, Hsu YW, Ho JF, Lin CH, Hsu WY, Liou TH. Prevalence and correlates
of self‐induced vomiting as weight‐control strategy among adolescents in
Taiwan. J Clin Nurs. 2012;21(1‐2):11–20.
85. Suematsu H, Ishikawa H, Kuboki T, Ito T. Statistical studies on anorexia
nervosa in Japan: detailed clinical data on 1011 patients. Psychother
Psychosom. 1985;43(2):96–103.
86. Kuboki T, Nomura S, Ide M, Suematsu H, Araki S. Epidemiological data on
anorexia nervosa in Japan. Psychiatry Res. 1996;62(1):11–6.
87. Nakamura K, Yamamoto M, Yamazaki O, et al. Prevalence of anorexia
nervosa and bulimia nervosa in a geographically defined area in Japan. Int J
Eat Disord. 2000;28(2):173–80.
88. Chisuwa N, O’Dea JA. Body image and eating disorders amongst Japanese
adolescents. A review of the literature. Appetite. 2010;54(1):5–15.
89. Kiriike N, Nagata T, Tanaka M, Nishiwaki S, Takeuchi N, Kawakita Y.
Prevalence of binge-eating and bulimia among adolescent women in
Japan. Psychiatry Res. 1988;26(2):163–9.
90. Nakai Y, Nin K, Teramukai S, Taniguchi A, Fukushima M, Wonderlich SA.
Typical and atypical anorexia nervosa in a Japanese sample. Int J Eat Disord.
2014;47(2):130–7.
91. Jackson SC, Keel PK, Lee YH. Trans-cultural comparison of disordered eating
in Korean women. Int J Eat Disord. 2006;39(6):498–502.
92. Jennings PS, Forbes D, McDermott B, Hulse G, Juniper S. Eating disorder
attitudes and psychopathology in Caucasian Australian, Asian Australian and
Thai university students. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2006;40(2):143–9.
93. Pon LW, Kandiah M, Mohd Nasir MT. Body image perception, dietary
practices and physical activity of overweight and normal weight Malaysian
female adolescents. Malays J Nutr. 2004;10(2):131–47.
94. Kuan PX, Ho HL, Shuhaili MS, Siti AA, Gudum HR. Gender differences in BMI,
body weight perception and weight-loss strategies among undergraduates
in Univeriti Malaysia Sarawak. Malays J Nutr. 2011;17(1):67–75.
95. Swami VS, Tovee M, Harris AS. An examination of ethnic differences in
actual-ideal weight discrepancy and its correlates in a sample of Malaysian
women. Int J Cult Ment Health. 2012;6(2):96–107.
96. Gan WY, Mohd Nasir MT, Zalilah MS, Hazizi AS. Disordered eating behaviors,
depression, anxiety and stress among Malaysian university students. Coll
Stud J. 2011;45(2):296–309.
97. Edman JL, Yates A. Eating attitudes among college students in Malaysia: an
ethnic and gender comparison. Eur Eat Disord Rev. 2004;12(3):190–6.
98. Lee S, Lee AM. Disordered eating in three communities of China: a
comparative study of female high school students in Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, and rural Hunan. Int J Eat Disord. 1999;27(3):317–27.
99. Schmidt U. Bulimia nervosa in the Chinese. Int J Eat Disord. 1993;14(4):505–9.
100. Lai KYC, Pang AHT, Wong CK. Case study: early-onset anorexia nervosa in a
Chinese boy. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1995;34(3):383–6.
101. Witcomb GL, Arcelus J, Chen J. Can cognitive dissonance methods
developed in the West for combatting the ‘thin ideal’ help slow the rapidly
increasing prevalence of eating disorders in non-Western cultures?
Shanghai Arch Psychiatry. 2013;25(6):332–41.
102. Chen H, Jackson T. Prevalence and sociodemographic correlates of eating
disorder endoresements among adolescents and young adults from China.
Eur Eat Disord Rev. 2008;16(5):375–85.
103. Jackson T, Chen H. Predicting changes in eating disorder symptoms among
adolescents in China: an 18-month prospective study. J Clin Child Adolesc
Psychol. 2008;37(4):874–85. 
104. Liang XM, Guo LT, Liu KZ. A cross-sectional investigation on eating disorders
in 1486 female students from universities, senior high schools and junior
high schools in Chengdu. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi.
2008;29(4):321–4.
105. Jackson T, Chen H. Sociocultural experiences of bulimic and non-bulimic
adolescents in a school-based Chinese sample. J Abnorm Child Psychol.
2010;38(1):69–76.
106. Tao Z, Zhong W. Eating attitudes and weight concern among Chinese
middle-age women: a comparison between different age and BMI groups.
Eur J Psychiatry. 2010;24(3):146–57.
107. Xu X, Mellor D, Kiehne M, Ricciardelli LA, McCabe MP, Xu Y. Body
dissatisfaction, engagement in body change behaviors and sociocultural
influences on body image among Chinese adolescents. Body Image.
2010;7(2):156–64.
108. Huon GF, Qian MY, Oliver K, Xiao GL. A large-scale survey of eating disorder
symptomatology among female adolescents in the People’s Republic of
China. Int J Eat Disord. 2002;32(2):192–205.
109. Li Y, Hu X, Ma W, Wu J, Ma G. Body image perception among Chinese
children and adolescents. Body Image. 2005;2(2):91–103.
110. Fan Y, Li Y, Liu A, Hu X, Ma G, Xu G. Associations between body mass
index, weight control concerns and behaviors, and eating disorder
symptoms among non-clinical Chinese adolescents. BMC Public Health.
2010;10(1):314–4.
111. Liao Y, Knoesen NP, Castle DJ, Tang J, Deng Y, Bookun R, et al. Symptoms
of disordered eating, body shape, and mood concerns in male and female
Chinese medical students. Compr Psychiatry. 2010;51(5):516–23.
112. Tong J, Miao S, Wang J, Yang F, Lai H, Zhang C, et al. A two-stage
epidemiological study on prevalence of eating disorders in female
university students in Wuhan, China. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol.
2013;49(3):499–505.
113. Mendhekar DN, Arora K, Lohia D, Aggarwal A, Jiloha RC. Anorexia nervosa:
an Indian perspective. Natl Med J India. 2009;22(4):181–2.
114. Sjostedt JP, Schumaker JF, Nathawat SS. Eating disorders among Indian and
Australian university students. J Soc Psychol. 1998;138(3):351–7.
115. Balhara YPS, Mathur S, Kataria DK. Body shape and eating attitudes among
female nursing students in India. East Asian Arch Psychiatry. 2012;22(2):70–4.
116. Stigler MH, Arora M, Dhavan P, Shrivastav R, Reddy KS, Perry CL. Weight-
related concerns and weight-control behaviors among overweight
adolescents in Delhi, India: a cross-sectional study. Int J Behav Nutr Phys
Act. 2011;8(1):9.
117. Basker MM, Mathai S, Korula S, Mammen PM. Eating disorders among
adolescents in a tertiary care centre in India. Indian J Pediatr. 2013;80(3):211–4.
118. Mammen P, Russell S, Russell PS. Prevalence of eating disorders and
psychiatric co-morbidity among children and adolescents. Indian Pediatr.
2007;44:357–9.
119. Chandra PS, Abbas P, Palmer R. Are eating disorders a significant clinical
issue in urban india? A survey among psychiatrists in Bangalore. Int J Eat
Disord. 2012;45(3):443–6.
120. Mishra SK, Mukhopadhyay S. Eating and weight concerns among Sikkimese
adolescent girls and their biocultural correlates: an exploratory study. Public
Health Nutr. 2011;14(05):853–9.
121. Talukdar J. Thin but not skinny: women negotiating the “never too thin”
body ideal in urban India. Women’s Stud Int Forum. 2012;35(2):109–18.
122. Areemit RS, Patjanasoontorn N. Anorexia nervosa in a Thai adolescent. Eat
Weight Disord. 2012;17(3):e207–9.
123. Rongmuang D, McElmurry BJ, McCreary LL, Park CG, Miller AG, Corte C.
Regional differences in physical appearance identity among young adult
women in Thailand. West J Nurs Res. 2011;33(1):106–20.
124. Pattanathaburt P, Somrongthong R, Thianthai C. Prevalence of disordered
eating behaviors, body image dissatisfaction, and associated factors among
Thai female undergraduate students. J Health Promot Educ. 2013;51(3):151–60.
125. Galea S, Uddin M, Koenen K. The urban environment and mental disorders.
Epigenetics. 2011;6(4):400–4.
126. Hawkes C. Uneven dietary development: linking the policies and processes
of globalization with the nutrition transition, obesity and diet-related
chronic diseases. Global Health. 2006;2(1):4.
127. Watson JL. Golden arches east: McDonald’s in East Asia, 2nd edn. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press; 1997, 2006.
128. Lee CMY, Martiniuk ALC, Woodward M, Feigin V, Gu DF, Jamrozik K, et al.
The burden of overweight and obesity in the Asia-Pacific region. Obes Rev.
2007;8(3):191–6.
Page 14
Pike and Dunne Journal of Eating Disorders (2015) 3:33
129. Jayawardena R, Byrne NM, Soares MJ, Katulanda P, Hills AP. Prevalence,
Trends and associated socio-economic factors of obesity in South Asia.
Obes Facts. 2013;6(5):405–14.
130. Asia Pacific Cohort Studies Collaboration. The burden of overweight and
obesity in the Asia-Pacific region. Obes Rev. 2007;8(3):191–6.
131. Striegel-Moore R, Silberstein LR, Rodin J. Toward an understanding of risk
factors for bulimia. Am Psychol. 1986;41(3):246–63.
132. Muazzam A, Khalid R. Development and validation of disordered eating
behavior scale: identification, prevalence, and difference with clinically
diagnosed eating disorders. Pak J Psychol Res. 2011;26(2):127.
133. Becker AE, Fay K, Agnew-Blais J, Guarnaccia PM, Striegel-Moore RH, Gilman
SE. Development of a measure of “Acculturation” for ethnic Fijians:
methodologic and conceptual considerations for application to eating
disorders research. Transcult Psychiatry. 2010;47(5):754–88.
134. Soh NL, Walter G. Publications on cross-cultural aspects of eating disorders.
J Eat Disord. 2013;1(1):1–4.
135. Ricciardelli L, McCabe M. A Biopsychosocial model of disordered eating and
the pursuit of muscularity in boys. Psychol Bull. 2004;130:179–205. 
Page 14 of 14
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
